* 0802047
* GOALI: Neural Networks and Adaptive Critic Designs For Energy Security and Sustainability
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2014
* Ronald Harley, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 06/30/2014
* USD 398,841.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
ECCS-0802047&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: GOALI: Neural Networks and
Adaptive Critic Designs For Energy Security and
Sustainability&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI Name: Harley,
Ronald&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI Institution: GA Tech Research Corporation - GA
Institute of Technology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GOALI: NEURAL NETWORKS
AND ADAPTIVE CRITIC DESIGNS FOR ENERGY SECURITY AND
SUSTAINABILITY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objectives and Approach&lt;br/&gt;The
objective is to develop an intelligent wide area controller to monitor and
coordinate wide areas of a power network that includes a windfarm, solarfarm,
pumped storage system and other traditional generators, in order to optimally
use all of these resources both during slow changing conditions such as moving
cloud cover, and variations in wind speed, as well as during transient
disturbances.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The approach will use adaptive critic
designs to develop an optimal wide area controller, which does not need any
mathematical descriptions of the power system. This involves first simulation,
then validation on a real time digital simulator and finally, a demonstration on
a small scale 2000kW power system in
Colorado.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Learning
how well the theory of adaptive critic designs scales up with cellular neural
networks and ObjectNets. Optimum utilization of the wind and solar farms, will
improve reliability, damping during disturbances in the power network, and
assist control room operators. The findings should provide a better
understanding of multiple-time base system identifiers and
neurocontrollers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;The
outcome of this project will allow solar and wind farms to be recognized and
used by engineers in the same way as other more traditional energy sources and
to be fully integrated with controls to assist in maintaining grid stability,
and energy security and sustainability. Skilled manpower including minorities
will be produced to serve as future champions in the quest for generating
"clean" energy and reducing CO2 and other greenhouse gases emissions.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;