* 0802602
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Disturbance History and Regeneration Patterns in the Big Woods of Minnesota
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2008,09/30/2009
* Susy Ziegler, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ezekiel Kalipeni
* 09/30/2009
* USD 12,000.00

0802602&lt;br/&gt;Susy S. Ziegler&lt;br/&gt;Julia Rauchfuss&lt;br/&gt;University
of Minnesota&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Big Woods hardwood forest developed along
the prairie-forest border in Minnesota 300 to 650 years ago. The long-standing
hypothesis to explain Big Woods' establishment has been that a change to wet
conditions reduced fire activity and allowed fire-sensitive species to grow up
into a forest. Recent analyses of fossil pollen, charcoal fragments, and lake-
level changes, however, suggest that the development of the Big Woods may have
coincided with dry conditions. This study seeks to identify the primary climatic
conditions that drive establishment of trees at the prairie-forest border in
Minnesota. The research will also yield a reconstruction of the disturbance
history of several old-growth deciduous forests, and an evaluation of recent
methods for estimating the percentage of the canopy disturbed each decade to
determine their potential for streamlining classical methods. This project will
use the high spatial and temporal resolution inherent to tree rings to
complement and enhance recent reconstructions from lake sediments of the
ecological history of the Big Woods. To achieve the objectives, the
investigators will visit Big Woods remnants and extract increment cores from all
trees in several 0.1-hectare plots. Measurements of tree and canopy size will be
recorded. The PIs will assign accurate dates to tree rings, and will measure
ring widths to calculate the canopy area that was disturbed each decade and to
evaluate two methods of disturbance reconstruction (time-series analysis with
intervention detection and the absolute-increase method). The investigators will
test whether both methods will yield data that are comparable and statistically
similar to data from already tested methods; if so, the new methods will
increase efficiency compared to the classical ones. This study will support the
recent lake-sediment analyses if it shows that trees in the Big Woods
established during dry rather than wet periods and that the disturbance history
differed throughout the Big Woods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More complete knowledge
of vegetation change in the sensitive grassland-forest transition zone will
support conservation efforts in a landscape increasingly affected by humans.
This research will provide theoretical insights into vegetation response to past
climate change and disturbance. In turn, modelers can use this information to
improve predictions of the effects of environmental change on vegetation
patterns, which will help society prepare for the future. With climate
conditions in Minnesota currently changing to warmer and potentially drier
conditions, resolving the debate around whether forests expand during drier or
wetter climatic conditions is essential for predicting how vegetation at the
prairie-forest border will change as global warming continues. State and local
agencies will be able to develop science-based management plans with a clear
vision of the natural range of variability of disturbance in this forest type
and a firm grasp of the complex climate-disturbance interactions that shape
vegetation cover in the Big Woods. Assessment of recently proposed methods to
reconstruct the disturbance history, and a comparison between them and classical
approaches, will also refine methods of tree-ring analysis. A strong educational
component of the project will not only train the graduate investigator, but
through field and laboratory work will also engage undergraduates in the
research. A parallel educational effort will introduce lifelong learners and
K-12 students to new knowledge about the formation and value of the Big Woods,
and thus help them appreciate the need to protect undeveloped land.