* 0802114
* Solar Neutrinos
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Robert Vogelaar, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 07/31/2012
* USD 972,000.00

PROPOSAL NUMBER: 0802114&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: VA Polytechnic Inst &amp; St U
&lt;br/&gt;NSF PROGRAM: PHY - NUCLEAR ASTROPHYSICS&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL
INVESTIGATOR: Vogelaar, Robert B.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: Solar Neutrinos
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides funding
for the Virginia Tech group to continue their participation in the Borexino
experiment at the Gran Sasso underground lab in Italy. Experiments with solar
neutrinos gave the first evidence for neutrino mass and mixing. The Borexino
experiment has recently made the first real-time measurement of the flux of low
energy solar neutrinos from 7Be. The result is consistent with predictions of
Standard Solar Models and neutrino oscillations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The group
plans to address the full utilization of the calibration system, participation
in data acquisition and analysis, and the implications of anticipated Borexino
results. With better purity and calibration now achieved, the potential for
measuring the CNO and pep solar neutrino fluxes in Borexino is now realistic.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact on science, technology and outreach
that is expected from the program includes deployment and utilization of ultra-
clean calibration techniques and creating the possibility that, for the first
time, one might directly measure the Sun?s energy generation today, versus what
is currently seen in the photosphere after a delay of about 50,000 years. The
outreach is to astrophysicists, cosmologists, geophysicists and geochemists,
chemists and chemical engineers, teachers and students in universities in
Virginia and neighboring states and the international scientific community.
&lt;br/&gt;