* 0802968
* Optical Excitations and Applications in Novel Organic Macromolecular Aggregates
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2008,01/31/2014
* Theodore Gore Goodson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 01/31/2014
* USD 645,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;An important step in the process of creating new
materials for energy harvesting and nonlinear optical devices is in the
understanding of the structure-function relationships based on size, geometry
(cyclic, 2-dimensional), and intramolecular interactions. This proposal is
directed at the development of novel organic multifunctional materials and the
use of ultra-fast coherent spectroscopy to probe energy migration, nonlinear
optical, and quantum interference phenomena in these materials. The PI will
carry out Investigations of several novel aggregated systems will be performed.
Specifically, using a combination of femtosecond spectroscopic methods such as
femtosecond time-resolved fluorescence upconversion, transient absorption,
transient grating, three pulse photon echo peak shift experiments complemented
with those of steady state spectroscopy we will deeply investigate a variety of
novel macromolecular aggregated architectures. These architectures include
dendrimers with broken symmetry, new two-dimensional macromolecular structures,
giant cyclic macromolecular thiophene aggregates, as well as a novel porphyrin
aggregate. The PI will perform extensive modeling based on recent theoretical
approaches describing exciton migration, self-trapping and the details of the
excitation energy transfer between aggregated systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this
proposal is directed to the PI's science education activities which have been
successful in encouraging young scientists of diverse backgrounds as well as the
participation of women. The PI will continue to bring young scientists into the
field of material science and inspire careers in science with participation in
summer enrichment and mentorship programs as part of on campus and national
organizations. Continued interactions with Ann Arbor and Detroit public high
schools will be carried out in summer research opportunities in the PI's
laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;