* 0802803
* Global invariants for complex varieties with isolated singularities and applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Stephen S. Yau, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2012
* USD 164,665.00

Abstract for NSF Proposal 0802803 "Global invariants for complex varieties with
isolated singularities and applications"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Yau's
research proposal contains projects in seven areas:&lt;br/&gt;(1) Fundamental
problems in complex geometry on complex varieties and on&lt;br/&gt; C^N and
their relationship.&lt;br/&gt;(2) Higher order Bergman functions and their
explicit computation.&lt;br/&gt;(3) Explicit computation of biholomorphic maps
between complete Reinhardt&lt;br/&gt; domains in complex varieties with only
quotient singularities.&lt;br/&gt;(4) Construction of infinitely many continuous
numerical invariants for&lt;br/&gt; complete Reinhardt domains in complex
varieties with only quotient&lt;br/&gt; singularities.&lt;br/&gt;(5)
Construction of the moduli spaces of complete Reinhardt domains or&lt;br/&gt;
strictly pseudoconvex domains in complex varieties.&lt;br/&gt;(6) Geometry of
the moduli spaces of complete Reinhardt domains in&lt;br/&gt; complex
varieties.&lt;br/&gt;(7) Rigidity of CR morphisms between compact strongly
pseudoconvex CR&lt;br/&gt; manifolds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Yau introduces higher
order Bergman functions for domains in complex varieties with only isolated
normal singularities. These Bergman functions are invariant under biholomorphic
maps. He intends to use these Bergman functions to study the problem of
biholomorphic equivalence of domains in complex varieties. Yau observes that his
higher order Bergman functions put a lot of restriction on biholomorphic maps
between two complete Reinhardt domains in a variety, from which these
biholomorphic maps can be determined explicitly. He develops a new technique to
construct a family of infinite number of continuous numerical invariants on
complete Reinhardt domains lying in the same variety. He shows that this family
of infinite number of continuous numerical invariants is actually a complete set
of invariants for either the set of all strictly pseudoconvex complete Reinhardt
domains in the variety or the set of all pseudoconvex complete Reinhardt domains
with real analytic boundaries in the variety. In particular, the moduli spaces
of these domains in the variety are constructed explicitly as the images of this
complete family of numerical invariants. He illustrates how this works in a
concrete example of A_1-variety. It is well known that A_1-variety is the
quotient of cyclic group of order 2 on C^2. Yau proves that the moduli space of
complete Reinhardt domains in A_1-variety coincides with the moduli space of the
corresponding complete Reinhardt domains in C^2. Since his complete family of
numerical invariants are computable he has solved the biholomorphically
equivalent problem for a large family of domains in C2. He proposes to continue
his work for any quotient singularities. He also proposes to study the rigidity
problem of CR morphisms between two strongly pseudoconvex compact CR embeddable
manifolds of the same dimension. If the dimension is at least five and the
codimension of the target manifold is relatively small, he shows that non-
constants CR morphisms are necessarily CR biholomorphisms. He plans to prove the
most general rigidity theorem of CR morphisms between two strongly pseudoconvex
compact CR embeddable CR manifolds of the same dimension.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
It is well known that singularities theory plays an essential role in main
stream of mathematics as well as many branches in Science. For example, by
taking a cone over a projective manifold, one can get an isolated singularity at
the origin. The classification of projective manifolds can be achieved via the
classification of islated singularites.&lt;br/&gt;Therefore in some sense
algebraic geometry is contained in the theory of singularities. The Black Holes
can also be viewed as singularities of our universe. We encounter singularities
in our daily life. Anythings which are not smooth (for example table corner) can
be think of as singularities. Hence it is very important for us to understand
singularities structures. This project proposes a new way to understand the
global structures of singularities. Yau's NSF grant was used to partially
support the Midwest Workshop on Complex Analysis and Complex Geometry, April 13
--15, 2007 at University of Illinois at Chicago. There were 11 speakers, two of
them are female. Yau and Song-Ying Li have organized a Special Session
``Analysis and CR Geometry'' for AMS meeting at De Paul University Oct. 5--6,
2007. There are 23 speakers. The P.I. was the adviser of a high school student
Letian Zhang who was selected as the final 40 in the Intel Science competition.
Yau and Zhang paper was published in Math Research Letter. Currently the P.I. is
advising two high school students for the Intel Science Competition. One of them
is a female student. Yau has a female student who finished her Ph.D. this
year.&lt;br/&gt;He still has 7 graduate students working for their Ph.D., one of
them is an African American. Yau has established research and education
collaborations with Chicago State University (a non Ph.D. granting institution
with African American students as the majority) and John Tyler Community College
at Virginia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;