* 0802422
* Symposium K Materials and Devices for Laser Remote Sensing and Optical Communication will be held in San Francisco on March 24-28, 2008
* ENG,ECCS
* 12/15/2007,05/31/2008
* Nasser Peyghambarian, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 05/31/2008
* USD 2,900.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;ECCS-0802422&lt;br/&gt;Robert Pachavis, Materials Research
Society&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT&lt;br/&gt;This symposium
provides ideal opportunities for science and engineering graduate students and
post doctorates to learn about critical laser and photonic component
technologies that can revolutionize the human lives by enabling major
breakthroughs in future voice and data communication, transportation and travel.
This grant will allow the graduate student attendees to become familiarize to
the state-of-the-art laser and photonic technologies, learn about various
applications of these technologies, and understand their requirements and
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACT&lt;br/&gt;One of the major goals of
this symposium is to provide a forum gathering scientists, technologists, and
end-users from different technical backgrounds in order to elevate the laser
remote sensing field to a technological level that can allow low-cost and
reliable instruments for a wide range of scientific, commercial, military, and
space applications. The laser remote sensing field can greatly benefit from
considerable advances in fiber optics and photonics component technologies.
These telecommunication-related technologies will create new exciting
opportunities for developing lidar sensors with drastically improved measurement
capabilities. Much of the lidar robustness and efficiency issues that has
prevented its widespread utilization can also be addressed by the technological
knowledge acquired by the optical telecommunication communities. This NSF grant
will be used only to support US graduate students to participate in the
symposium and provide them with opportunities to interact with research experts
and industry representatives in this field. &lt;br/&gt;