* 0802733
* US-Argentina Doctoral Dissertation Research:    Cooperative Institutions and Socio-Spatial Transformation in Argentina's Recovered Businesses
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/2008,01/31/2011
* Marvin Waterstone, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 01/31/2011
* USD 12,000.00

0802733&lt;br/&gt;Waterstone&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral dissertation
enhancement project is for John Baldridge, a PhD student at University of
Arizona, working under the direction of his advisor, Dr. Marvin Waterstone. His
dissertation will examine the aftermath of the Argentine 2001 economic crisis
and the neo-liberal policies of the 1990s that resulted in workers recovering
bankrupted businesses from their former employees and establishing worker led
cooperatives. The research will be conducted in collaboration with the Argentine
Ministry of Labor, the National Movement of Recovered Businesses (MNER), and
Drs. Federico Schuster, Liliano de Riz, and Hector Palomino from the Faculty of
Social Sciences at University of Buenos Aires. The new institutional
arrangements that resulted from these recovered businesses will be investigated
along with how these cooperative institutions are formed, sustained, perceived,
and impact the identity of the workers involved. The project utilizes mixed
methodology including archival work, interviews, oral histories, and participant
observations. The student has already visited the site, completed preliminary
work, and developed strong collaborations with the Argentine institutions to
carry out the proposed research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study aims to develop
a new theory of the industrial commons to explain the unique development of
these worker owned businesses in Argentina and thereby create a potentially
transformative framework that may be applied to other parts of the Americas. The
research would have much relevance to the policy and planning communities in the
Americas and provide a new perspective on common property regimes as they exist
in urban settings. This proposal will support international dissertation
research for one graduate student.&lt;br/&gt;