* 0802506
* Transformative Research Initiative: The Role of Undergraduate Institutions and Students
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2009
* Nancy Hensel, Council on Undergraduate Research
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 07/31/2009
* USD 34,900.00

Interdisciplinary (99)&lt;br/&gt;The Council on Undergraduate Research (CUR) is
conducting a summit meeting on transformative research, engaging leading
scientists at predominately liberal arts institutions. The overall structure
includes: 1) a two-day summit for 24 members of the STEM faculty to address
questions and consider opportunities for the role of undergraduate institutions
in transformative research; 2) the development of a monograph on how
undergraduate institutions can support potentially transformative research; and
3) a web conference for predominately undergraduate institutions on their role
in transformative research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
Undergraduate research is a particularly effective way to develop the problem-
solving skills and work habits needed by science professionals. Undergraduate
research improves retention in higher education, helps to connect students'
classroom experiences to the world of work, and motivates students to complete
their STEM studies at the baccalaureate level and continue on at the graduate
level. Undergraduate research supports the development of critical thinking,
problem-solving skills, oral and written communication, and self-confidence.
Predominately undergraduate institutions have had a significant role in the
preparation of science professionals and it is important to understand the ways
in which these institutions can support recent efforts to encourage
transformative research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Over 500
institutions belong to the Council on Undergraduate Research. All are engaged in
supporting undergraduate research. The results of this project will be
communicated to CUR institutional members through the CUR Quarterly and the CUR
E-News.