* 0802740
* New Directions in Algorithms, Combinatorics and Optimization
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2008,03/31/2009
* Xingxing Yu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce E. Sagan
* 03/31/2009
* USD 40,826.00

This award will support an international conference entitled&lt;br/&gt; "New
directions in Algorithms, Combinatorics and Optimization". &lt;br/&gt;The
central theme of this conference will be combinatorics and its applications
&lt;br/&gt;in theoretical computer science and operations research. The
conference will take &lt;br/&gt;place in May 2008 on the campus of the Georgia
Institute of Technology in midtown &lt;br/&gt;Atlanta, and will honor the 65th
birthday of William T. Trotter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are two main reasons
for holding the conference in Atlanta, namely direct &lt;br/&gt;flights from
most of the world's major airports, and the presence of the PhD program
&lt;br/&gt;in Algorithms, Combinatorics and Optimization (ACO) at Georgia Tech,
with its more &lt;br/&gt;than 45 affiliated faculty and 40
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference program will consist of
approximately 30 invited lectures, a poster &lt;br/&gt;session and a problem
session. The conference is expected to attract 200-300 &lt;br/&gt;attendees,
including local, regional, national and international delegates. A
&lt;br/&gt;conference proceedings will be published as a special issue of the
journal &lt;br/&gt;Combinatorics, Probability and
Computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The list of invited speakers includes only the
leading experts and fine expositors. &lt;br/&gt;The organizing committee
consists of experienced senior researchers who will uphold &lt;br/&gt;very high
standards. Georgia Tech has excellent facilities to accommodate a
&lt;br/&gt;conference of this type.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using federal support
the organizers will be able to offer financial assistance to
&lt;br/&gt;attendees with no outside funding, including students, postdoctoral
associates, junior &lt;br/&gt;faculty, women, and underrepresented minorities,
with priority given to young people &lt;br/&gt;and members of underrepresented
groups. While the main lectures will be by invitation &lt;br/&gt;only, junior
scientists will be able to present in the poster session and participate
&lt;br/&gt;in the scientific discussions throughout the
conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A further aspect of broader impact is the
interplay of mathematics, computer science &lt;br/&gt;and operations research,
that is already present in the ACO program at Georgia Tech. &lt;br/&gt;This
conference will further promote the fruitful interactions of these disciplines,
&lt;br/&gt;drawing upon the successful experience at Georgia Tech, and in doing
so will further &lt;br/&gt;strengthen the ACO program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
conference proceedings will be stringently refereed subject to the standards of
&lt;br/&gt;premier combinatorics journals. Thus the conference will have lasting
impact not limited &lt;br/&gt;to its attendees.