* 0802399
* Exploring Galaxy Evolution as a Function of Environment Using Submillimeter Galaxies as Signposts of Protoclusters
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Karin Menendez-Delmestre, Menendez-Delmestre      Karin
* Fellowship Award
* Edward Ajhar
* 09/30/2011
* USD 231,000.00

Dr. Karin Menendez-Delmestre is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics
Postdoctoral Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at the
Observatories of the Carnegie Institution of Washington. Dr. Menendez-Delmestre
will conduct a multi-wavelength study of proto-clusters at high redshift that
will use submillimeter galaxies as signposts of these large-scale structures.
The aim of the program will be to investigate the relationship between galaxy
properties and their proto-cluster environment.

The morphology-density relation, which particularly addresses the distribution
of galaxy morphologies within clusters, has been established at z < 1. Dr.
Menendez-Delmestre will extend current knowledge of galaxy evolution as a
function of environment to incorporate other galaxy properties (morphologies,
sizes, star-formation rates, stellar ages, stellar masses, metallicities,
outflows and active galactic nuclei activity) and to extend the study out to the
higher redshifts traced by submillimeter galaxies, z ~ 1-3. Major components to
this research are detailed spectroscopic and photometric observations of
individual proto-cluster members using Persson's Auxilliary Nasmyth Infrared
Camera (PANIC) and the Inamori Magellan Areal Camera and Spectrograph (IMACS) on
the Magellan Telescope.

Dr. Menendez-Delmestre will also extend Carnegie's commitment to outreach and
education towards a broader section of the Los Angeles community by
strengthening the existing, yet informal ties with the Griffith Observatory, a
well recognized leader in the Los Angeles community as a center of public
education. With a Hispanic population greater than 50%, Los Angeles is an
exceptionally well suited area to develop educational outreach programs that
specifically target the Hispanic community. Dr. Menendez-Delmestre will serve as
a Curatorial Advisor to the Griffith program team led by Dr. Laura Danly
(Curator, Griffith Observatory) by: (1) helping in the implementation of a
Griffith school astronomy program directed at elementary-school children; (2)
training Observatory guides; (3) reviewing the accuracy of the Observatory's
educational materials; and (4) helping to organize public, astronomy-related
activities at Griffith.