* 0802607
* RUI: High Resolution Spectroscopy of Stable Molecular Species and Free Radicals
* MPS,CHE
* 10/08/2007,05/31/2009
* Michael Jackson, Central Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 05/31/2009
* USD 85,742.00

In this project, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Michael Jackson and undergraduate students at
the University of Wisconsin, La Crosse will detect and measure optically pumped
molecular laser (OPML) emissions in the far-infrared (FIR). These emissions then
will be used as coherent radiation sources in laser magnetic resonance (LMR) and
laser Stark spectroscopy experiments. The FIR-LMR technique will be used to
study diatomic and triatomic free radicals, including NH, ND, FeH, FeH2, FeD2,
CoH, and HF+. In addition, a Stark spectrometer will be constructed for use with
the OPML system to investigate the electric dipole moments of the high-energy
rotational states of ammonia, methyl fluoride, methyl chloride and similar
molecules. Visiting scholars from Mexico, Brazil, and Canada will assist Jackson
and his students in recording the LMR and Stark spectra. The data will be
analyzed in collaboration with the group of Professor John Brown of the
University of Oxford. The free radicals to be studied are of fundamental
theoretical interest. The high-resolution spectroscopic work also will
facilitate the detection of these species in interstellar clouds and contribute
toward the understanding of the mechanisms of their formation. The research will
provide La Crosse undergraduates with excellent training in laser spectroscopy.
The results of the work will be presented at national and international meetings
and published in the scientific literature.