* 0803454
* Elastomeric Networks, and Their Use in Novel Nanocomposites and Related Materials
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* James Mark, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing grant
* Andrew J. Lovinger
* 06/30/2012
* USD 468,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

One practical goal of the research being carried out is to obtain structure-
property relationships that can be used to optimize the properties of
elastomeric materials. Experiments will include a variety of deformations, and
corresponding computer simulations will be carried out as well. Elastomers will
include commercially important polymers, cross linked by a variety of
techniques. One specific project will be producing biodegradable elastomeric
gels of enhanced orientation and improved mechanical properties. Another example
involves characterization of strain-induced crystallization, which can greatly
improve the mechanical properties of a material. Novel reinforcing fillers such
as silica will be generated in-situ, yielding unusual particle shapes and
orientations, and ceramic particles of one type will be coated by a ceramic of
another type. It will also be possible to thread elastomeric chains through
reinforcing zeolites, to obtain other unusual properties. Simulations will also
be carried out to elucidate reinforcing mechanisms in filled elastomers in
general, which is one of the major unsolved problems in this area of polymer
science. Of particular interest here is the types and extents of reinforcement
obtained when the primary particles are bonded into relatively stable structures
called "aggregates" and into less-stable arrangements called "agglomerates". As
a final topic, experiments will be carried out to exploit the ability of
elastomeric domains to improve the impact resistances of polymer-ceramic hybrid
composites in which the ceramic is the continuous phase. Of particular interest
in this regard is control of the level of dispersion by using the connectivity
of network structures in one of the phases to "frustrate" the usual types of
phase separation in disparate two-component systems.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The work described will provide a better understanding of polymers in general
and elastomers and nanocomposites in particular. This will ultimately lead to
guidance important for the preparation and utilization of better elastomeric
materials and various types of composites. Results will be disseminated in the
usual way, in journal publications and lecture presentations at National
Meetings of various scientific or engineering societies. Broader impacts, would
include integrating research and teaching. The rubberlike elasticity exhibited
by elastomeric materials is one of their most striking features, and the
applicant will continue to exploit this in demonstrations during lectures,
experiments in laboratory courses, and in the modification of standard physical
chemistry concepts. Results from experiments, simulations, and theory obtained
in these projects will continue to be included in the elasticity course taught
at the University of Cincinnati, and in some of the American Chemical Society
Short Courses the applicant has taught since 1972.