* 0803703
* Monitoring, Modeling, Control, and Ultimate Disposal of Heavy Metal Contaminants in the Environment
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2008,03/31/2009
* Bruce Berdanier, Ohio Northern University
* Standard Grant
* W. Y. B. Chang
* 03/31/2009
* USD 29,664.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0803703 Berdanier Monitoring, Modeling, Control,
and Ultimate Disposal of Heavy Metal Contaminants in the
Environment&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ohio Northern University (ONU) is awarded
$29,664 over 12 months in travel and participant support to travel to the
Edernet mine in Mongolia to characterize primary environmental contamination
vectors by sampling and assessing the feasibility of adsorption properties
presented by naturally occurring zeolites in the Mongolian countryside.
Participants include the PI, Dr. Bruce Berdanier, Professor of Civil Engineering
at ONU, M.R. Hansen, Professor of Civil Engineering at South Dakota School of
Mines and Technology (SDSMT), Charles Tinant, Science Outreach Coordinator and
Instructor at Oglala Lakota College (OLC), and three U.S. undergraduate
students. Lead foreign counterpart investigators are Tsevel Samdaag, Professor
of Civil Engineering, Mongolian University of Science and Technology (MUST),
Darkhan, Mongolia; and, Anf Ziadat, Professor of Civil and Environmental
Engineering at Mutah University (MUJ), Al Karak, Jordan.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objectives of the planning visit include investigating the
feasibility of developing a proposal to: 1) develop an experimental model of
aeolean sediment transport of mine tailings in order to evaluate the efficiency
of fly ash incorporation into the waste stream in reducing offsite migration of
heavy metals; 2) determine the fundamental interfacial chemistry relationships
controlling heavy metal occurrence and distribution; and 3) investigate the
efficiency of bio-indicators (e.g., tree bark; lichen) in the passive monitoring
of heavy metals contamination concrete mortar for ultimate disposal. The PIs
also intend to determine the feasibility of establishing an international REU
site based at Oglala Lakota College on these themes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;