* 0803135
* Line Shape Parameters and Their Temperature Dependence for Molecules of Importance in Earth's Atmosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Robert Gamache, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 06/30/2012
* USD 356,065.00

The Principal Investigator (PI) plans to develop a theoretical framework to
calculate pressure-broadened half-widths and pressure-induced line shifts for
trace gases in the terrestrial atmosphere. The half-width remains the major
source of error in the spectral parameters used for reducing remote sensing data
and in line-by-line models used to calculate radiative forcing from greenhouse
gases. The inclusion of the line shift in profile retrievals also reduces the
error in the procedure. For applications to the Earth's atmosphere, data are
needed for thousands of ro-vibrational transitions. Hence a theoretical model is
needed that is computationally efficient and capable of determining gamma and
delta within the needs of the spectroscopic and remote sensing communities. In
this work the temperature dependence of the half-width and the line shift will
be investigated. The vibrational state, rotational state, and temperature
dependence of these collision-induced parameters will be
investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts include education of a
postdoctoral student and three undergraduate students in the research project.
The work will also provide resources for research and education. All the results
of the calculations will be made available online
(http://faculty.uml.edu/Robert_Gamache). The line shape information for
atmospheric molecules will be incorporated into the HITRAN molecular absorption
parameter database for use by the community. The contributions beyond science
and engineering are that the results will be used by the remote sensing
community and will allow them more confidence in their data. These results will
allow a better understanding about planet Earth, its energy balance, how the
concentration of ozone and other gases are changing with time, and how climate
is evolving. This knowledge will allow for better regulation and stewardship of
the planet's interacting systems and will allow better presentations of the
information to the citizens of the United States and the world.