* 0803550
* Collaborative Research: Extensional Unroofing of the Central Menderes Metamorphic Complex, Southwestern Turkey
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2007,01/31/2009
* Matthew Kohn, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 01/31/2009
* USD 23,340.00

&lt;br/&gt;The Aegean region experienced a series of continental plate
collisions from Late Cretaceous to Eocene time. Post-collisional extension in
the region, although controversial in its timing and nature, caused the
exhumation of several metamorphic belts. The largest of these, the Menderes
Massif, accommodated significant crustal extension, which may have been caused
by: (1) tectonic escape and lateral extrusion, in which the Anatolian plate
moves westward along the North and East Anatolian Faults, (2) back-arc
spreading/slab roll back due to the subduction along the Hellenic Arc, or (3)
orogenic collapse of thermally weakened lithosphere that experienced Paleogene
contraction. These hypotheses are tested using geochronology, making the
Menderes Massif a key locale in identifying the fundamental plate tectonic
processes that facilitate extension in the continental lithosphere. The main
goal of the research is to characterize the petrologic evolution of rocks in the
central Menderes Massif to identify the cause of tectonic transition from
compression to extension in the Aegean Region. The project involves fieldwork
and geochemical data acquisition, including recently developed techniques of in
situ ion microprobe monazite geochronology and argon-argon K-feldspar multi-
diffusion domain modeling. The ion microprobe technique preserves the grain and
rock fabric, and, when combined with electron microprobe chemical analyses,
allow for a clear interpretation of meaning of the age. The argon-argon multi-
diffusion domain model shows that a single K-feldspar sample can reveal a broad
segment of a cooling history, rather than a single datum. This project is
collaborative between a U.S. team including Dr. Elizabeth Catlos, Dr. Ibrahim
Cemen (School of Geology; Oklahoma State University) and Dr. Matt Kohn (Dept.
Geological Sciences; University of South Carolina), and a Turkish team including
Dr. Cemal Goncuoglu (Middle East Technical University, Department of Geological
Engineering, Ankara). The two graduate students participating in this proposal
are exposed to a different culture, intense fieldwork, and a variety of
geochemical methods. &lt;br/&gt;