* 0803214
* Pfaffian orientations, graph coloring and the theory of Riemann surfaces on graphs
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2007,08/31/2011
* Sergey Norin, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2011
* USD 103,315.00

The central problem of this proposal is characterization of Pfaffian graphs.
Pfaffian graphs are important as the problem of enumeration of perfect matchings
can be solved in polynomial time in a Pfaffian graph, while the corresponding
problem for general graphs is #P-complete. Among other approaches to structural
characterization of Pfaffian graphs, the PI proposes to continue his work on a
general matching minor theory, an analogue of celebrated graph minor theory of
Robertson and Seymour. Such a theory would have many potential theoretical and
algorithmic applications beyond the theory of Pfaffian graphs. The PI also
proposes to continue his research on three other types of graph theoretical
problems. The first one is connected to the Four Color Theorem, a problem that
remained open for over a hundred years and lies at the heart of the modern graph
theory. The second type of problems involves circular colorings, a relatively
new concept that has been studied extensively in recent years and has both
practical motivations and theoretical applications to the theory of graph
coloring. Thirdly, the investigation of graph theoretical analogues of the
results in the theory of Riemann surfaces is proposed. The PI, in collaboration
with Matthew Baker, has recently been able to prove a Riemann-Roch theorem for
graphs. The Riemann-Roch theorem is widely regarded as the most important result
in the theory of Riemann surfaces. The discovery of its analogue demonstrated an
interesting connection between Riemann surfaces and graphs and led to further
open problems with potential applications outside graph
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work belongs to the area of graph theory.
Graph theory can be used to model various objects in diverse fields, ranging
from telephone networks and Internet to molecular structures and crystal
lattices. The problems considered in this proposal have applications in physics,
chemistry and computer science, as well as potential applications to practical
problems of periodic scheduling and computer chip design. Achieving results on
the proposed research problems would advance our understanding of these
applications.&lt;br/&gt;