* 0803203
* RUI:  Experimental Investigation of the Physico-chemical Properties of Aqueous Organic and Mixed Organic/Inorganic Systems Important in the Upper Troposphere
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2015
* Keith Beyer, University of Wisconsin-La Crosse
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 06/30/2015
* USD 487,626.00

The thermodynamic properties of aqueous systems that constitute aerosol
particles in the mid and upper troposphere will be investigated. Because,
depending on their phase, these aerosols may be involved in cirrus cloud
formation and contribute to earth's radiation balance, their phase diagrams and
relative humidity/solute concentration relationships will be studied.
Temperature-dependent deliquescence relative humidity (DRH) and
concentration/activity relationships will be measured using humidity-controlled
thermogravimetric analysis (HTGA) for several aqueous dicarboxylic acids in the
range 303 - 253 K: malonic (C3H4O4), oxalic (C2H2O4), succinic (C4H6O4), maleic
(C4H4O4), malic (C4H6O5), and glutaric (C5H8O4). Low temperature liquid/solid
equilibrium phase diagrams will also be investigated. Enthalpies of transition,
the temperature-dependent DRH, and concentration/activity relationships will be
measured using differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), infrared spectroscopy of
thin films, and HTGA for ternary systems of dicarboxylic acids, ammonium
sulfate, and water.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research will be
used to validate and constrain atmospheric aerosol models. Undergraduate
students will be extensively involved in laboratory experimental work, data
analysis, and communication of results. A new research grade humidity-controlled
thermogravimetric analyzer (HTGA) will be purchased, which will enhance the
research and teaching infrastructure at the grantee institution. Students will
gain extensive experience with FTIR and DSC instruments as well as the HTGA.