* 0803378
* Stochastic Partial Differential Equations: Theory and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Sergey Lototsky, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2012
* USD 180,000.00

The research goals of this project are to develop new analytical, statistical,
and numerical methods for stochastic partial differential equations. There are
three directions in the proposed research: Wiener Chaos decomposition for linear
and nonlinear equations, analysis of stochastic partial differential equations
in domains, and statistical inference for stochastic partial differential
equations. Wiener Chaos decomposition is a stochastic analog of the classical
Fourier method and is a powerful tool in the study of stochastic equations, from
both analytical and numerical points of view. In particular, Wiener Chaos
decomposition is the key component of several new numerical algorithms for
nonlinear filtering and the stochastic Navier-Stokes equation. Analysis of
stochastic partial differential equations in domains is necessary for
development of a complete theory, similar to the one for deterministic partial
differential equations. In addition to purely theoretical results about
existence and uniqueness of solutions, this analysis leads to new numerical
methods for such equations. Methods of statistical inference make it possible to
relate an abstract equation to a concrete problem from applications. Unlike
finite-dimensional systems, a consistent estimation in a stochastic partial
differential equation is possible even when both the observation time and the
amplitude of noise are fixed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stochastic partial
differential equations are both an interesting mathematical object and an
effective modelling tool in various branches of applied science, such as
ecology, finance, meteorology, and navigation. Equations studied in this project
can describe, for example, the term structure of interest rates, the propagation
of an oil spill in the ocean, and the motion of the target on the radar screen.
The research objectives of the project are to study mathematical properties of
stochastic partial differential equations and to develop effective computational
and statistical methods for relating an equation to a model. The educational
objective of the project is to increase understanding of stochastic partial
differential equations among the students and researchers both inside and
outside of the mathematical community. This educational objective will be
achieved by developing several basic and special topics graduate courses aimed
at helping graduate students make a transition to independent research.