* 0803578
* HCC-Medium: Collaborative Research: Multimodal Capture of Teamwork in Collocated Collaboration
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,09/30/2009
* Randall Burd, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey-RBHS-Robert Wood
* Standard Grant
* David W. McDonald
* 09/30/2009
* USD 150,000.00

The design and use of information systems to support the collaborative activity
of collocated teams in dynamic, high-risk scenarios remains a challenge. This
project will develop novel methods to more efficiently capture and communicate
this activity in environments that currently rely on human observation, verbal
communication, and collective memory. More efficient teamwork capture processes
will enable both larger-scale collection (which supports retrospective analysis
that is critical for improved training and technology design) and
contemporaneous collection (which provides real-time feedback to workers to
assist in error detection). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve these goals,
domain-specific knowledge and probabilistic reasoning will be used to identify
patterns of work and communication. The representative domain of trauma
resuscitation is ideal for this work since the roles and tasks of players are
well-defined and the flow of work follows a general schema regardless of the
patient?s injuries. Because of the complexity of this environment, manual
tracking of all activities using video recordings requires repeated review and
is very time-consuming even for experienced observers. A computer system will be
developed that uses video analysis to determine the location of each player,
motion analysis to track their movements, and speech recognition targeted at a
limited lexicon to identify their communication. Using these inputs, a
probabilistic reasoning model will be constructed that correlates data from the
environment with a domain-specific model of teamwork. The tagged recording of
the resuscitation event will be available in real time during the event as well
as post-event for analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific importance of
this work is in the need to tag these video observations. Many forms of videos
are of repetitive behaviors, whether in surveillance applications, work
situations, or other uses. In all such cases, applying a grammar to the video,
and matching actions and sounds to that grammar, has the possibility of greatly
simplifying work analysis, which is the critical phase in the development
computer support for complex, high-risk human activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed approach will develop novel algorithms and
methods for: (i) person and resource tracking in crowded collaborative
environments; (ii) recognition of human activity based on fusion of unreliable
data from multimodal sensors and a model of the process being recorded; and
(iii) reasoning about human activities at different time scales based on
heterogeneous technologies (Hidden Markov Models, Bayesian Nets, and Petri Nets)
that mutually interact for activity and event detection. Moreover, the methods
will be developed and evaluated in a clinical environment that currently uses
limited information technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. This work
will also provide the foundation for implementing decision aids in environments
such as trauma resuscitation and related medical domains that lack effective
methods for instrumented tracking of teamwork. Trauma care is a significant
health care crisis and any improvements in resuscitation processes will save
lives.