* 0803388
* International cooperative research on homogeneous operators
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2014
* Adam Koranyi, Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2014
* USD 41,454.00

Koranyi&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is being co-funded OISE and DMS and will
partially support collaborative research between Professor A. Koranyi of CUNY, H
H Lehman College, and Professor G. Misra if Indian Institute of Science. The
research will focus on homogeneous operators. These form an important class of
operators on Hilbert space. Professor G. Misra is the leading expert on them.
There are important open questions in the field, such as the classification and
explicit description of all homogeneous operators in the Cowen-Douglas class. A.
Koranyi and G. Misra have been doing joint research on this problem for the last
three years. Two publications have resulted from this, giving a full
classification in an important special case and proving various properties. The
continuation of this research is expected to lead to a complete classification
in the general case and to results about related problems, in particular about
dilation theory. After this, it will be attempted to extend at least some of the
results to the case of n-tuples of commuting operators associated to bounded
symmetric domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposal
consists in solving some long open problems of operator theory by the
combination of ideas from different branches of mathematics. This will
constitute substantial progress in operator theory. The broader impacts include
advancing operator theory and widely distributing the results in a wy to be
useful to all working in the field. This will furnish a method that may have
applications in physics and will have a beneficial effect on teaching and
research activities both at the CUNY Graduate Center and at the Indian Institute
of Science in Bangalore. The project is large enough for students and junior
researchers to participate in it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;