* 0803166
* TMCC Science Enhancement
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2014
* Scott Hanson, Turtle Mountain Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Jody Chase
* 09/30/2014
* USD 2,519,636.00

This project has four key focus areas which are designed to &lt;br/&gt;provide
opportunities for student learning, retention and success. The Outreach
component &lt;br/&gt;targets the K-12 system to foster science exploration and
success with the ultimate goal of &lt;br/&gt;increasing the number of students
choosing STEM science careers. At the college level, the &lt;br/&gt;project will
increase enrollment of STEM science majors through the development of new
&lt;br/&gt;courses and programs. For retention of STEM students, the project
will foster increased &lt;br/&gt;opportunities for student success. To increase
completion/transfer/four year graduation &lt;br/&gt;rates, TMCC will initiate
partnerships with four year schools to upgrade its curricula, initiate joint
&lt;br/&gt;research and aid students in developing familiarity with four year
schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will conduct an in-depth review and
revision of the existing &lt;br/&gt;TMCC science courses. This effort meets two
critical needs: enhancing student learning by &lt;br/&gt;providing more hands-on
activities and ensuring the curricula is consistent with the standards at
&lt;br/&gt;four year schools. In the latter area, the project will foster
partnerships between the college and &lt;br/&gt;four year colleges. These
partnerships are expected to bridge the rural isolation experienced by
&lt;br/&gt;the TMCC faculty and provide four year school familiarity to students
prior to transfer. &lt;br/&gt; As this project is the demonstration of how
involvement in learning impacts student &lt;br/&gt;achievement and career
choices, it is applicable not only in STEM subjects but across the
&lt;br/&gt;curriculum. The current literature suggests student learning is
heavily impacted by how &lt;br/&gt;engaged the student is in the learning
process. Using a results driven approach, the project will &lt;br/&gt;identify
what enhancements positively impact student learning not only at the college
level, but &lt;br/&gt;across the continuum of education. The results of this
project can be replicated not only at the &lt;br/&gt;college level but in K-12
Native American programs. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;