* 0803573
* 2008 Gordon Research Conference on Solid State Chemistry,  New London, NH, July 27 - August 1, 2008
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2008,02/28/2009
* Mercouri Kanatzidis, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 02/28/2009
* USD 23,800.00

The aim of this conference is to bring together researchers from diverse
backgrounds to discuss the latest advances and challenges in the area of solid-
state chemistry with the intent to promote an exchange of ideas and to build
strong relationships among academic, industrial, and government researchers.
Internationally known speakers and poster presentations from students, post-
doctoral scholars, and early career faculty will emphasize technical advances,
the presentation of unpublished work, and the discussion of new ideas and future
directions emerging within the solid-state chemistry community. The speakers
represent academic, industrial, and government laboratories, and there will be
strong international participation. Leading scientists working in various areas
of solid-state chemistry are expected to draw the interest of many researchers
in the field. Current frontiers to be highlighted include synthesizing and
characterizing a variety of new materials that are important in energy
generation, storage and conversion. The energy problem impacts many fields of
physical science, technology and society. Other highlights include the science
of materials synthesis and discovery and porous materials capable of absorbing
massive amount of gases such as hydrogen. As a result, the content of some
sessions cuts across different materials types and uses, and should therefore
draw the interest of those working on diverse classes of compounds and related
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solid-state
chemistry is an important discipline that generates and develops the new
materials that underpin many of the technological advances currently underway.
This scientific area has undergone rapid growth in recent years due to the
broadly based recognition of the technological importance and scientific
challenges involved in the discovery and study of new materials, and due to the
influx of scientists from other disciplines who see the opportunities for
performing exciting research in this area. The 2008 Solid State Chemistry Gordon
Research Conference is a major international meeting to be held July 27-August
1, 2008 at Colby-Sawyer College, New London, NH. The goal of the conference is
to facilitate collaborations and information exchange across a broad spectrum of
researchers with interests in solid-state chemistry areas. These include new
concepts for design and synthesis of novel functional materials, fundamental
studies in structure, theory and modeling, and related areas of materials
nanoscience and engineering research and education. The NSF funds will be used
primarily to support the participation of students, post-doctoral scholars, and
early career faculty, as well as senior U.S. session chairs and invited
speakers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;