* 0803487
* HCC-Medium: End-user debugging of machine-learned programs
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2013
* Thomas Dietterich, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 09/30/2013
* USD 929,362.00

This is a project to give the end user some ability to debug programs that were
written by a machine instead of a person, especially when the users are not
expert programmers. This is the problem faced by users of a new sort of program,
namely, one generated by a machine learning system. For example, intelligent
user interfaces, categorizers of email and web sites, and recommender systems
use machine learning to learn how to behave. This learned set of behaviors is a
program. Learned programs do not come into existence until the learning
environment has left the hands of the machine learning specialist, because they
learn from the user's ongoing data. Thus, if these programs make a mistake, the
only one present to debug them is the user. Giving end users the ability to
debug such programs can improve the speed and accuracy of these
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project envisions a fine-
grained, iterative, interactive debugging process. First, a user notices an
erroneous classification (with the system's help, based on reasoning about its
own competence), such as an email message that might be misfiled. Second, the
user asks for an explanation. Third, using the system's explanation, the user
provides reasoning constraints, declaring, for example, that "today" is not an
important word, and that anything from the company president should go into the
"company" folder. The learned program reevaluates competence models and redoes
its reasoning, giving the user an opportunity to immediately see the result of
the change. The loop then begins again. Thus, the goals of this project are the
following: 1. To help users identify reasoning problems, and to provide
explanations of the behavior of machine-learned programs suitable for end users.
2. To elicit rich feedback from the user, incorporating it into the reasoning of
the learned program. 3. To improve the speed and accuracy of machine learning by
integrating this rich feedback into learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition
to the potential speed and accuracy improvement in the machine learner, users
may become more productive and make fewer errors. Providing disclosure of the
learned programs' reasoning engenders trust, and with it, increased willingness
to use the system. Thus, this project has the potential to make significant
advances in the user acceptance of machine learning in a variety of new, real-
world applications. Combining human constraints and guidance with statistical
learning could enable highly accurate learning from small data sets, which is
critical to creating successful intelligent user interfaces. The project will
also result in learning systems whose data sources and input features are easy
to change and whose behavior is easy to control. In combining human-computer
interaction principles with machine learning, this project opens opportunities
for novel perspectives, especially in the realm of interdisciplinary education.
Graduate students will be trained in this blended research area, and aspects of
it will be incorporated in classes in both human-computer interaction and
machine learning, and in other educational experiences for undergraduates and
high school students. &lt;br/&gt;