* 0803510
* Simulation Studies of Ground State Phases and Criticality in Correlated Quantum Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Anders Sandvik, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2011
* USD 360,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: This award supports theoretical research and education in
computer simulation studies of ground state phases and criticality in correlated
quantum matter. Large-scale computer simulations of lattice quantum many-body
systems are carried out in this work. These studies are inspired by the
phenomenology of strongly-correlated electron systems?their complex phase
diagrams and quantum phase transitions in particular?but are not complete
descriptions of specific materials (because of the computational complexity).
Instead, simplified quantum spin models are used to capture physical phenomena
of interest and gain generically valid insights through unbiased simulations.

Complex ground states and phase transitions induced by competing interactions
are studied, focusing in particular on the transition between an
antiferromagnetic (AF) and a valence-bond-solid in two-dimensional quantum spin
systems. The transition and the VBS phase are investigated using sophisticated
numerical methods. Research into novel computational algorithms based on states
defined by tensor-networks and related objects are also carried out. Such
methods have the potential to enable studies of ground states of previously
intractable frustrated quantum spin systems.

The effort undertaken has broader impacts with both scientific and educational
consequences. The work on numerical simulation techniques produces new
algorithms that have broad applications in condensed matter physics and atomic
and molecular physics (ultra-cold condensates). The work on tensor-network and
related states for describing correlated quantum states is also of interest in
quantum information theory. An educational aspect of this proposal, beyond the
important training of students in physics and advanced scientific computing, is
a web-site in which a variety of computational methods developed by the PI are
presented in a pedagogical manner, along with example programs for a variety of
models.

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY: This award supports theoretical research and education in
the use of state-of-the-art computer simulation studies of novel electronic
structures that have been discovered in exotic materials like the two-
dimensional carbon sheets called graphene. Large-scale computer simulations of
quantum physics that describes these systems are carried out in this work. These
studies are inspired by experiments and discovery of these novel materials, but
are not aimed at complete descriptions of specific materials because such
detailed numerical studies are not yet possible because of the computational
complexity. Instead, simplified quantum spin models are used in order to capture
physical phenomena of interest, with the objective of gaining new generically
valid insights through unbiased computer simulations.

The effort undertaken has broader impacts with both scientific and educational
consequences. The work on computer simulations produces new algorithms that have
broad applications in condensed matter physics and atomic and molecular physics
(ultra-cold condensates). The work on novel computational algorithms is also
important in quantum information theory. An educational aspect of this proposal,
beyond the important training of students in physics and advanced scientific
computing, is a web-site in which a variety of computational methods developed
by the PI are presented in a pedagogical manner, along with easy-to-use example
programs for a variety of models.