* 0803360
* Stochastic Models for Anomalous Diffusion
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Mark Meerschaert, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2012
* USD 299,945.00

Classical diffusion is a mathematical model for the spread of agents due to
molecular collisions. The same model also describes various dispersion
phenomena, where the spreading is due to other mechanisms such as velocity
contrasts, hopping, and trapping. Anomalous diffusion occurs when the rate of
spreading is either faster (super-diffusion) or slower (subdiffusion) than the
classical model predicts. This phenomenon is seen in the spread of contaminants
in air and water, the dispersion of biological species, the movement of
molecules through cell membranes, and the fluctuations of stock prices.
Stochastic methods identify the random motions behind the deterministic
diffusion equations. They describe the physical principles that underlie the
anomalous diffusion equations, and facilitate numerical solution by the method
of particle tracking, where a large number of agents are followed through time
and space to mimic the stochastic physical model. Power law resting times lead
to fractional time derivatives in the anomalous diffusion equations, while power
law movements lead to fractional derivatives in space. However, the range of
power laws is restricted by technical conditions in the theory. The proposed
research will refine and extend the stochastic models of anomalous diffusion,
relaxing these technical conditions to allow an arbitrary power law index. It
will also encompass alternative stochastic models that lead to a wide range of
space-time pseudo-differential equation models for movement and spreading, by
using triangular array limits and Markov process methods. The stochastic process
models behind the anomalous diffusion equations are scaling limits of continuous
time random walks, where random waiting times intervene between random motions.
The scaling limits are Markov processes subordinated to non-Markovian hitting
time processes. The resulting models should provide a sound basis for important
applications in geophysics, biology, and finance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A biological or chemical agent, once released into the air
or water, will move and spread. The proposed research will allow a more accurate
modeling of the spreading of these contaminants. Previous research has
documented anomalous spreading in both air and water. Fast spreading can cause
pollutants to arrive downstream earlier than expected. Accurate prediction of
this risk factor is important for protecting sources of drinking water, for
properly assessing the risk from a biological or chemical attack via airborne
release, and for designing a safe repository for nuclear waste. Slow release is
a related issue that has been observed in efforts to clean up water pollution.
Improved models will enhance the nation?s ability to budget for superfund
remediation efforts. Anomalous spreading is also observed in the movement of
drugs across cell boundaries, stock market price changes, and the migration of
molecules in the formation of advanced composite materials. The proposed
research will build a foundation for more accurate medical drug delivery design
systems, better management of retirement portfolios, and improved manufacturing
using composite materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;