* 0803779
* Study Dust Optical and Radiative Properties Using Optimal Morphological Sets
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2012
* George Kattawar, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 05/31/2012
* USD 419,905.00

Airborne dust and smaller aerosol particles play an important role in the
earth's climate system by scattering light and longer wavelength (e.g., thermal)
radiation passing through the atmosphere. To the extent that their impacts are
imperfectly known, they also complicate interpretation of TOA (top of
atmosphere) emissions of thermal energy and scattered/reflected light as
remotely sensed by satellites. Both aspects are of crucial importance in our
efforts to obtain a physically representative, quantitatively accurate
understanding of global circulation dynamics and any overlain signals
corresponding to climate change. The fact that dusts and aerosols exhibit a
myriad of differing sizes, shapes and compositions greatly complicates this
problem. The primary objective of this research effort is to explore the
feasibility of reducing this complexity via definition and development a more
manageable number of "optimal morphological parameters" associated with
representative particle types. This project will develop and validate
mathematically sophisticated methods for estimating both radiative and light-
scattering properties of such particles that are far more efficient in their use
of computer time than currently available methods. Once fully tested and
documented, associated computer codes will be made widely available to the
broader research community for further use and
evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this effort is
centered on improving our knowledge of the optical and radiative properties of
airborne dust and aerosols. The resultant findings will have direct applications
in the study of the Earth's radiative budget as well as remote sensing of
atmospheric properties from both ground-based and orbital platforms. Broader
impacts of this research will include increased ability to accurately specify
the "direct radiative forcing" (e.g., induced warming and/or cooling) associated
with both natural and anthropogenically-generated aerosols on our climate via
sophisticated global-scale computer models. This project will also support the
education and training of several graduate students in the interdiscplinary area
marked by the intersection of atmospheric physics and classical
electromagnetics.&lt;br/&gt;