* 0803622
* RI - Medium: Pelvic Obliquity Rehabilitation in Stroke Patients Using Robotically Generated Force-Fields
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Joel Stein, Northeastern University
* Continuing grant
* Richard Voyles
* 07/31/2011
* USD 753,076.00

The research objectives of this 3-year project, are: 1) The development of a
robotic device, called Robotic Gait Rehabilitation (RGR) Trainer, which will
generate force-fields applied at the patient?s pelvic area to facilitate
treadmill gait retraining in patients with abnormal gait patterns; 2) The design
and implementation of high level impedance control strategies to achieve a
smooth human-robot interaction thus facilitating gait retraining; 3) The testing
of the RGR Trainer for treadmill gait retraining in post-stroke patients,
integrating the novel haptic feedback in the pel-vic area with previously
developed visual feedback. The intellectual merit of the proposed pro-ject is
the study of patient-robot interaction via haptic feedback provided through the
pelvis and the study of the integration of haptic and visual feedback modalities
during robot-assisted reha-bilitation in post-stroke patients. The educational,
broader impact and outreach activities of this project are: 1) The initiation of
undergraduate students in rehabilitation robotics; 2) The establishment of
collaborative projects on biomedical engineering and robotics with Massachusetts
high schools; 3) The organization of a special session on robotics and treadmill
gait retraining at a major conference; 4) The estab-lishment of a webpage in the
area of robotic and treadmill gait rehabilitation devices.