* 0803305
* Understanding and Tailoring Magnetic Interactions at the Interfaces of Magnetic Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Zi Qiu, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 08/31/2012
* USD 310,000.00

Technical This condensed matter physics research will develop a fundamental
understanding of interfacial and interlayer interactions in magnetic
nanostructures. Oxide and metallic thin films will be grown by Molecular Beam
Epitaxy (MBE) with atomic layer control and characterized by the state-of-the-
art techniques of Reflection High-Energy Electron Diffraction (RHEED), Low-
Energy Electron Diffraction (LEED), Auger Electron Spectroscopy (AES), and
Scanning Tunneling Microscopy (STM). Spin-dependent electronic reflectivity
measured by Spin-Polarized Low Energy Electron Microscopy(SPLEEM) will reveal
spin-dependent electronic structure of the ultrathin films. Element specific
magnetic domains will be imaged by Photoemission Electron Microscopy (PEEM) to
retrieve the effect of magnetic interfacial and interlayer couplings. Magnetic
hysteresis loops will also be measured by in situ Surface Magneto-Optic Kerr
Effect (SMOKE) technique and X-ray Magnetic Circular Dichroism (XMCD). The
research will involve both graduate and undergraduate students, thus provides a
natural training of the students on basic science and technology.

Non-Technical As the size of materials is reduced to the nanometer scale, the
electrical charge and magnetic field (spin) of electrons can behave coherently
to generate unique materials properties that are important to the future
information technologies. This condensed matter physics research program will
develop a basic understanding of the electron spin interactions at the
boundaries of different materials in magnetic nanostructures. This understanding
is crucial to the development of artificial structures which consist of
properties not available in natural materials. In order to achieve this goal,
state-of-the-art techniques will be employed to synthesize and characterize the
materials at the atomic level. Result of the research will lead to an
understanding of the new behaviors of electron spins at the nanometer scale, and
to provide guidance for future spintronics device fabrication. Graduate students
will receive training at the cutting edge of modern experimental techniques,
which is crucial for their future careers in academic, industrial, and
government jobs. Undergraduate students involved in this research program will
have a chance of integrate their class room knowledge into the real scientific
research.