* 0803619
* Molecular arrays for dipole-based quantum information processing
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Robin Cote, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Houghton Pratt
* 08/31/2011
* USD 225,000.00

As the field of quantum information processing (QIP) matures, so do its goals.
In particular, we are looking for more realistic and better scalable systems,
for novel areas of application and stronger crossfertilization with other areas
in physics. In this proposal, we are addressing all of these goals. We propose
to deepen and expand our investigation of polar molecules for QIP, specifically
with a view towards feasibility, scalability, and connection with novel solid
state and hybrid systems. We want to explore similar setups for efficient
deterministic optical quantum computing systems that also could be used for
efficient switches and transistors.&lt;br/&gt;First, we want to expand the idea
of using single polar molecules for qubits. Polar molecules are ideal because of
both recent fast progress in cooling and trapping promising similar densities as
neutral atoms and of ion-like ease of manipulation. We described a deterministic
and robust scheme where we can switch molecular dipole moments on and off using
the rich level hierarchies in molecules. Here, we want to suggest, (i)
generalized criteria for polar molecule-based QIP, (ii) the use of solid state
rare gas matrices as an ideal and novel architecture in which molecules can be
stored very close&lt;br/&gt;and with nearly no relative distance uncertainties,
thus maximizing the potential of the dipole-dipole interaction even beyond
nearest-neighbor interactions, (iii) a hybrid-type nano-fiber/molecular trap
design to both trap and couple the molecules, potentially on a so-called
?molecular chip. The objective of the second part of the proposal is to
introduce dipolar arrays as tools for deterministic optical quantum computation.
The idea of this is to treat photons as qubits. Since photons do not interact
directly, a non-linearity has to be introduced in order to create a two-qubit
gate. We propose to create singlephoton nonlinearities by sending dark-state
polaritons, photon molecule coupled excitations, through a dipolar medium
subject to dipole-dipole interactions.&lt;br/&gt;While propagating, the photons
thus accumulate a nonlinear phase shift that can be interpreted as a phase gate.
We propose to (i) describe in detail the process including interrelation between
density, propagation length, coupling, and dipole-dipole interaction strength in
order to create an efficient phase gate; (ii) to give an overview over the most
important decoherence sources, such as non-symmetric excitations and phonons and
their typical strengths for particular setups; (iii) in order to battle
decoherence to investigate the possibility of using so-called ?many-body
protected manifolds? which introduce a bias between symmetric and non-symmetric
state manifolds and thus mitigate phonon decay; (iv) to study optimal
dimensionality and geometry and connect these with similar architectures as
suggested in the first part of the proposal; and (v) to give an outlook to novel
solid state setups such as Si surface quantum dots and semiconductor bound
excitons in connection with&lt;br/&gt;the proposed idea.