* 0803524
* III-COR-Medium: Providing Provenance through Workflows and Database Transformations
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2014
* Val Tannen, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2014
* USD 914,494.00

Data provenance is a fundamental issue in the processing of scientific
information and beyond. Two lines of research have been pursued in recent years
with direct bearing on the issues of data provenance. In one of them, provenance
in workflows, the emphasis is on extracting provenance from logs of events
marking the execution of different modules to various intial and derived
datasets. In the other line of research, provenance in databases, the emphasis
is on the propagation of provenance through the operators that make up database
views, or on propagation of provenance through copy/cut-and-paste operations
within and among databases. These two bodies of work employ different techniques
and at first glance their results appear quite different. However, in many
scientific applications, database manipulations co-exist with the execution of
workflow modules, and the provenance of the resulting data should integrate both
kinds of processing into a usable paradigm.

By analyzing the work on data provenance in workflows and in databases, the PIs
identify what they believe are the main difficulties in unifying and integrating
these two different kinds of data provenance: (1) the lack of a data model that
is rich enough to capture the interaction between the structure of the data and
the structure of the workflow; and (2) the lack of a high-level specification
framework in which database operators and workflow modules can be treated
uniformly.

In this project, the PIs aim to overcome these difficulties and thus provide
concepts and tools that allow a truly comprehensive approach to the provenace of
scientific data. The project's approach relies on a data model that supports
nested collections and on a functional language approach to workflow
specification. Based on this, the project aims to deliver a framework and tools
for defining, managing and querying data provenance in complex scientific
workflows that include database manipulations. The project is expected to impact
bioinformatics (through interdisciplinary collaborations in the Penn Center for
Bioinformatics and the Penn Genome Frontiers Institute) and phyloinformatics
(through contributions to the NSF AToL program) as well as ongoing
standardization work on provenance in workflows and in the business processes
(eg., BPEL) community.

The results of this project are disseminated as publications, through direct
collaborations and through the project website:
http://db.cis.upenn.edu/research/UNIPROVE.html.

