* 0803691
* Spectroscopy of Electron Liquids in Quantum Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2013
* Aron Pinczuk, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2013
* USD 570,000.00

Technical This individual investigator award will support advanced optical
spectroscopy studies of low-lying excitation modes of two-dimensional electron
liquids in quantum Hall regimes. Collective excitations in the spin or charge
degrees of freedom will be accessed by inelastic light scattering methods
developed by the PI and collaborators. The primary interests are on the diverse
and competing quantum phases of many particle systems that emerge at very low
temperatures when electrons populate higher Landau levels in highly perfect
systems. Being composed solely of electrons, the electron fluids and solids in
the quantum Hall regimes are unique phases of matter that emerge at very low
temperatures and high magnetic fields and that arise from the impact of
fundamental Coulomb interactions among electrons. In these intriguing phases
small changes in magnetic field may alter the statistics of quasiparticles from
fermions to bosons and even to anyons. The goals of this body of research are
the discovery and elucidation of the physics in these competing quantum phases
of matter. The broader impacts stem from prospects of advancing the field by
offering previously unavailable insights on striking quantum phases of matter.
The group of the PI has strong representation of women and minorities, and
significant links to leading scientists in the US and abroad.

Non Technical When the spin, which is analogous to a small magnet attached to
the electron, or electrical charge of electrons of systems containing many
electrons existing in a certain state called the "quantum Hall regime" new
electronic properties of the material containing them emerge. These properties
will be measured using methods involving the reflection of light that were
developed by the PI and his collaborators. The quantum Hall regimes occur at
very low temperatures when electrons in nearly perfect man-made semiconductor
structures are restricted to move on a flat plane with a magnetic field applied
perpendicular to this plane. This group of electrons makes up a fluid or solid
system of particles and is in a unique state of matter that emerges from the
fact that each electron has a charge causing interactions to occur among them.
In these intriguing electron systems under study, the collective motion of
electrons is represented by what is known as ?quasiparticles? that may assume
different characteristics that can be altered by applying small magnetic field
changes to the system. The goal of the projected research is the discovery and
elucidation of the physics that is at the origin of the competing electron
states that emerge in these many electron systems. The research is of interest
to an international community of scientists and to the general public that is
amazed by manifestations of basic electron properties and their potential
applications. The group of the PI offers significant opportunities to diverse
groups of students and junior scientists to participate in world-class research.