* 0803230
* U.S.-Brazil Dissertation Enhancement:    Magnetism and Transport in the Inhomogeneous Hubbard Model
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/2008,02/28/2010
* Richard Scalettar, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 02/28/2010
* USD 6,000.00

U.S.-Brazil Dissertation Enhancement: Magnetism and Transport in the
Inhomogeneous Hubbard Model&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0803230&lt;br/&gt;Richard T.
Scalettar, University of California, Davis &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will
support a dissertation enhancement for Christopher Varney, a Ph.D. student at
the University of California, Davis. The Principal Investigator for this award
is Dr. Richard T. Scalettar from the University of California, Davis. The
research will be done in collaboration with Drs. Thereza C. Paiva and Raimundo
S. Dos Santos of Brazil's Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro. The proposed
work will examine topics with high scientific interest, which include the
interplay between disorder and interactions on a honeycomb lattice, the spin
correlations in graphene nanoribbons, and the role of layering of repulsive and
free sites on a rectangular lattice. The scientific technique that will be
applied is a reliable technique that has been largely developed at the
University of California, Davis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
will have two important broader impacts; it will enhance the education of a
graduate student and it will help to strengthen U.S. collaboration with a high
quality research group at Brazil's Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro. The
graduate student will work closely with Brazilian researchers while conducting
research at the Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro on two extended trips
during the two year period. &lt;br/&gt;