* 0803127
* International Conference: Mathematical tools for multi-scale biological processes, June 2008. Bozeman, MT
* MPS,DMS
* 04/15/2008,03/31/2009
* Tomas Gedeon, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 03/31/2009
* USD 16,000.00

In the past twenty years biology has greatly benefited from insights gathered
from mathematical models of biological processes. The unprecedented growth of
molecular and systems biology in last 10 years challenges mathematicians to
develop modeling techniques appropriate for the intricate biology on a cellular
and sub-cellular level. It is increasingly clear that the processes in a living
cell cannot be captured by static descriptions, but must be modeled as dynamical
processes. This leads to descriptions by sets of differential equations, often
with a stochastic component and including spatial dependencies. The conference
will bring together mathematical biologists working on systems ranging from
individual molecular processes to entire ecosystems. The aim of the conference
is to facilitate the discovery of similarities between systems at these widely
different scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The revolution in genetic and molecular
biology of the past decade promises a great advancement in medical science in
the near future. The progress on many human diseases like cancer, Alzheimer's
disease and genetic diseases is tied to our understanding of molecular
mechanisms causing them. Every second of every day hundreds of chemical
reactions in each cell sustain our lives. While we increasingly know who the
players in these reactions are, we do not understand how they are controlled and
regulated. Mathematical models can guide the necessary experiments that are
needed to untangle this clockwork of interconnected processes. The conference
will bring together the leading scientists in mathematical systems biology to
exchange the ideas and establish new collaborations in order to help molecular
biology to deliver on its medical promise. The conference participants
constitute a diverse group of speakers in terms of gender, geographic origin, as
well as career stages, and include members of underrepresented groups in
science.