* 0803555
* HCC-Medium: Collaborative Research: Understanding and Optimizing Wireless Mobile Computing for Underserved Urban Communities
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Jerome Crowder, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2012
* USD 138,000.00

The intent of this research is to develop a wireless mobile computing paradigm
consisting of cost-effective wireless broadband network, mobile phones, and
relevant applications for underserved urban communities. To date, 3G cellular
networks, the proposed deployment of urban-scale mesh networks, and penetration
of data-ready mobile phones, provide an initial thrust towards this vision.
However, this paradigm invites drastically different user experiences and usage
patterns from both traditional personal computers based computing and cellular
telephony. Consequently, fundamental research questions arise regarding the
design of wireless mobile computing to support users from the targeted
communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses these questions
systematically, leveraging a CRI supported deployment of a large-scale open-
access wireless broadband network in Pecan Park, an underserved Latino community
in Houston, Texas and the distribution of experimental Wi-Fi capable mobile
phones to establish a wireless mobile infrastructure there. The longitudinal
study of this community's adoption and use of this network infrastructure will
be performed using remote data collection and ethnographic fieldwork. The
results will drive an iterative, value-centered optimization of the technology
ranging from user-centered mobile computing design to community-driven network
management. This approach utilizes multidisciplinary techniques including mobile
computing, networking, human-computer interaction, and cultural anthropology to
develop new research methods relevant to this emerging research domain.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. The experimental deployment in Pecan Park
will provide low-cost access to information and communication technologies for
its residents. Its success will demonstrate the potential of wireless mobile
computing to address the digital divide for our nation's urban poor. It will
produce lessons and insights for future deployments of wireless mobile
infrastructures in other underserved urban communities, both nationally and
internationally. The project will provide research opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students, primarily from underrepresented groups.