* 0803449
* SGER: Interfacial Tension-induced Deformations in Soft Solids
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2008,09/30/2009
* Sachin Velankar, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 09/30/2009
* USD 53,723.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two-way shape-memory polymers are
materials that can reversibly switch between two different shapes in response to
a trigger, such as change in temperature. We have proposed a new shape-memory
concept based on interfacial tension-driven deformations in crosslinked polymer
blends with an anisotropic two-phase morphology. This project will develop the
scientific underpinnings of this new shape-memory concept. &lt;br/&gt;The first
goal is to experimentally evaluate whether interfacial tension-driven
deformations in solids are sufficiently large (strain ~ 10%) to be useful in
two-way shape-memory applications. This portion of the project will be done on a
model experimental system composed of polystyrene ellipsoids suspended in a
crosslinked silicone rubber matrix; the shape change induced by melting the
ellipsoids will be measured as a function of aspect ratio of the ellipsoids and
the modulus of the silicone rubber. The second goal is to conduct numerical FEM
calculations to calculate the magnitude of the shape change as a function of the
interfacial tension, the size-scale of the two phase morphology, and the modulus
of the solid.&lt;br/&gt;The result of this project will be an unambiguous
determination of whether the new shape-memory concept has potential for two-way
shape memory applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two-way shape-memory polymers are advanced
materials with numerous potential applications ranging from shape-morphing
aircraft to mechanical actuation of parts of small machinery. Existing two-way
shape-memory concepts require specialized polymers. We propose a broadly-
generalizable strategy to design two-way shape-memory polymers, a strategy that
will allow two-way shape memory to be realized using a wide range of polymer
pairs. This project is intended to evaluate practical feasibility of this idea.
If this exploratory project shows that interfacial tension-driven deformations
in solids are sufficiently large, we will undertake future research to implement
the new shape-memory concept using practical polymers. One post-doctoral fellow
and one undergraduate will be trained during the project. The research will
foster collaborations with the PI's colleagues in Mechanical Engineering and in
Mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;