* 0803216
* Geometry and dynamics of representations into semisimple Lie Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2007,06/30/2010
* Anna Wienhard, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2010
* USD 49,652.00

The PI plans to establish new results concerning geometric and dynamical
&lt;br/&gt;properties of special subsets of the representation variety of a
finitely &lt;br/&gt;generated group into a semisimple Lie group. Besides
classical methods &lt;br/&gt;from differential geometry, rigidity theory and
algebraic groups, new &lt;br/&gt;techniques from continuous bounded cohomology
will be employed in an &lt;br/&gt;essential way. The project builds upon
previous joint work with M. Burger &lt;br/&gt;and A. Iozzi,in which the bounded
Kaehler class, a second continuous &lt;br/&gt;bounded cohomology class, was
used, both, to establish rigidity results &lt;br/&gt;for Zariski dense
representations of arbitrary finitely generated groups &lt;br/&gt;into Lie
groups of Hermitian type, as well as to define and study &lt;br/&gt;connected
components of the representation variety of a surface group, &lt;br/&gt;which
give generalizations of Teichmueller space. One part of the project
&lt;br/&gt;concerns the study of refined geometric properties of surface group
&lt;br/&gt;representations in these special components, of parametrizations
similar &lt;br/&gt;to Fenchel-Nielsen or shear coordinates on Teichmueller
space, and of the &lt;br/&gt;explicit relations between these generalized
Teichmueller spaces and the &lt;br/&gt;moduli spaces of Higgs bundles and of
locally homogeneous geometric &lt;br/&gt;structures on the surface. In a second
part of the project, methods and &lt;br/&gt;techniques used in the study of the
bounded Kaehler class will be extended &lt;br/&gt;to define and investigate
bounded cohomology classes in higher degree, &lt;br/&gt;which are expected to
give rise to new rigidity phenomena and structural &lt;br/&gt;results about
representations into other semisimple Lie
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Symmetries arise everywhere in nature and are very
important in biology, &lt;br/&gt;chemistry, physics and mathematics.
Mathematically one way to study &lt;br/&gt;symmetries is to consider symmetry
groups, that is groups of &lt;br/&gt;transformations preserving the given
symmetries. Patterns with many &lt;br/&gt;symmetries are often optimal
configurations and as such stable or rigid, &lt;br/&gt;because small
deformations or changes destroy the symmetry. Sometimes &lt;br/&gt;patterns with
symmetries arise in families and form so called "moduli &lt;br/&gt;spaces";
then, small or even large deformations do not break symmetry even
&lt;br/&gt;though they change the pattern. In this project both phenomena are
&lt;br/&gt;detected and studied using a special measurement for the geometric
&lt;br/&gt;complexity of objects, which depends only on their
symmetries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;