* 0803880
* Dynamical Systems, Rigidity and Related Topics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2010
* Anatole Katok, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

The central theme of the proposed program is the study of various aspects of
rigidity in dynamics. New methods and insights have been recently introduced by
the PI and his collaborators which led to a significant progress in the problem
of rigidity of invariant measures and the differentiable rigidity of orbit
structure for actions of higher rank abelian groups. Advances achieved based on
these methods engendered fruitful applications to Diophantine approximation
problems in number theory and provided first examples of existence of invariant
geometric structure for large classes of actions. &lt;br/&gt;There are several
major directions in the proposed program:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1.Local
differentiable rigidity for partially hyperbolic and parabolic actions of higher
rank abelian groups with the emphasis on the combination of the dynamical
systems, harmonic analysis/group representation and geometric
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Finding new methods in the theory of measure
rigidity for algebraic dynamical systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Existence of
invariant geometric structures for general classes of actions of higher rank
abelian groups determined by global topological, homotopical or dynamical
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4.Classification of Anosov systems up to
differentiable conjugacy vis various classes of
moduli.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;5.Construction of smooth realization of Gaussian
dynamical systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;6.Application of the theory of unitary
group representations to the cohomological problems in
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical concept of "rigidity" has many
facets. Its simplest and most basic manifestations can be seen from the
following elementary example: a small number of equations or inequalities of a
special type may imply much larger number of equation. For example, if the
arithmetic mean on n numbers coincides with the geometric mean (one equation)
then the numbers are all equal ( n-1 equations). An example from the PI's
earlier research is conceptually similar albeit technically much more
sophisticated: a compact surface of negative curvature, i.e. a bounded geometric
shape where any geodesic triangle has the sum of its angles less than 180
degrees, for which two numbers characterizing global and statistical volume
growth (topological and metric entropy) coincide has constant negative
curvature, i.e. the sum of the angles of a geodesic triangle is uniquely
determined by the area. The research under the present grant involves both
deeper investigation of rigidity phenomena for dynamical systems with multi-
dimensional time, and expansion and development of striking application to
several areas of mathematics and mathematical physics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Here is an interpretation of some results from the area 3.
above. Investigation of chaotic behavior in deterministic dynamical systems
plays a central role in application of the modern theory of dynamical systems to
various areas on natural and social sciences. Here is the crucial difficulty
which impedes efforts in more comprehensive understanding of important models:
while it is often relatively easy to establish existence of some initial
conditions which produce chaotic behavior, proving chaotic behavior of most or
many (in the sense of volume in the phase space) is beyond the present on even
anticipated mathematical methods. PI and his collaborators discovered that for
systems with multidimensional time under certain very general conditions this
difficulty is overcome: global conditions of topological or dynamical nature
which a priori guarantee only existence of some chaotic orbits in fact imply
existence of such orbits which fill positive volume in the phase space.