* 0803226
* Genetic Analysis of the Differential Effects of NifM, a PPIase, on its Substrates
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2008,08/31/2010
* Lakshmi Pulakat, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert L. Burnap
* 08/31/2010
* USD 303,085.00

Peptidyl-prolyl cis/trans isomerases (PPIases) are enzymes that catalyze the
cis-trans isomerization of proline peptide bonds in their substrate proteins and
regulate their folding. Genomic sequencing and analyses using bioinformatic
tools have led to an explosion of discovery of new PPIases across species. Many
prokaryotic and eukaryotic proteins are dependent on their cognate PPIases for
achieving their functional form. However, their ability to interact with
proteins that are structurally similar to their natural substrates can
contribute to misfolding of these proteins and hinder their functional
properties. How these enzymes alter the functionality of their substrate
proteins is still an enigmatic topic. The project focus is to develop innovative
approaches to unravel abnormal PPIase-substrate interactions that lead to the
misfolding of proteins. The research approach employs a model system that
consists of a prokaryotic PPIase enzyme, the NifM, and two structurally similar
substrate proteins, the NifH, a bacterial protein, and the ChlL, a chloroplast
protein. The experimental system employed in the project will probe into the
potentially beneficial or detrimental ability of PPIases to act as molecular
switches that can activate one protein but inhibit other structurally-similar
proteins. The rational of the work is that since NifM exerts its effects through
its PPIase activity on certain regions of its substrates, it must be possible to
render NifM-independence to NifH and NifM-tolerance to ChlL through the mutation
of specific residues/regions of the respective substrates. Although many PPIases
have been characterized across species, to date, there are no reports on PPIase-
independent, or PPIase-tolerant mutants of their substrates. The project
involves such mutants (NifM-independent nifH and NifM-tolerant chlL) and
chimeric proteins. Molecular analyses of these mutants will explain what changes
free these proteins from PPIase-influence, and this information will have a
major impact on the current understanding of the mechanisms of protein folding
pathways. The work will determine whether the NifM-independent NifH is capable
of complementing the functions of ChlL in chlorophyll
biosynthesis.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: NifH is a complex metalloenzyme that
shares strong structural homology with ATPases and several other metalloproteins
such as CompA and MinD, which function in glutamate degradation and the spatial
regulation of cell division, respectively. Thus, understanding the molecular
mechanisms involved in NifH accessory protein-mediated activation will advance
the fields of the functional assembly of metalloenzymes in general. The
educational impact of this project is that it will sustain the ongoing graduate
and undergraduate training in modern molecular and cellular biology at MSU. The
experiment system that will be employed in the project will serve as an
excellent teaching tool in the fields of biology including but not limited to
genetics, cellular and molecular biology, molecular modeling, and
bioinformatics. Students will be provided research experience for academic
credit in two settings, in a classroom setting and as an independent researcher.