* 0803403
* International Conference on Modeling and Simulation
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2009
* Tsorng-whay Pan, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 04/30/2009
* USD 20,000.00

The investigators and their colleagues propose to organize
an&lt;br/&gt;International Conference on Modeling and Simulation, which will
be&lt;br/&gt;held from July 9-12, 2008 in Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an,
Shaanxi&lt;br/&gt;Province, China. In the last two decades, the rapid
development of&lt;br/&gt;computer power and sophisticated computational
methodology has&lt;br/&gt;permitted the application of high performance
computing to simulation&lt;br/&gt;and modeling of unprecedented accuracy and
scope applied to a wide&lt;br/&gt;range of important problems. These
applications have had profound&lt;br/&gt;implications and applications in
mathematics, science, engineering and&lt;br/&gt;industry. Scientific computing
is in fact the only feasible tool for&lt;br/&gt;analyzing many different types
of critical important phenomena such as&lt;br/&gt;flow and transport, weather
prediction, wave propagation, novel&lt;br/&gt;material design, computational
chemistry, genome sequencing and&lt;br/&gt;analysis. The proposed conference
will bring prominent researchers&lt;br/&gt;from U.S. and Europe working in these
active areas to Asia, as to&lt;br/&gt;enhance and facilitate contacts and
dialogs between specialists of&lt;br/&gt;different fields dealing with modeling
and simulation so that new&lt;br/&gt;concepts can be discovered and new
methodologies can express their&lt;br/&gt;power.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the
past quarter of a century, along with rapid economical&lt;br/&gt;developments
and advancements in the Far East Asian countries,&lt;br/&gt;particularly the
phenomenal growth in China, there has been ever&lt;br/&gt;increasing
collaborations between U.S.- and Asia-based (also between&lt;br/&gt;Europe- and
Asia-based) researchers in all fields of scientific&lt;br/&gt;research. Such a
phenomenon and trend is clearly exemplified by what&lt;br/&gt;has taken place in
mathematical sciences latterly (thanks to the&lt;br/&gt;effort and initiatives
of the NSF). These cross-continental research&lt;br/&gt;collaborations have
already made a large impact on many fields of&lt;br/&gt;scientific research,
most noticeably, on the human genome sequencing&lt;br/&gt;project in biological
sciences and on the proof of the Poincare&lt;br/&gt;Conjecture in mathematical
sciences. The proposed conference will be&lt;br/&gt;a contribution to promoting,
enhancing, and stimulating such&lt;br/&gt;cross-continental research
interactions and collaborations in&lt;br/&gt;mathematical sciences, more
specifically, in applied and computational&lt;br/&gt;mathematics,