* 0803478
* Quantum Concatenated Code Hamiltonians
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Aram Harrow, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Orel
* 07/31/2012
* USD 320,000.00

As the basic building blocks of computers shrink to the atomic scale, new
physics, in particular quantum physics, arises which shapes how these devices
function. Systems that could previously robustly store information, when they
are scaled down to atomic scales, lose their ability to robustly store
information. On the other hand, it is known that if one could build computers at
atomic scales which operate strictly according to the laws of quantum physics,
then these computers would offer significant advantages over&lt;br/&gt;today?s
classical computers. Quantum computers, if they could be built, would break
today?s modern cryptosystems and revolutionize the simulation of quantum many-
body physics. The research proposed here would result in a new method for
constructing robust devices for storing and manipulating quantum information.
This method starts with the observation that classical information storage is
made possible by the physics of the devices used to store the information. For
example, the magnetic domains used to store information on a hard drive are
robust storage devices exactly because of the existence of an ordered low
temperature phase in the Ising model (in two or greater dimensions.) The
research described here follows the same principles which allow robust classical
storage of information: in short the research attempts to show how
to&lt;br/&gt;engineer condensed matter systems which can act as a quantum hard
drive. This&lt;br/&gt;research is particulary novel in that it makes direct
contact with the traditional method for showing that robust quantum computation
is possible, concatenated coding. In standard error correction, encoding
information across multiple independently erred systems reduces the rate that
information is destroyed. By encoding encoded information, also known as
concatenating, one can achieve an even further reduction in the rate of
information destruction. In this research this is put to use in constructing a
particular class of many-body quantum system, called quantum concatenated code
Hamiltonians, which use the concatenation idea on energy landscapes to preserve
quantum information. The research includes a theoretical study validating the
robust storage capability of concatenated code Hamiltonians along a plan for
implementing the&lt;br/&gt;model in a variety of realistic architectures. The
final outcome of the research will be the schematics for a new type of quantum
information storage device, one which will drastically improve the prospects for
building a quantum computer.&lt;br/&gt;