* 0803213
* Cascade Topology Seminar
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2012
* Steven Bleiler, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2012
* USD 27,892.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0803213&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Steven A. Bleiler&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant partially
supports the speakers and participants at&lt;br/&gt;conferences of the Cascade
Topology Seminar (CTS). During the&lt;br/&gt;three-year grant period May 1, 2008
- April 30, 2011, meetings of&lt;br/&gt;the CTS are scheduled at semiannual
intervals. These conferences&lt;br/&gt;will be held at various universities in
the Northwestern United&lt;br/&gt;States and Southwestern Canada. Universities
currently active in&lt;br/&gt;the CTS are the Universities of British Columbia,
Calgary,&lt;br/&gt;Nevada-Reno, Oregon, Puget Sound, Victoria, and Washington,
and&lt;br/&gt;Boise, California-Chico, Oregon, and Portland State
Universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The basic goals of the CTS include providing
for frequent&lt;br/&gt;contacts between workers in similar fields, to allow
participants&lt;br/&gt;to keep abreast of recent developments by bringing in
speakers&lt;br/&gt;from outside the region, to enable graduate students
and&lt;br/&gt;topologists in the Pacific Northwest and Southwestern Canada
to&lt;br/&gt;hear, consult, and possibly collaborate with the outside
speakers&lt;br/&gt;and members of other institutions, and to provide an
opportunity&lt;br/&gt;for local people to lecture on their own work. Topics
covered&lt;br/&gt;are not limited, however, the interests of the various
organizers&lt;br/&gt;tend to be mirrored by the interests of the participants.
Thus,&lt;br/&gt;the seminar programs usually concern algebraic, geometric, or
low&lt;br/&gt;dimensional topology, differential or algebraic geometry,
or&lt;br/&gt;combinatorial group theory. The CTS also coordinates
its&lt;br/&gt;activities with the Pacific Northwest Geometry Seminar and
the&lt;br/&gt;Western States Geometric Topology Workshop with whom
joint&lt;br/&gt;meetings have occasionally been held. The URL for the
Cascade&lt;br/&gt;Topology Seminar is
http://www.mth.pdx.edu/events/cts/.&lt;br/&gt;