* 0803315
* Constrained Fluctuations
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Mehran Kardar, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2012
* USD 390,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research
and education on the role of fluctuations in various physical contexts.
Fluctuations, whether of quantum, thermal, or non-equilibrium origin, are an
inherent part of physical matter. Constraining these fluctuations by boundaries,
geometry or topology, leads to a myriad of interactions, patterns and phases.
This proposal aims at quantifying such phenomena in several
contexts.&lt;br/&gt;Specific questions that will be addressed by the research
include:&lt;br/&gt;(i) The forces between neutral objects are due to constrained
electromagnetic fluctuations. How do these forces depend on the shapes and
orientations of these objects? Can one hold an object in stable equilibrium
using only such forces?&lt;br/&gt;(ii) How does the confinement of critical
thermal fluctuations of the order parameter lead to the thinning of helium films
at the onset of superfluidity?&lt;br/&gt;(iii) What is the role of rigidity in
the melting of double-stranded polymers such as DNA? How do fluctuations soften
the elasticity of polymers and sheets? &lt;br/&gt;(iv) What governs the
distribution of escape times, from a confining interval, in a process that is
slower than diffusion? Is there a common description for such processes?
&lt;br/&gt;(iv) How can we classify and catalog entangled
proteins?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fluctuating systems are characterized by
probability distribution functions. Statistical physics provides the relative
weights of different configurations in equilibrium, and the time evolution of
weights away from equilibrium. The methods of statistical field theory are
appropriate for handling quantum fluctuations of the electromagnetic field. The
Casimir force between different materials and its dependence of geometry can be
obtained by constraining the fluctuations on the bodies. Transfer matrix and
renormalization group methods will be used to address questions involving semi-
flexible polymers. Anomalous dynamics will be studied by a combination of
scaling theory, and Monte Carlo and Molecular Dynamics
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Education is an important component of this
award. This research project is interdisciplinary; methods from statistical
physics will be applied to a wide range of scientific problems. The research is
closely linked to courses taught by the PI, which through textbooks and
dissemination by the web will have impact on broader scientific community. The
PI will also be an organizer of a workshop at the Kavli Institute for
Theoretical Physics on the subject of fluctuation?induced
forces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education on the materials and physical consequences of fundamental principles
of statistical physics. The research encompasses a wide range of physical
systems and phenomena that are connected through the unifying question of how
confinement modifies behavior and properties. The effects of confinement are an
inherent part of physical systems and the effects of boundaries and geometry
lead to a myriad of interactions, patterns and phases. This research quantifies
such phenomena in several contexts. Varied research questions are
addressed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(i) Theoretical predictions concerning the
forces between neutral objects, due to mere proximity, known as Casimir forces,
are decades old, but have only recently been measured and even more recently
been the subject of experiments to investigate their application in devices.
This research moves from what is known for simple planar geometries to
investigating how these forces depend on the shapes and orientations of the
objects. Unanswered fundamental questions are taken up, such as can one hold an
object in stable arrangement using only such forces?&lt;br/&gt;(ii) This thrust
focuses on how the confinement of helium films alters their behavior from simple
fluids to exhibit a variety of unusual fluid properties. Films of the element
helium are essentially two dimensional liquids that exist at very low
temperatures and exhibit behavior governed by quantum mechanics.&lt;br/&gt;(iii)
A related topic is the role of confinement induced in molecules by crowding and
interacting with other members of bulk collection. This aspect of the research
studies the softening and elasticity of polymers and flexible sheets. In this
case, confinement arises through the entanglement of long
molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Education is an important component of this
award. This research project is interdisciplinary; methods from statistical
physics will be applied to a wide range of scientific problems. The research is
closely linked to courses taught by the PI, which through textbooks and
dissemination by the web will have impact on broader scientific community. The
PI will also be an organizer of a workshop for the broader theoretical physics
community at the Kavli Institute for Theoretical
Physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;