* 0803371
* Institute for Quantum Information
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* John Preskill, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Orel
* 08/31/2014
* USD 3,837,500.00

Quantum information science (QIS) is devoted to understanding how the
fundamental laws of quantum physics might be harnessed to dramatically improve
the acquisition, transmission, and processing of information.&lt;br/&gt;The
potential scientific and technological payoff from QIS is vast, but many deep
and fundamental problems must be solved before that potential can be fulfilled.
These advances will require contributions from scientists trained in a variety
of subjects who are bold enough to disregard the traditional boundaries between
disciplines and to pool their efforts in building an important new
field.&lt;br/&gt;With this need in mind, the Institute for Quantum Information
(IQI) was founded at Caltech in September 2000, supported by a five-year $5M
Information Technology Research (ITR) award from NSF. Since September 2005, the
IQI has been supported by a three-year award sponsored jointly by the Physics at
the Information Frontier program (PIF) in MPS/PHY, the Emerging Models and
Technologies for Computation Cluster (EMT) in CISE/CCF, and the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA). The IQI, led by a multidisciplinary team of
five Caltech professors, is devoted to building the theoretical foundations of
quantum information science across a broad front encompassing quantum
algorithms, quantum cryptography, quantum information theory, fault-tolerant
quantum information processiThe research accomplishments of the IQI have clear
intellectual merit. Since September 2000, IQI participants have produced 282
publications covering all aspects of theoretical QIS; of these 86 were generated
since the onset of our current award in September 2005.&lt;br/&gt;Some
noteworthy achievements during the past two years are: (1) Progress in quantum
algorithms, such as the discovery of an exponential speedup for finding hidden
nonlinear structures. (2) Insights into quantum communication, such as a proof
of the quantum channel capacity theorem based on decoupling of the environment.
(3) Studies of quantum entanglement, such as a characterization of the monogamy
of nonlocal correlations. (4) Tools for fault-tolerant quantum computation, such
as a scheme for protecting against highly biased noise. (5) Proposals for
quantum hardware, such as a protected qubit based on a superconducting current
mirror. (6) Connections between quantum information theory and quantum many-body
theory, such as new proposals for experiments that probe the non-abelian
statistics of quantum Hall quasiparticles.&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the
IQI also has many facets. With the end of scalability of conventional
siliconbased information technology on the horizon, it is vitally important to
explore aggressively new paradigms for information technology. IQI contributions
are broadening the nation's technical base, ensuring US leadership in the future
development of quantum science and technology. The IQI has attracted and trained
top postdoctoral scholars, 16 of whom have moved on to faculty positions (or the
equivalent) elsewhere, thus significantly strengthening the world effort in QIS.
The IQI has also trained many Ph.D. students who are still working in the field,
and we have sponsored a variety of undergraduate research projects.&lt;br/&gt;A
particularly important aspect of the IQI?s broader impact is a vibrant visitor
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since 2000, we have sponsored 120 visits by senior
and postdoctoral scholars, and 70 visits by graduate students from other
institutions. The visitor program fuels intellectual excitement,facilitates
collaborations and exchanges of scientific ideas, and performs a highly valued
service for the international QIS community.&lt;br/&gt;The IQI can best ensure
its continued success by nurturing its distinctive qualities: a focus on
interdisciplinary research, an emphasis on fostering the career development of
world-class postdoctoral talent, and devotion to an active visitor program. At
the same time, in response to new scientific opportunities, the mission of the
IQI will evolve in important ways over the next several years. Two increasingly
prominent themes will be the exciting interface of QIS with condensed matter
physics, and the daunting challenge&lt;br/&gt;of closing the considerable gap
between the theory and experimental practice of QIS and physical implementations
of quantum computing. Basic advances in all of these areas are needed to bring
revolutionary quantum technologies closer to realization.