* 0803313
* Marine Technology Mentoring and Internship Program on Oceanographic Research Vessels
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2008,03/31/2012
* Michael Gilmartin, Monterey Peninsula College
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 03/31/2012
* USD 212,277.00

Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;This award provides renewed funding for a Research
Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program at the Marine Advanced Technology
Education (MATE) Center of Monterey Peninsula Community College (MPCC). Although
this program represents a new site for REU, the PI had funding for an internship
program (NSF/OCE 0510158). The requested program will provide twelve internships
per year for undergraduates who are interested in careers as marine technicians.
The interns will work on U.S. academic research vessels represented by the
University National Oceanographic Laboratory System (UNOLS) and United States
Coast Guard vessels. The interns will spend from one to eight weeks (with an
average of 4 weeks per internship) working on these vessels.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MATE Center's marine technical internship program
helps to prepare undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;students for ocean-related occupations.
The program targets community college students&lt;br/&gt;enrolled in marine
science and technology programs and university students interested
in&lt;br/&gt;marine technical careers. The program makes a substantial effort to
recruit students who are&lt;br/&gt;traditionally unrepresented in science and
technical disciplines. MATE interns will work with marine technicians and
scientists onboard research vessels, which provides them with the opportunity to
develop their technical, scientific, seamanship, and interpersonal skills. To
date, more than two-thirds of the student interns have gone on to work in a
marine related science or technical field or to continue their education in a
marine-related discipline. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The site will be supported by
the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU Program. &lt;br/&gt;