* 0803325
* Optical, Electrical and Magnetic Studies of pi-Conjugated Polymer/Organic Acceptor Blends for Photovoltaic Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2008,05/31/2011
* Zeev Valy Vardeny, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 05/31/2011
* USD 486,000.00

Technical: This project aims for greater understanding of electronic states,
charge transport, and spin phenomena in blends of PCP (p-conjugated polymers)
with molecular acceptors that are used in bulk-heterojunction OPV (organic
photovoltaic) devices. Processes/phenomena to be investigated in blends (films
and devices) include: ultrafast exciton dissociation, charge generation
mechanism, below-gap response, formation of charge transfer complex (CTC) of PCP
chains and acceptor molecules, geminate recombination, spin-dependent transport
and recombination, and morphology-dependent carrier mobility. These studies will
be conducted in PCP-fullerene blends of different concentrations that show high
OPV efficiency, as well as in novel PCP-acceptor blends that have not been used
before. Outcomes are expected to contribute to basic understanding of physical
processes that govern photovoltaic response in OPV devices, and have potential
to increase their solar power conversion efficiency beyond the 6% record of the
present time. &lt;br/&gt;The approach utilizes optical, electrical and magnetic
experimental techniques: (i) ultrafast exciton and polaron dynamics in the
blends will be investigated using a pump/probe photomodulation (PM) technique in
the spectral range of 0.1 to 2.5 eV; (ii) the excitation in (i) is to vary from
above to below-gap photon energy to explore the possibility of polaron
generation by processes other than traditional charge transfer from the polymer
chain onto the acceptor molecule; (iii) the possible formation of a CTC state in
the blends will be studied by IR-photoluminescence, below-gap absorption, IR-
electroabsorption, and photogenerated polaron action spectra; (iv) electrical
admittance spectroscopy for obtaining the carrier mobilities; (v)
magnetoresistance measurements of OPV devices for studying polaron
recombination; and (vi) dynamics of optically-detected magnetic-resonance of
spin Â½ polarons for studying spin-dependent recombination, and spin-lattice
relaxation rate in OPV devices. &lt;br/&gt;Non-technical: The project addresses
basic research issues in a topical area of electronic/photonic materials science
with high technological relevance. These studies may lead to OPV (organic
photovoltaic) devices with enhanced solar power conversion efficiency, and
deepen our understanding of the PCP-acceptor blends. In addition, the
integration of experimental efforts, including polymer and small molecule
synthesis, optics, magneto-transport, modeling, and device fabrication,
processing and testing, will serve to educate graduate and undergraduate
students, and a postdoctoral associate who will be involved in this
interdisciplinary research project. A graduate course on ?Organic
optoelectronics; basic studies and device applications? is also planned. An
outreach program includes research participation of high school students and
their teacher mentors during the summer, as well as engineering demonstrations
for illustrating organic light emitting diodes and OPV devices to the public.