* 0803161
* Gaalee'ya STEM Project
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* Julie Maier, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Jody Chase
* 08/31/2014
* USD 2,415,720.00

Global climate changes are affecting subarctic and arctic ecosystems and peoples
more &lt;br/&gt;significantly than anywhere else on the globe. Rural Alaska
Natives who subsist in these &lt;br/&gt;ecosystems naturally have close ties to
the land and are deeply involved in science-based &lt;br/&gt;research and land
management through tribal organizations, governmental, and research-
&lt;br/&gt;oriented institutions. To date, rural Alaska Natives have had limited
access to quality STEM &lt;br/&gt;education addressing their unique cultural and
geographic needs and have, therefore, not been &lt;br/&gt;engaged in helping to
find solutions to these complex ecological issues. We sorely need their
&lt;br/&gt;input in this day of rapid change. The underlying philosophy behind
the Interior-Aleutians (IAC) &lt;br/&gt;and Chukchi Campus (CC) Gaalee?ya
project is that integrating culture and place into all &lt;br/&gt;aspects of
their academic STEM experience will support the engagement, capacity, and
&lt;br/&gt;continuity (Jolly et al. 2004) of rural Alaska Native STEM students.
&lt;br/&gt;The Gaalee?ya STEM project will build a rigorous and culturally
relevant STEM program &lt;br/&gt;through the Associate?s level for students in
the IAC and CC regions. Gaalee?ya STEM will &lt;br/&gt;incorporate cultural
values and perspectives and local interests in ecosystem changes with
&lt;br/&gt;scientific coursework, research, and analysis from a Western academic
perspective while &lt;br/&gt;allowing students to take courses by distance so
that they may remain in their home &lt;br/&gt;communities. Mathematics and
science courses, which are delivered primarily via audio- &lt;br/&gt;conference
to rural students, will be enhanced through this project with culturally
responsive &lt;br/&gt;pedagogies, face-to-face learning intensives, academic
tutoring, and increased contact with &lt;br/&gt;STEM faculty. Students will also
gain research experience through projects designed around &lt;br/&gt;the theme
of ?ecology of place? to engage, educate, and retain rural Alaska Native
students in &lt;br/&gt;STEM degrees. Elders and STEM faculty will work together
to support the students using an &lt;br/&gt;integrative approach. Program
objectives are built around gains in student participation,
&lt;br/&gt;persistence, grade point averages and graduations of rural Alaska
Native students with a &lt;br/&gt;replicable model for reaching underserved
populations as a primary goal of evaluation. &lt;br/&gt;