* 0803059
* CSUMS: Computational Mathematics with an Emphasis on Computer Vision and Imaging Science (CMECVIS)
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Mubarak Shah, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2012
* USD 585,198.00

Shah&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0803059&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The investigator and his
colleagues at the Department of&lt;br/&gt;Mathematics of the University of
Central Florida introduce a&lt;br/&gt;year-long computational mathematics
research and training&lt;br/&gt;program. Using exciting applications of
mathematics in images&lt;br/&gt;and videos as motivating examples, this CSUMS
program provides&lt;br/&gt;participants with a solid background in both
mathematical theory&lt;br/&gt;and problem-solving techniques to pursue careers
and graduate&lt;br/&gt;study in fields that require integrated strengths in
computation&lt;br/&gt;and the mathematical sciences. The program starts in the
spring&lt;br/&gt;semester with classes that prepare students in numerical
methods,&lt;br/&gt;mathematical modeling, and computer vision and imaging
science. &lt;br/&gt;Then, in an intensive summer component, the students
immerse&lt;br/&gt;themselves in a research project. In the fall semester
they&lt;br/&gt;continue to conduct research and take additional classes
in&lt;br/&gt;advanced computer vision and imaging science, and
advanced&lt;br/&gt;mathematical modeling. In the follow-up spring semester,
the&lt;br/&gt;students submit their research for publication, finish
an&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate honors thesis, and get training in graduate
career&lt;br/&gt;advancement issues. In addition, participants
attend&lt;br/&gt;professional conferences, which give them a chance to
present&lt;br/&gt;their research and to meet known researchers in the field,
who&lt;br/&gt;may serve as their role models. To broaden the
students'&lt;br/&gt;perspective, there are field trips to technology companies
in&lt;br/&gt;central Florida area such as Lockheed-Martin, Harris, and Boeing.
&lt;br/&gt;Finally in order to promote interaction amongst the students,
a&lt;br/&gt;seminar course is installed throughout the program and
several&lt;br/&gt;social events are included such as dinners with
distinguished&lt;br/&gt;speakers visiting the campus. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; A
cohort of 10 participants is selected each year among math&lt;br/&gt;majors and
minors at UCF. The key elements of the program&lt;br/&gt;include: to have a full
year training in carefully designed&lt;br/&gt;course work so that the
participants can master the mathematical&lt;br/&gt;and computational
fundamentals, to engage each participant in a&lt;br/&gt;meaningful research
project integrated into the year-long&lt;br/&gt;program, and to develop the
participants' skills in communicating&lt;br/&gt;scientific ideas in writing and
oral presentations through&lt;br/&gt;writing journal papers for publication,
giving routine seminar&lt;br/&gt;presentations, and presenting at the
professional meetings. The&lt;br/&gt;program represents a team effort of faculty
members from&lt;br/&gt;mathematics, computer science, education and industry. It
leads&lt;br/&gt;to the development of a year-long research-oriented
curriculum&lt;br/&gt;for computational mathematics. In particular, the
participants&lt;br/&gt;are trained in and exposed to the latest techniques and
critical&lt;br/&gt;issues in computational mathematics through both upgraded
and&lt;br/&gt;newly designed courses and real-life research projects
in&lt;br/&gt;computer vision and imaging science, which involve
video&lt;br/&gt;compression, image denoising, object detection,
tracking,&lt;br/&gt;activity and event recognition. This project contributes
to&lt;br/&gt;preparing a work force of diverse scientists in order to
maintain&lt;br/&gt;America's strategic position of command in science
and&lt;br/&gt;engineering. Participants are trained in
computational&lt;br/&gt;mathematics with an emphasis on computer vision and
imaging&lt;br/&gt;science, in particular they learn fundamentals of
computation&lt;br/&gt;with applications of consequence in areas such as
national&lt;br/&gt;defense and intelligence, homeland security, and biomedical
and&lt;br/&gt;life sciences. The outcome of this CSUMS model, its
evaluation,&lt;br/&gt;related research, articles, and curriculum materials,
is&lt;br/&gt;disseminated to other colleges and universities via a
dedicated&lt;br/&gt;web site.