* 0803974
* Mesoscopic Magnetic Measurements
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2013
* Kathryn Moler, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 06/30/2013
* USD 500,000.00

Technical&lt;br/&gt;A normal metal ring that is smaller than the decoherence
length is expected to have a persistent current that is periodic in the flux
through the ring. Such a persistent current is a signature of phase coherence in
an electronic system, and provides a means to test models and theories of the
electronic state. This project will use a scanning Superconducting QUantum
Interference Device (SQUID) microscope in a dilution refrigerator to study
ballistic metal rings (in which the electron mean free path is comparable to the
circumference) and to directly measure the distribution of currents in an
ensemble of nominally identical rings. This distribution will provide
information on the role of disorder and interactions in quantum metals. The
scanning approach allows the measurement of the properties of many mesoscopic
samples in each cooldown, one sample at a time. These highly demanding
experiments will provide the educational benefit of training some of the
nation?s top young scientists in an intellectually rich research environment.
Research students will learn nanotechnology and precision measurement techniques
as well as fundamental physics. In addition, lab personnel interact actively
with the K-12 science education community through a Summer Institute for Middle
School Teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical&lt;br/&gt;It is well known
that currents in superconducting rings can flow indefinitely because
superconductors have zero resistance. Such currents are called ?persistent?
currents. Less well known is that normal metals -- even though they are
resistive -- are also theoretically expected to have persistent currents when
they are sufficiently small and cold. These persistent currents are a direct
signature of the quantum mechanical, wavelike nature of the electrons in the
metal, and provides a means to test models and theories of the electronic state.
This project will use an ultrasensitive magnetic detector, called a
Superconducting QUantum Interference Device (SQUID), at very low temperatures to
study persistent currents in order to test our understanding of the quantum-
mechanical nature of metals and semiconductors. These highly demanding
experiments will provide the educational benefit of training some of the
nation?s top young scientists in an intellectually rich research environment.
Research students will learn nanotechnology and precision measurement techniques
as well as fundamental physics. In addition, lab personnel interact actively
with the K-12 science education community through a Summer Institute for Middle
School Teachers.&lt;br/&gt;