* 0803958
* Superconductivity and Proximity Effect in Two-Dimensional Films and Multilayers
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2008,03/31/2011
* Malcolm Beasley, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 03/31/2011
* USD 440,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum phase transitions continue
to attract intense theoretical and experimental interest. Such transitions --
where changing an external parameter in the Hamiltonian induces a transition
from one quantum ground state to another, fundamentally different one -- have
been invoked to understand experimental data in many electronic systems, as well
as to analyze more challenging quantum phenomena such as the limitations of
quantum computing. A paradigm for quantum phase transitions has been the
superconductor to insulator transition in two-dimensional films. This transition
is found to have a variety of realizations depending on intrinsic properties of
the materials used. Controlling the strength of superconductivity, disorder, or
dimensionality of the films will impact the nature of the transition, which is
accessed through the variation of external parameters such as temperature and
magnetic field. This award supports a project to explore the superconductor to
insulator transition in amorphous MgB2 films and multilayers. The uniqueness of
this system is the ability to control the strength of superconductivity over a
very wide range, control the disorder, and fabricate bilayers and multilayers.
However, more uniquely, due to the lightness of both magnesium and boron, spin
orbit interaction is probably the lowest that can be achieved in any thin film
superconductor, providing us with new opportunities to study its effect on the
transition. The proposed work is expected to impact science in several areas
including shedding new light on the nature of quantum phase transitions in
reduced dimensions, better understanding of the material science of amorphous
superconducting films, and the development of new methodologies using novel
measurements techniques. The program involves graduate students in this area of
great interest to physics and future
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studies of the phase diagram of two-dimensional
superconductors has been intimately connected to finding new materials. With
each materials system a different set of properties is highlighted. Over the
years, NSF support enabled the optimization of a variety of materials for
studies of thin superconducting films in general and the superconductor to
insulator transition (SIT) in particular. These include amorphous-MoGe films
that allowed the discovery of "metallic phases," amorphous-InOx films that
allowed the studies of the regime of strong disorder, and more recently
amorphous- MgB2 films which in addition to the overlap in parameters with MoGe
and InOx, also provide a new knob in the form of controlling spin-orbit
interaction. A newly available, novel technique to fabricate multilayers of
amorphous MgB2/MgO allows further exploration of dimensionality effects. This
award supports a project to explore the rich physics this MgB2 model system
offers. Experiments will be performed to study SIT in perpendicular magnetic
field on MgB2 thin films bilayers of various types (e.g. proximity systems) and
multilayers. Specific attention will be given to the effect of quantum melting
near the SIT point. The manifestation of low spin-orbit interaction will be
explored through measurements in parallel magnetic field searching for
signatures of first order transition and irreversibility. In addition to
transport measurements, mesoscopic effects near the transition will be explored
using novel techniques including scanning tunneling potentiometry and Kerr
microscopy. The proposed work is expected shed new light on the nature of
quantum phase transitions in reduced dimensions, as well as impact the
understanding of the material science of amorphous superconducting films, and
the development of new methodologies using novel measurements techniques. The
program involves graduate students in this area of great interest to fundamental
physics and future applications.