* 0803565
* HCC-Medium: Personalized Socially-Assistive Human-Robot Interaction: Applications to Autism Spectrum Disorder
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2015
* Maja MatariÄ‡, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2015
* USD 996,964.00

Robotics is currently at the forefront of technologies with recognized potential
for impacting quality of human life. In response to the large need for
personalized one-on-one care for the growing populations of elderly individuals
and those with special cognitive and social needs throughout life, great strides
must be made in the domain of human-robot interaction (HRI) in order to bring
robotics into such application domains in human everyday life. This
interdisciplinary project identifies a specific set of HRI research questions in
socially assistive robotics, the study of robotic systems capable of providing
help through social rather than physical interaction. The research focus is on
two key issues: (1) the role of the robot's physical embodiment in the
interaction; and (2) the use of expressive embodied communication and user
modeling toward personalized time-extended assistive interaction. A specific
consideration is given to interactions under the challenges of socio-
communicative heterogeneity and deficits. A novel assistive robot control
architecture is developed, based on multi-modal perception, embodied expression
and communication, and on-line user modeling, implemented in three different
types of real-world socially assistive systems. To give a realistic context to
the research, the experimental testing and evaluation are performed with
children drawn from a typical population and a population with Autism Spectrum
Disorders (ASD), a family of disorders that have already been identified as
amenable to technological, and in particular robotic, intervention and therapy.
A key contribution of the research lies in the unified and tightly integrated
end-to-end approach that jointly studies embodiment and multimodal expressive
communication, grounded in data from hypothesis-driven experiments, and the
development and use of novel signal processing and user modeling methods for
human-machine interaction design. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, by its
very nature, aims to impact the large and growing population affected by Autism
Spectrum Disorders. With the support of the large and unique corpus of data that
will be collected and analyzed, the expected scientific impact will go well
beyond novel insights toward a better understanding of the fundamentals of HRI
and its relevance for diverse user populations and for socialization of children
with ASD. In addition to the basic research, two complementary educational
outreach programs broaden the impact of the work: (1) a novel K-12 outreach and
teacher training program specifically aimed at special education through the use
of robotics for teaching STEM topics; and (2) undergraduate research training
and pipelined role-modeling from pre-university to undergraduate to graduate
students. The education programs dovetail with the research plan, resulting in
integrated activities involving all participants in the research team.