* 0803304
* Geometric quantum information processing in open systems
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Daniel Lidar, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Orel
* 08/31/2012
* USD 150,000.00

The theoretical promise of quantum information processing (QIP) is widely
regarded as one of the most exciting developments in computer science in many
years. This is because QIP appears to be able to efficiently solve problems
which are classicaly intractable (such factoring, Shors algorithm), and is
provably capable of providing significant computational speedups in problems of
wide interest (such as database search, Grover's algorithm). As a result QIP has
spawned an avalance of activity across many disciplines, including also physics,
electrical engineering, chemistry, and materials science. However,how to best
implement QIP is still a wide open question. In particular, not only is it still
unclear which physical system is best suited for QIP, it is also
&lt;br/&gt;unresolved whether QIP should be implemented by means of dynamical or
geometric&lt;br/&gt;logic gates. This proposal is concerned with the geometric
approach.&lt;br/&gt;Although the most widely studied version of QIP is based on
dynamical evolution of quantum states, other approaches could very well turn out
to be easier to implement and/or more robust against unwanted interactions and
imperfections. In this proposal, the investigators intend to explore an
alternative and promising version of QIP called holonomic quantum computation
(HQC, introduced by the PI) that has garnered increasing interest. In HQC a
quantum system that has a set of degenerate lowest energy (?ground?) states is
driven slowly (adiabatically) around a loop in its control parameter space. In
the process the system acquires a so-called geometric phase, meaning that its
state changes in accordance with the geometrical properties of this loop. These
state changes can then be combined in order to execute a complete quantum
algorithm.&lt;br/&gt;The resulting geometrical transformations are not only of
fundamental interest, but have the advantage over the standard dynamical ones
that they are rather robust to certain errors. The reason is that the geometric
phase depends only on the area the loop encloses in parameter space, but not on
its shape, or on the speed the loop is traversed, provided it is slow. HQC has
already attracted the attention of various groups attempting to build quantum
computers, especially using trapped ions, because of the aforementioned
robustness and because it is a more natural approach to the implementation of
quantum logic gates than is the dynamical model.&lt;br/&gt;The potential of HQC
is exciting, but there are crucial missing elements in HQC theory. Most
importantly, the theory of HQC error correction is still primitive, even though
error correction will undoubtedly be indispensable for a working holonomic
quantum computer. It is essential to develop this general theory as well as
detailed insight into specific physical systems that could be used to realize
fault tolerant HQC. At the same time, it is vital to investigate HQC?s potential
for new algorithms and new insight into physical processes. This proposal
presents strategies for addressing these fundamental&lt;br/&gt;open
problems.&lt;br/&gt;The success of HQC depends on the ability to keep the
quantum system in its ground energy subspace, which in turn depends on
maintaining an energy gap between the ground and next lowest energy
states.&lt;br/&gt;Opening the HQC to interactions with its environment leads to
processes that either shrink this gap or cause transitions across it, thus
ruining the computation (a process known as decoherence). Equipped with a
formulation of geometric phases for open systems recently introduced by the co-
PI, the researchers intend to achieve a deep understanding of the effects of
decoherence on HQC. The open system geometric phase provides a tool that can
quantitatively capture the relationship between error correction and the
gap.&lt;br/&gt;To thoroughly explore error correction in HQC, the authors plan
to leverage their experience in circuit QC with decoherence-free subspaces,
dynamical decoupling, and error correcting codes. They intend to use open system
adiabatic theory (introduced by the co-PI) to provide thorough analysis of the
validity and utility of their proposed error correcting techniques.