* 0803733
* HCC-Medium: StepGreen: Mobilizing Social Networks and Context Awareness to Motivate Reduced Energy
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Susan Fussell, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2012
* USD 506,000.00

In 2005, Americans consumed 100 quadrillion BTUs of energy, or almost six times
the world wide average per person. Much of this energy consumption is directly
related to personal, individual activities such as lighting, heating and
cooling. By making simple modifications to these routine activities individuals
can conserve energy and help reduce total CO2 emissions. This project leverages
Internet technologies to develop a scalable approach to changing behavior
regarding environmental footprint (the amount of natural resources or emissions
required to support an individual or household). The intent is to use online
social networks, cell phones and other technologies to provide a set of
ecologically sound, context-sensitive behavioral recommendations. The ultimate
goal is to achieve Internet-scale energy behavior change via behavioral research
on successful ways to motivate change, environmental impact analysis, and
ubiquitous computing that supports objective measurement and context-sensitive
communication. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use the existing
StepGreen.org website as a testbed for three core activities. First, controlled
field studies will be conducted to examine the value of personalization and
social influence on motivation to change as well as how motivational strategies
can accommodate differences among ethnic and cultural groups. Second,
inexpensive sensing techniques will be developed that can unobtrusively extract
information about changes in daily behaviors. For example, this will be able to
track home heating, cooling and transportation behavior through simple financial
monitoring of transactions such as electricity bills and gasoline purchases.
Finally, the StepGreen deployment, as a large-scale social intervention, must
adapt flexibly to contextual information about people (e.g., favored
communication modalities, appropriate timing). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
multidisciplinary nature of the proposed work enables innovative changes in
several scientific domains. By bringing together technical innovation and social
science, the proposed work can test theories of social computing in the field,
providing a detailed understanding of how online social networks in combination
with behavioral intervention strategies can lead to widespread behavioral
change. Simultaneously, this work will explore and innovate solutions for large-
scale distributed evaluation of Ubicomp technology. By bringing together
environmental science and machine learning, the investigators will create the
first objective calculator of individual energy use. Finally, the research will
benefit environmental decision making by identifying misconceptions about
relationships between behavior and energy consumption, educating a broad
populace on individual actions they can take to reduce their consumption, and,
ideally, achieving reductions in U.S. energy use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts. The proposed research will benefit education through the
interdisciplinary training of graduate and undergraduate students and through
high school outreach as part of Carnegie-Mellon's Green Design Apprenticeship.
The work?s focus on different socioeconomic groups will help to highlight the
importance of addressing cross-cultural issues in design and behavioral science.
Finally, the project will benefit society by helping to address a critical
social issue and by providing results that inform other domains in which
societal benefits depend on individual behavior change (e.g., health, littering,
community action).