* 0803730
* Experiments on the Role of Disorder in the Quantum Phases and Phase Transitions of Two-Dimensional Electrons
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2008,04/30/2011
* Daniel Tsui, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 04/30/2011
* USD 371,630.00

Technical:&lt;br/&gt;The two-dimensional electron systems (2DES) in
semiconductor heterostructures has been a hot bed for new physical phenomena,
manifesting strong correlation physics, and a testing ground for novel
theoretical ideas. Physics research on the system has in the past mostly focused
on the correlation physics of ideally clean systems and the experiments have
been designed and carried out on 2DES with the highest mobility attainable at
the time. This research will focus on three new material/device structures to
access previously inaccessible physical regimes of dilute 2DES with controllably
tunably disorder. DC transport and microwave spectroscopy measurements will be
made at low T down to the nuclear demagnetization refrigerator temperature range
to search for the expected new phases of electron matter intermediate to the
Wigner crystal in clean 2DES and the Anderson insulator in highly disordered
2DES. It will educate students in condensed-matter physics and the science of
semiconductor materials. They will be equipped with hands-on expertize in
experimental low temperature physics techniques and semiconductor device
processing technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical:&lt;br/&gt;In modern
day electronics, almost all device functions are performed by electrons that are
confined to move in thin films, or along the interfaces, of semiconductors. Such
so-called two-dimensional electrons in semiconductors, though behaving at normal
ambient as an ordinary gas of charged particles, have been under properly
designed experimental conditions a hot bed for new physical phenomena,
manifesting the quantum physics of strongly correlated electrons, and a testing
ground for novel theoretical ideas. This research will investigate the influence
of disorder, which is inevitable in all semiconductors, and explore a new
physical regime, where the interplay between disorder and electron correlation
is expected to give rise to new phases of the electron matter. The research is
multidisciplinary in nature; it will educate students to be fluent in condensed-
matter physics and the science of semiconductor materials, and equip them with
hands-on expertize in experimental low temperature physics techniques and the
processing technology of semiconductor devices. &lt;br/&gt;