* 0803102
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Interorganizational Influences on Water Issue Awareness and Knowledge: Recognition Justice in Metropolitan Phoenix, Arizona
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2008,10/31/2009
* Ann Kinzig, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 10/31/2009
* USD 12,000.00

Distributional and ideological barriers can create disparities in the ability of
the public to advocate for their interests in particular environmental
decisions. This research focuses on the roles interactions between organizations
play in shaping public understanding of water resource issues, with a particular
emphasis on water education provided to citizens of metropolitan Phoenix,
Arizona. The objectives of this study are to use an environmental justice
framework to understand: (1) the geographic distribution of water education
effort in metropolitan Phoenix; (2) how public receptiveness and knowledge
differ across areas of high and low water education effort; (3) the distribution
and qualities of water education gaps (Are they merely spatial or are there
mismatches between water education effort and public receptiveness? How systemic
are these gaps?); (4) the roles of organizational networks in public perceptions
of each organization's usefulness; and (5) potential ways to take advantage of
ties or making changes to the network structure of organizations that could
influence the equity and efficiency of the educational landscape. To address
these objectives, this research will use participatory geographic information
systems (GIS) methods, which use local expertise to create and evaluate maps, to
delineate the spatial overlap of programs provided by all 43 organizations
providing information about water conservation and water quality. Maps designate
census tracts as receiving "high" or "low" amounts of information. This research
also uses social network analysis to analyze the structure of informational ties
between organizations to determine how much they might influence each other.
Finally, a multi-modal survey of residents in three "high" educator effort and
three "low" educator effort neighborhoods will measure water knowledge,
information perceptions, information preferences, and demographic
characteristics. The findings will demonstrate ways in which relationships
between organizations influence public awareness about water. The investigators
expect that there are spatial differences in issue awareness, but that
ideological differences between water education providers and sub-populations
may categorically exclude subgroups traditionally vulnerable to environmental
ills. Researchers predict that social networks between organizations may
illuminate why educators may conform on sub-optimal campaigns designed to inform
the public about local water issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
is a consideration of spatial and ideological elements of public information as
an environmental justice issue. However, GIS-based environmental justice studies
rarely address the concept of recognition justice which suggests that people
must have a voice in the development of policy. By examining patterns in the
level of accessible information about water conservation, this study is able to
address the issue of recognition justice. Methodologically, this research
presents a new combination of decision making tools. For example, combining
participatory GIS with visualizations and statistical analyses of the
relationships between organizations enhances the salience of the information for
water educators and represents new interdisciplinary research methods that can
be useful in the future. This type of social network analysis is rarely used in
environmental justice and provides context for the choices made by education
organizations and insight into how particular messages or methods of information
sharing become popular. This research also has potential use within the water
management field. Upon completion, the investigators will host a meeting for
water educators and water managers to report the results of the study and
provide a forum for discussion about potential ways to shift resources to better
serve the water literacy needs and environmental goals of the metropolitan
Phoenix, Arizona population. &lt;br/&gt;