* 0803223
* Collaborative Research FRG:   Automorphic Forms, Galois Representations, and Special Values of L-Functions
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2007,06/30/2011
* Christopher Skinner, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 06/30/2011
* USD 236,917.00

Number theory has seen many significant advances in the past few years.
&lt;br/&gt;Results from arithmetic geometry and the theories of modular forms
and &lt;br/&gt;Galois representations have yielded a proof Fermat's Last Theorem
and &lt;br/&gt;fundamental advances towards the $p$-adic Birch-Swinnerton-Dyer
&lt;br/&gt;Conjecture (BSD), to name two. The research proposed in this project
aims to &lt;br/&gt;continue this progress. The PI's propose to investigate many
aspects of the &lt;br/&gt;connections between automorphic forms, Galois
representations, and &lt;br/&gt;values of their $L$-functions, with the
particular aim of making advances &lt;br/&gt;towards BSD, Bloch-Kato
conjectures, and the Iwasawa Theory of automorphic &lt;br/&gt;Galois
representations, as well as answering fundamental questions about the
&lt;br/&gt;Galois representations associated to automorphic forms. Their project
&lt;br/&gt;focuses on $p$-adic methods in the theory of automorphic forms and
&lt;br/&gt;Galois representations. By combining their various expertise, they
propose to &lt;br/&gt;consider a number of specific problems that fall under the
following &lt;br/&gt;headings: $p$-adic Eisenstein measures and their
specializations, &lt;br/&gt;Iwasawa's $\mu$-invariants, Non-vanishing modulo $p$
of $L$-values, &lt;br/&gt;Eisenstein ideals for unitary groups, Geometric
construction of $p$-adic &lt;br/&gt;automorphic forms, $p$-adic construction of
Euler systems, Endoscopic &lt;br/&gt;congruences, Galois representations and
Shimura varieties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enhance our knowledge
of the deep links between &lt;br/&gt;automorphic forms, Galois representations,
and their $L$-functions - a &lt;br/&gt;central focus of number theory - as well
as have significant &lt;br/&gt;consequences for our understanding of mathematics
in general. Two workshops, a final &lt;br/&gt;conference, and graduate and post-
doctoral advising will have an &lt;br/&gt;important impact on the formation of
new researchers in the field and on &lt;br/&gt;the promotion of new
collaborations. &lt;br/&gt;