* 0803353
* The Uxbenka Archaeological Project
* SBE,BCS
* 09/18/2007,11/30/2010
* Keith Prufer, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/2010
* USD 87,507.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Keith Prufer and his team of
colleagues will conduct three field seasons of archaeological research in
southern Belize. The team brings together specialists in archaeology and
epigraphy to examine geopolitical relationships between large and small Maya
cities that flourished between 200 and 900 AD. The project will combine the
analysis of the hieroglyphic texts with intensive archaeological survey and
excavations at Uxbenka, a small Maya capital founded sometime before 500 AD.
Uxbenka is the earliest known site in southern Belize, an agriculturally rich
region and situated near to coastal and inland trade routes. It is also located
between several larger political centers. Texts from the Uxbenka suggest that it
maintained close political ties to the large urban center Tikal, though the
exact nature of their relationship remains unclear.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how large and small centers interacted will
contribute to knowledge of Maya political and economic organization. Competing
models posit that large Maya polities functioned as central places and capitals,
with coherent boundaries, holding sway over smaller centers or, alternately,
that large and small Maya centers were, though economically integrated,
politically autonomous rivals. More recent studies suggest that understanding
geopolitical links and barriers also requires accommodating historical realities
of rivalry and shifting relationships, and that single function models
oversimplify prehistoric political landscapes. The project addresses several
related sets of research questions. When first settled, what links did Uxbenka
have with other regions? Did Uxbenka develop under the sway of Tikal, or did
they merely emulate or memorialize historical figures or dynasties mentioned in
native texts? Did the suspected relationship with Tikal continue to manifest
itself as Uxbenka grew and interacted with other polities? Data from mapping,
excavations, the analysis of ceramics and other artifacts, and architectural
variation, combined with the study of hieroglyphic texts from the site, will
illustrate Uxbenka's history and regional and long-distance economic and
political ties over time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses
theoretical debates regarding culture contact and the difficulty of
distinguishing between types of interregional interactions. The intellectual
merit of this project is in its approach, which integrates archaeological and
historical data to improve our understanding Maya settlement and interaction
over time, and in its theoretical perspective, which recognizes that political
and economic organization is often based on uneven and asymmetrical networks
between competing groups, subject to change over time. The resulting data will
have implications for understanding similar developments across the Maya area
and for understanding the development, behavior, and functioning of early
complex polities in general. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this
project are in education and community development. The results of this project
will be disseminated widely to both scholars and the general public. The project
will provide teaching, training, and learning opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students. Because Uxbenka is located in a modern Mayan community,
the project will work closely with indigenous groups and the Belize government
to insure that archaeological research and preservation activities benefit plans
for co-managed sustainable development of the archaeological site.