* 0803956
* Theoretical Approach to Organization and Function of Biological Membranes
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Michael Schick, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2012
* USD 312,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education in biological physics. The research involves a series of increasingly
sophisticated models of biological membranes which are designed to elucidate
salient structure in the organization of molecules in the membrane. This idea,
that molecules in the membrane of a cell are not distributed uniformly,
underlies a set of new research questions. The underlying hypothesis is that the
distribution of proteins and other molecules, such as cholesterol, in the cell
membrane leads to functional organization, i.e. this organization can affect a
host of other biologically important processes such as cell signaling, membrane
fusion, viral entry and a variety of other functions which involve the cell
membrane. Techniques of statistical mechanics and simulation will be used to
explicate behaviors of model bilayer membranes consisting of cholesterol,
saturated and unsaturated lipids with specific goal of observing the phase
separation in this quasi-two dimensional fluid. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three
specific phenomenon are highlighted in this research. The first attempts to
identify sound theoretical basis for the existence (or nonexistence) and
properties and dynamics of membrane rafts. Such rafts, described as regions of
saturated lipids and cholesterol that had aggregated and float together. The
functionality which is associated with rafts derives from the attachment of
signaling proteins to the edges of the raft and thereby providing structural
organization for signaling processes the couple the interior and exterior of the
cell. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
fundamental theoretical research and education on the biological physics of cell
membranes. Scientific understanding of living cells has clearly shown that the
cell membrane is complex and sophisticated in its functionality, doing far more
than simply acting as a container holding the contents of the cell in place.
With new understanding that the molecules that form the membrane are not
entirely disorganized, there have developed a number of conjectures of how the
intrinsic structure in a cell membrane may organize the way biological processes
occur in the region where transport of signaling occur between the cell interior
and its external environment. The research will employ tools of theoretical
physics and use computer simulations to describe the organization of molecules
in groups in the membrane. These tools allow researchers to establish what sort
of structures can exist in the membrane and whether this pays an essential role
in allowing the cell to carry out the essential life processes. A key concept of
cell membrane organization is that the membrane includes floating groups of
molecules which carry specialized signaling molecules or other proteins involved
in allowing the cell to communicate with its
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will be conducted with the full
participation of graduate students, who will be trained in modern methods of
theory and computer simulation as applicable to biological systems, preparing
them for careers in science and biotechnology. Finally the research will be
performed in collaboration with scientists from the US and abroad, strengthening
and enriching the US physical community.&lt;br/&gt;