* 0803705
* RI-Medium:   Collaborative Research:  Graph Cut Algorithms for Linear Inverse Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2014
* Eva Tardos, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 06/30/2014
* USD 562,500.00

Last Modified Date: 05/19/08 Last Modified By: Sheila M. Smith &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Abstract &lt;br/&gt;Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many imaging tasks
involve ill-posed problems, which require realistic priors. Standard convex
optimization techniques use priors that prefer globally smooth images, and thus
tend to give poor results. Graph cut methods, which permit edge-preserving
priors for a restricted class of ill-posed problems, have proven quite
successful over the last decade. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project
will address an important but challenging class of ill-posed problems, namely
those arising from rank-deficient linear inverse systems. Such underconstrained
problems occur in medical imaging tasks such as MRI&amp;CT image reconstruction
and fMRI undistortion, as well as in traditional vision problems such as super-
resolution. Currently these applications rely on convex optimization methods,
which do not support realistic image priors. Yet existing graph cut methods
cannot be applied due to some difficult theoretical issues.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To overcome these challenges we propose a collaboration
between computer vision researchers and experts in graph algorithms. We will
develop new graph constructions to address linear inverse systems, drawing
heavily on state-of-the-art techniques from boolean optimization. To simplify
our task we will exploit specific properties of the rank-deficient linear
inverse systems that arise in the applications of interest. We will focus
primarily on sparse structured linear inverse systems, an important subclass
which contains all of the applications that drive our work. While our proposed
work stresses algorithm development, we will also do a significant experimental
evaluation of new algorithms on a range of applications, both to assess their
performance and to identify promising new avenues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project brings together experts in computer vision, medical imaging and graph
algorithms to address a problem of broad interest in a novel manner. The linear
inverse systems that we are concerned with arise in a wide range of medical
applications, as well as in other areas, yet current techniques have significant
shortcomings. Our approach draws heavily on methods developed by the
investigators over the last decade, which have proven quite successful for
related problems. In addition, this project will strengthen the ties between
researchers in computer vision and algorithms, which have proven to be quite
beneficial to both areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Publications and additional
material resulting from this project will be made available at
http://www.cs.cornell.edu/~rdz/graphcuts.html &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;