* 0803142
* SGER: A Novel Gas Sensing Platform with Tin Oxide Nanocrystals Supported on a Carbon Nanotube
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2009
* Junhong Chen, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 05/31/2009
* USD 61,519.00

CBET-0803142&lt;br/&gt;Cheng&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Miniaturized gas sensors that
rapidly and accurately detect and differentiate trace amount of gases/vapors and
their mixtures are extremely attractive for many applications, such as
environmental monitoring, medical diagnosis, food processing, lab-on-a-chip
analytical devices, and control of other industrial processes. The research
objective of this proposal is to explore a novel sensing platform of a carbon
nanotube (CNT) coated with SnO2 nanocrystals for miniaturized gas sensors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sensing platform is based on our recent invention in
nanoparticle assembly and promises to enable miniaturized gas sensors with
superior sensitivity and flexibility to realize selectivity for multisensing
capabilities. The new sensing platform based on multiwalled CNTs has been shown
to sense low-concentration gases at room temperature, overcoming the well-known
disadvantage of SnO2 sensors (high-temperature operation). However, the sensing
performance can be significantly enhanced with semiconductor single-walled CNTs
(SWCNTs) due to the relatively lower charge carrier density in these tubes. The
specific goals of the project are to fabricate gas sensors with SnO2
nanocrystals-SWCNT structures and to characterize the sensing performance of the
novel sensors. Effects of nanocrystal size and areal density on hybrid
nanostructure properties and the sensor performance will be investigated. Major
innovation of the project is the novel gas sensing platform for room-temperature
sensing. The hybrid nanocrystal-CNT system as a sensing element is superior to
either of the constituent components. The platform provides a radically new
opportunity to engineer gas sensors with quantum-mechanical sensing attributes
due to electronic coupling between the nanocrystal and the CNT. The proposed
approach may enable engineering of a highly efficient single nanoparticle sensor
with an ultimate sensitivity of a single molecule and with the advantage of
parallel detection of a large array of analyte molecules simply by incorporating
different types of nanocrystals, e.g., through doping.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this project are multi-faceted and far-
reaching. Miniaturized sensors with superior performance and low power
consumption will directly benefit society by enabling a secure and healthy
living environment. The new sensing mechanism for the hybrid nanostructure
sensor will lead to a new direction for improving sensor performance. The
project results will enable a wide range of innovative applications of hybrid
nanocrystal-CNT structures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will contribute to
the training of graduate and undergraduate students in nanotechnology and gas
sensing through their participation in the cutting-edge exploratory research and
the integration of small nanotechnology projects into an existing core
Mechanical Engineering senior experimentation course and a newly developed
graduate-level course on nanomanufacturing. It will also contribute to educating
K-12 students, teachers, and the general public in the area of nanotechnology
through "Science Saturdays" in collaboration with Wisconsin Career Academy.
Participation of women and minorities will be encouraged.