* 0803149
* Tweak Superconductivity at Nanoscale
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2012
* Judy Wu, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 05/31/2012
* USD 343,406.00

Technical: This project addresses current carrying capability in high-
temperature superconductor (HTS) films. The focus of the project is on novel
experimental approaches, such as incorporation of porosity by nanoscale strain
effects, and physical properties of HTS films. Three topics will be
investigated: 1) physics of critical current density in single HTS nanobridges
and networks of HTS nanobridges fabricated using e-beam lithography. The HTS
materials include YBCO), Tl-based (Tl-HTS) and Hg-based (Hg-HTS)
superconductors; 2) porous YBCO films via a process that combines vicinal growth
and nanoparticle insertion. The mechanism of pore initiation and pore evolution
will be studied to increase basic understanding and for its use toward achieving
control of pore morphology, density, and interface features. Electric transport
properties will be assessed to understand and utilize correlation between
microstructure and transport properties in formulating schemes for HTS devices
with high current carrying capability approaching theoretical limits. 3) focus
will be on the microscopic growth mechanism of linear defects, specifically
nanotube pores through micrometer thickness of YBCO films. &lt;br/&gt;Non-
technical: The project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of
electronic materials science with high technological relevance. Research and
educational activities will be integrated by involvement of undergraduates in
the research program, and incorporating new research results into the classroom,
striving for forefront education to the next generation in nanoscience, material
science, and physics.