* 0803181
* Starter grant:  Investigation of the role of alternative oxidase (AOX) in Vibrio fischeri respiration
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2009
* Anne Dunn, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 07/31/2009
* USD 50,000.00

Alternative oxidase (AOX) is a heme-independent terminal oxidase present in the
respiratory chains of all plants, as well as in certain fungi, protists,
animals, and bacteria. Unlike other respiratory oxidases, AOX does not directly
contribute to the generation of a proton motive force. With the exception of
thermogenic plants, where AOX is used to generate heat during flowering, its
function is uncertain, although in eukaryotes it may contribute to metabolic
homeostasis, protection from oxidative stress, or virulence. The role of
alternative oxidase in bacterial physiology is unclear. A recent survey of the
sequence databases revealed numerous bacteria and marine metagenomic samples
whose genomes encode an AOX-like protein. A model organism for studying the role
of AOX in bacterial physiology is Vibrio fischeri, a bioluminescent marine
bacterium that forms a symbiotic relationship with the Hawaiian bobtail squid.
In V. fischeri, microarray and reporter assay results have identified a link
between aox gene expression levels and nitric oxide (NO). The overall goal of
the research is to investigate the physiological link between AOX and NO. First,
quantitative PCR will be used to assess NO-induced changes in aox transcript
levels, and second, the effect of NO on the function of terminal respiratory
oxidases in V. fischeri will be investigated. This work will provide novel
information related to the function of AOX in bacterial physiology, an area that
is largely unexplored, but has implications for understanding bacterial
contribution to marine ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The studies will
provide a foundation for future exploration of the role of AOX in diverse
bacteria and ultimately a better understanding of the link between bacterial
respiration and ecosystem function. In addition, training opportunities will be
provided for one graduate and two undergraduate students in basic
microbiological techniques, molecular biology, bacterial physiology, and related
instrumentation techniques.