* 0803103
* Biomolecular Materials: Structure, Phase Behavior, &amp; Interactions
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Philip Pincus, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* David A. Brant
* 08/31/2012
* USD 405,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0803103 PI: Safinya, Cyrus ORG: California-Santa
Barbara&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Biomolecular Materials: Structure, Phase
Behavior, and Interactions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The project
aims to elucidate the nature of structures and interactions in self-assemblies
of filamentous neurofilaments derived from the axonal cytoskeleton and
structures of curvature stabilizing lipids. The proposal combines synchrotron
small angle- x-ray-scattering (SAXS), optical and cryo-electron electron
microscopy experiments with statistical mechanical theoretical investigations.
One series of proposed experiments focuses on understanding the nature of
interfilament interactions in neurofilament networks reconstituted from purified
proteins. Neurofilaments (NFs) consist of three homopolymers NF-L, NF-M, and
NF-H. Recent preliminary data from the PI?s laboratory suggest qualitatively
different behavior for interfilament interactions with sidearms consisting of
either NF-M or NF-H. Using the synchrotron SAXS-osmotic pressure technique, a
series of direct force measurements are proposed, which when combined with
complementary phase behavior studies, should result in a comprehensive
understanding of the nature of the interactions between neurofilaments. The
studies will be conducted in NF gel phases as a function of sidearm grafting
densities in binary (NF-LH, NF-LM), and ternary (NF-LMH) mixtures. The co-PI?s
group will carry out statistical mechanical studies of interactions between
polyampholyte brushes mimicking the NF sidearm structure of NF-L, NF-M, and
NF-H. Another set of proposed experiments is based on the PI's recent discovery
of block liposomes resulting from membrane curvature stabilizing multivalent
lipids. Cryogenic-TEM revealed the blocks to consist of distinctly shaped
nanoscale spheres, pears, tubes, or rods. Indeed, similar membrane shape
changes, occurring in vivo for the purpose of specific cellular functions, are
often induced by interactions between membranes and curvature stabilizing
proteins. By employing a series of lipids custom synthesized in the PI?s group,
which allow for systematic variations in the shape, size and charge of the
curvature stabilizing lipids (mimicking properties of more complex curvature
stabilizing proteins), the proposed experiments will permit the PI to
distinguish between the separate contributions of charge and lipid shape
responsible for the formation of block liposomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER
IMPACTS: From a broader perspective, aside from further enhancing our
understanding of polyelectrolyte brushes (which remains poorly understood, both
in experiment and theory), the research should enhance the understanding of
structures and interactions of the axonal cytoskeleton. The nanorods and
nanotubes observed in the studies of block liposomes have potential applications
in the area of templating (e.g. to produce nanowires) or chemical delivery. The
proposed biomolecular materials program is multidisciplinary and obligates the
PIs to educate and train undergraduate and graduate students, and postdoctoral
researchers in modern methodologies required to address important problems at
the interface between physics, chemistry, engineering, and biology. The state-
of-the-art characterization capabilities developed in the PI?s group are
integrated within the UCSB Materials Research Science and Engineering Center
(MRSEC) x-ray facility and open to a very wide user base comprised of over 30
groups from across campus. Students also gain familiarity with existing national
research facilities. The PI and co-PI actively participate in UCSB Outreach
Programs with the community colleges and colleges and universities outside of
Santa Barbara, which encourage participation by under-represented groups. These
programs include, the MRSEC outreach program, the Internships in Nanosystems
Science and Engineering Technology (INSET) outreach program, and the Research
Experience for Teachers (RET) outreach program. These programs allow the PIs to
train and educate undergraduate students and high school teachers in
multidisciplinary methods of science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;