* 0803663
* GOALI: Ultrafast Phase Transition and Critical Issues in Structure-Property Correlations of Vanadium Oxide
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2014
* Jagdish Narayan, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 06/30/2014
* USD 599,489.00

This project impacts profoundly infrared camera and smart sensors based upon
bolometer imaging arrays that can be monolithically integrated with silicon
integrated circuits and operated at or above room temperature. By improving the
reliability and sensitivity of uncooled bolometer arrays, it is hoped that every
soldier in the field will have another tool with which to ?own the night? and
maintain technological and operational superiority. Professor Narayan plans to
work closely with ORNL and Kopin Corporation to transition the basic knowledge
into practical devices. This work involves training of graduate and
undergraduate students at NCSU, and collaborations with NC A&amp;T University to
attract minority students into the graduate program at NCSU. The outreach will
also involve an annual ASM International-sponsored Summer School for rising high
school seniors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research deals with the very
interesting phenomenon ? an ultrafast phase transition from monoclinic to the
tetragonal structure of vanadium oxide (VO2). The principal investigator (PI)
will study the role of epitaxy in determining the properties of VO2, a material
that exhibits a sharp semiconductor-to-metal transition in bulk form. The
transition is associated with energy release (associated, at least in part, with
the deformation associated with the transition) that destroys the bulk material.
The supposition is that the thin film and its substrate will be able to
accommodate the transition without failure due to heat dissipation in the
substrate. Of course, the substrate will also impose mechanical boundary
conditions that will influence the temperature and "sharpness" of the
transition. Furthermore, the detailed microstructure of the epitaxial, textured
or amorphous film will influence the nature of the transition. The PI will
address the synthesis and processing of vanadium oxide thin films with
increasing grain size through to high-quality single-crystal on sapphire and
silicon substrates. High-quality single crystal films with controlled strain
will be grown by domain matching epitaxy paradigm on substrates with a large
lattice misfit, where critical thickness is less than a monolayer and the films
are relaxed from the beginning. These epitaxial films should exhibit a sharp
transition, large amplitude, and very small hysteresis, similar to bulk single
crystals of vanadium oxide. To obtain efficient and reliable infrared camera and
smart sensors, the PI will strive to control and optimize the sharpness and
amplitude of the transition, and the hysteresis upon heating and
cooling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;