* 0803854
* HCC - Medium: A Location-Aware Non-Mimetic Simulation Game for Teaching Team Coordination
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2008,01/31/2013
* Andruid Kerne, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 01/31/2013
* USD 539,806.00

Team coordination is essential for many critical tasks, but teaching people to
work together is difficult. Vital to safety and security, the demanding team
coordination of fire emergency response is characterized by real time stresses.
Participants quickly acquire, integrate, and share large amounts of information
while synchronizing action in dangerous, dynamic situations. Computer
programming, another demanding task performed by teams, is vital to security and
industry. Digital games are an exciting, new, intrinsically motivating medium of
education, capable of requiring interpersonal communication and cooperation, and
simulating stress in a safe environment. The embodied basis of location-aware
games, which create mixed reality by combining direct physical action with human
computer interaction via wearable computers and sensors, provides unique
capabilities for human-to-human interaction. Location-aware multi-player games
change the way participants interact with one another, by affording players the
opportunity to spontaneously split-up and re-group, which is impossible in
traditional desktop digital games. This research develops and evaluates a
location-aware non-mimetic simulation game for teaching team coordination based
on preliminary findings that establish the importance of dynamic re-grouping of
participants and optimization of communication modalities, such as face-to-face
and radio, in fire emergency response. The project introduces non-mimetic
simulation to describe environments that model contextualized human task
operations, emphasizing the structure of human communication and coordination,
while abstracting out physical characteristics of an environment. Non-mimetic
simulation focuses simulation resources on goal-directed operational
characteristics of task performance, such as information flows. The objective of
this proposal is to develop new high performance, cost-effective methods for
using location-aware non-mimetic simulation games to teach team coordination for
emergency response. Further, the transfer of the non-mimetic simulation from its
roots in grounded ethnographic data about fire emergency response to teaching
teams of STEM students to coordinate collaborative projects will be
investigated. The principal hypotheses are to investigate whether and how
location-aware games can improve team coordination performance in dangerous and
stressful environments, and whether this method for teaching skills will prove
transferable to other teamwork contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research is innovative in its interdisciplinary approach, which integrates
methods from ethnography, distributed and team cognition, game design, location-
aware systems, human computer interaction, and emergency response. This
innovative approach is expected to yield significant outcomes: (1) a grounded
methodology of non-mimetic simulation; (2) new knowledge of how embodied game
play impacts education; (3) new non-mimetic simulation game design methods for
teaching team coordination across domains; (4) new knowledge about designing and
evaluating location-aware systems; (5) new methods for evaluating team
coordination and how games support it. Research products will be deployed in the
nation's largest fire training facility, which educates over 45,000 students per
year, improving the skills and performance of emergency responders. More
effective teamwork means that fire emergency responders will be better able to
perform their duties: protecting the lives of citizens, protecting each others'
lives, and protecting property. Games are an essential form of culture.
Delivering education through games will motivate student engagement. In a period
in which STEM enrollment has been declining, deployment among undergraduate
computer science majors is expected to increase retention.