* 0803016
* Kinetics and Thermochemistry Studies of Carboxylic and Other Acids Using Negative Ion Proton Transfer Mass Spectrometry (NI-PTMS)
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2012
* Solomon Bililign, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 04/30/2012
* USD 323,360.00

This project is centered around 1) the development of Negative Ion Proton
Transfer Mass Spectrometry (NI-PTRMS) for the detection of carboxylic acids in
the atmosphere and 2) an improved understanding of the gas phase ion chemistry
on which the method relies. NI-PTRMS involves selective ionization of acidic
species via transfer of a proton to an acetate ion. Since acetic acid is the
weakest of the common carboxylic acids, acetate ions will react with all gas-
phase carboxylic acids, and with strong inorganic acids as well. Several
schemes, such as the high-pressure radioactive ionization of selected starting
materials (acetic esters or anhydrides, for example) will be explored and
evaluated for their potential to produce an intense, cluster-free source of the
desired ion. The relative gas-phase acidities of simple carboxylic acids
(propionic, butyric, and others) and some isotopomers of acetate will be
measured. Thermochemistry and reaction rates of the first hydrate of acetate ion
with carboxylic acids will also be determined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
scientific impacts include applications to air quality and climate change
because carboxylic acids are key intermediates in the formation of both
tropospheric ozone and aerosols. Education plans include participation by both
undergraduate and graduate students from communities that are underrepresented
in the atmospheric sciences.