* 0803119
* Phase II: Evolutionary STEM Advancement
* EHR,HRD
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2010
* Diana Morris, College of the Menominee Nation
* Standard Grant
* Keith A. James
* 09/30/2010
* USD 1,000,000.00

College of Menominee Nation, a tribal college located in Keshena, WI, has
successfully completed the &lt;br/&gt;objectives and strategies of its Phase I:
STEM Curriculum Enhancement Project. The College proposes &lt;br/&gt;to continue
the expansion and growth of its STEM programming and curriculum through a Phase
II: &lt;br/&gt;Evolutionary STEM Advancement Project. NSF funding will allow
College of Menominee Nation to &lt;br/&gt;continue contributing to both the
significant broader impacts of Tribal College STEM achievements as
&lt;br/&gt;well as to the support and critical promotion of Native Americans in
STEM employment fields &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;CMN?s Phase II goal is: To
continue to strengthen and build CMN?s capacity to provide competitive
&lt;br/&gt;STEM programming and services. Anticipated Phase II impacts include
1.) Increasing the number of &lt;br/&gt;underrepresented STEM majors; 2.)
Increasing STEM student retention; 3.) Increasing the number of
&lt;br/&gt;underrepresented STEM graduates; 4.) Increasing the number of
underrepresented students who enroll &lt;br/&gt;in baccalaureate degree granting
institutions; and 5.) Increasing the number of underrepresented
&lt;br/&gt;minorities entering the STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Phase
II objectives and strategies build upon the sturdy foundation of Phase I
successes and follow a &lt;br/&gt;natural progression of development. The
objectives and strategies are as follows: &lt;br/&gt;1. Objective One: To
advance existing STEM programs revised, expanded or developed in Phase I.
&lt;br/&gt;Strategies include developing and implementing advanced STEM courses
in mathematics and &lt;br/&gt;science, continue developing the Materials Science
Program linked to Menominee expertise in &lt;br/&gt;forests, expanding faculty
and student STEM resources available at CMN, and further integrating
&lt;br/&gt;technology into STEM courses. &lt;br/&gt;2. Objective Two: To
increase faculty capacity through advanced degree support for two faculty
&lt;br/&gt;members and general professional development for STEM faculty.
Strategies include supporting &lt;br/&gt;one faculty member in earning a
Master?s degree, supporting another in earning a doctorate, and
&lt;br/&gt;supporting general professional development of STEM faculty.
&lt;br/&gt;3. Objective Three: To develop and implement additional STEM student
research, internships, and &lt;br/&gt;exposure opportunities. Strategies include
developing and implementing student research and &lt;br/&gt;internship
activities, supporting a student exchange program with Belize, and supporting
student &lt;br/&gt;travel to major research labs and key STEM association
meetings. &lt;br/&gt;4. Objective Four: To continue to provide and expand
demonstrated successful STEM student &lt;br/&gt;support activities. Strategies
include supporting a STEM student advisor, supporting STEM &lt;br/&gt;tutors,
supporting the STEM scholars program and developing the STEM honors program.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;