* 0803112
* Conference: 2008 Metabolic Basis of Ecology GRC &amp; GRS: Metabolic Theory of Ecology, to be held July 5-11, 2008 at the University of New England.
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2009
* Michael Kaspari, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 04/30/2009
* USD 47,025.00

The third biennial Gordon Conference on the Metabolic Basis of Ecology and its
Graduate Research Seminar will be held at the University of New England from 5 -
11 July 2008. The Gordon Research Conference format, honed since the turn of the
century, fosters intense intellectual discourse. Networking opportunities at
these conferences are unusually good because the week-long schedule and the
emphasis on discussion time promotes interactions among young investigators and
more established researchers from around the world. No other conference focuses
on metabolic ecology and the goal of this conference is to build new
collaborations among scientists who seek a greater understanding of the
metabolic laws that govern the structure and function of living organisms and
the communities and ecosystems in which they live. The speakers and discussion
leaders represent scientists from diverse backgrounds, academic ranks, genders,
and national origins. In addition, there will be a graduate research seminar in
which students, postdocs and junior faculty will have a chance to interact with
established investigators prior to the Gordon Research Conference. The success
of this conference will be evaluated by using the Gordon Research Conference's
standard evaluation process.