* 0803160
* Nonlinear Fourier Analysis and Partial Differential Equations
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Andrea Nahmod, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2012
* USD 150,001.00

This project will involve research in partial differential equations, geometry,
and nonlinear Fourier analysis. Its intent is twofold. On the one hand, it is
concerned with the behavior of nonlinear waves and solutions to nonlinear
dispersive equations arising in physics, nonlinear optics, and ferromagnetism.
On the other, it is focused on wave-packet analysis techniques and the study of
multilinear singular operators, in both the non-translation-invariant and
nontensorial settings. These are two areas that are intimately related to one
another by way of decompositions, frequency interaction analysis, and nonlinear
estimates. The first part of the project concentrates on the study of certain
nonlinear partial differential equations and systems, including the spin-model
known as the hyperbolic Ishimori system, which plays a central role in the
theory of ferromagnetism. This system arises naturally from the Landau-Lifshitz
equation governing both the static and the dynamic properties of magnetization
when coupling to a mean field is taken into account. The global-in-time behavior
of solutions with special symmetries and initially carrying small energy will be
studied. In particular, one would like to know whether such systems are close to
equilibrium as time evolves. The principal investigator will also study soliton
solutions of the associated hyperbolic cubic nonlinear Schroedinger equation. Of
special interest here is the existence of symbions, which are solutions of
symbiotic form to dark and bright solitons. A longer term goal is to understand
the blow-up dynamics associated with large energy data. In a slightly different
direction, the principal investigator plans to obtain sharpened local well-
posedness and almost sure global existence results (i.e., for "generic data")
for certain periodic nonlinear equations for which there remains a gap between
the local-in-time results and those that could be globally achieved for all
solutions. The approach is to construct and to exploit the invariance of the
associated Gibbs measure that, just like typical conserved quantities, controls
the growth in time of the solutions through its support. The second major
component of the project is part of a comprehensive program to develop wave
packet analysis and time frequency techniques to study multilinear pseudo-
differential operators. Their treatment departs from the classical multilinear
theory because the behavior of the associated symbols may be governed by a
variety that is allowed to change at each spatial point or curvature assumptions
are not necessarily imposed in certain directions.

Wave phenomena in physics such as light, sound, and gravity, are mathematically
modeled using partial differential equations. Nonlinear wave models arise in
quantum mechanics and ferromagnetism, as well as in the study of vibrating
systems, semiconductors, and optical fibers. Nonlinear Schroedinger equations
are fundamental physical equations, for they govern the motion of quantum
particles, such as electrons. Some of the topics that the project will explore
are of basic interest in connection to both the theory of vortex filaments in
three-dimensional fluids and aerodynamics -- a vortex filament can be visualized
as a thin tube in which the flow has vorticity -- and to current work in
nonlinear fiber optics that is of fundamental importance in today's
telecommunication systems. The hyperbolic nonlinear Schroedinger equation has
recently received increased attention by physicists and applied mathematicians
studying the evolution of optical pulses in normally dispersive nonlinear array
structures. Nonlinear Fourier analysis in general (and adapted wave-packet
analysis in particular) consists in decomposing complex structures via modulated
waveforms into basic building blocks that are localized and thus relatively easy
to understand. These blocks can then be put back together in a straightforward
manner. The modulated waveforms capture amplitude, scale, frequency, and
position, just like a musical score. The objects to which the technique applies
include speech, radar signals, oscillatory expressions arising in optics, wave
propagation, and other phenomena of a nonlocal nature. This analysis is thus
well adapted to study the nonlinear effects that allow waves to interact and
produce new modified propagation patterns.