* 0803159
* RI-Medium:  Collaborative Research : Corpus-based Studies of Lexical, Acoustic, And Discourse Entrainment in Spoken Dialogue
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Ani Nenkova, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2013
* USD 343,768.00

Participants in human-human conversation often entrain to one another, adopting
the vocabulary and other behaviors of their partners. Evidence of this has been
found from laboratory studies and observations of real life situations. We are
investigating many types of entrainment in two large corpora of human-human
conversations to improve system behavior in Spoken Dialogue Systems (SDS). We
want to discover which types of entrainment occur generally across speakers and
which seem to be speaker-specific, which types of entrainment can be reliably
linked to task success and perceived naturalness, and which types of entrainment
can be automatically modeled in SDS. Our research has importance for the
construction of better SDS. Currently, research SDS have attempted to entrain
users to system vocabularies to improve speech recognition accuracy: Since users
are likely to employ the same vocabulary in their answers that systems use in
their queries, systems have a better chance of recognizing user input correctly
if they can predict word usage. However, there has been little attempt to create
SDS that entrain to user behavior, despite evidence that human beings rate
humans and systems that behave more like them more highly than those that do
not. Our work focuses on determining which types of system entrainment to users
will be most important to users and most feasible for SDS. Our results will be
disseminated through papers and presentations at speech and language
conferences. We will also provide publicly available annotated corpora for
future research by others.