* 0803690
* NGNI-Medium:   Collaborative Research:  MUNDO:  Managing Uncertainty in Networks with Declarative Overlays
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Joseph Hellerstein, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2013
* USD 450,000.00

We are entering an Industrial Revolution in the production of information. While
in the past data was "handmade" by typing on keyboards, today data are
increasingly manufactured by machines: sensors, cameras, software logs, etc.
When harnessed in a timely manner, these data can have significant positive
impact in many contexts, including early warning and rapid response in natural
disasters, air quality monitoring, and improved Internet security. To provide
useful information in these contexts, computers in multiple locations must
coordinate over networks, because the data are both widely distributed and
massive, and cannot be "warehoused" at a single location in a timely manner.
Worse, sensor data is typical "noisy" or erroneous in various ways, so
statistical methods must be employed to convert the raw "evidence" data into
probabilistically reliable information.

In this project we develop new techniques to integrate statistical inference
methods from AI with overlay network algorithms developed for peer-to-peer and
wireless settings. We design new overlay network algorithms customized for
distributed inference. We also develop network-aware inference algorithms that
can trade off inference approximation quality for communication efficiency and
robustness to network failure. Finally, we explore the use of a high-level
declarative language for programming both the networking and inference logic.
The high-level language enables us to investigate compilation techniques to co-
optimize the inference and overlay network tasks for maximal utility. We
prototype and evaluate our ideas via open-source implementations deployed on
testbeds like Emulab and Planetlab. Software and research papers are
disseminated at http://declarativity.net.