* 0803301
* Symposia for the International Symposium on Olfaction and Taste 2008, July 21-26, 2008 in San Francisco, CA
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2009
* Thomas Finger, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Mark Kirk
* 04/30/2009
* USD 13,300.00

The purpose of this award is to defray costs associated with the International
Symposium on Olfaction and Taste, a meeting held every 12 years in the United
States. The 2008 meeting is planned for San Francisco, California on July 21-26.
Two symposia are to be supported by this award. The one entitled Olfaction in
Birds will honor Dr. Bernice Wenzel, by exploring the sensory biology and
ecology of olfaction in a wide variety of species, from the perspective of a
variety of disciplines including foraging ecology, social behavior and
neuroethology. The symposium on the Neuroecology of Chemical Senses will focus
on neuroecological approaches, which range from behavioral and community ecology
to neural and molecular mechanisms of action, placed squarely within the context
of the evolution. The aim is to bridge the gap between knowledge of
physiological effects and ecological consequences. Eight speakers will be
supported and six of them are young investigators or post-docs. Furthermore,
support of this symposium will allow funds from the sponsoring organization (the
Association of Chemoreception Sciences) to be dedicated to underwriting meeting
costs for all graduate student attendees. The proceedings of these symposia will
be published in two forms. First, the abstracts from all presentations at the
meeting will appear in a special issue of the journal, Chemical Senses (Oxford
Univ. Press). Also, proceedings from the symposia will be submitted for journal
publication.