* 0803516
* Disorder Induced Novel Quantum Phases in Superfluid 3He
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2012
* Yoonseok Lee, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 04/30/2012
* USD 345,000.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****

The physics of disorder is integrated in an extremely large area of science as a
common thread, and the impact of research on this subject permeates from the
highly practical to the purely academic. This project addresses a fundamental
question: ?How does the nature of a quantum matter evolve in response to
disorder?? Unlike other physical systems, the liquid state of 3He at low
temperatures is a unique, practically disorder free system for which we have a
quantitative understanding. Furthermore, the superfluid phases of 3He, which can
be characterized more generally as unconventional superconductivity, are known
to exhibit extreme sensitivity to external disorder. This project will
investigate the effect of controlled disorder on this unique quantum state of
matter. The effect of two distinct forms of disorder: anisotropic disorder in
high porosity aerogel and surface disorder in thin films of liquid will be
studied. The ultimate goal of the project is to identify novel, disorder-induced
quantum phases which have been predicted to emerge in these systems. The
research will be conducted by two teams of graduate and undergraduate students.
Undergraduate research is an important element of education and also an
effective way of retaining Physics undergraduate students in this field. The PI
of the project will continue to interact with local science teachers and
students through lectures/demonstrations and participation in science fairs.

****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****

This project will investigate the superfluid phases of 3He in the presence of
controlled disorder presented by high porosity aerogel and by confinement in the
form of films. The ultimate goal of the proposed project is to identify
disorder-induced novel quantum phases which have been predicted to emerge in
these systems. The effect of anisotropic disorder on anisotropic superfluid can
be studied in a systematic way in uniaxially deformed aerogel. The 1D-like polar
phase is predicted to be stabilized due to anisotropic disorder induced in
stretched aerogel. Experiments will be performed to elucidate the effect of
surface disorder on superfluid 3He employing state-of-the-art microelectro-
mechanical systems (MEMS) to form controlled films and to detect various phase
transition features. This project will focus on quasi-two dimensional films
where the re-entrant behavior of the A-B transition and the emergence of an
inhomogeneous superfluid phase have been theoretically predicted. The proposed
research will be conducted by two teams of graduate and undergraduate students.
Retaining Physics undergraduate students is as important as increasing their
number. One effective way is undoubtedly through undergraduate research.