* 0803219
* RI Medium: Audio Diarization - Towards Comprehensive Description of Audio Events
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Mark Hasegawa-Johnson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2010
* USD 249,864.00

?Perceptual salience? is a term used by psychologists of vision to describe the
power of an object to draw viewer attention; for example, it has been
demonstrated that eye movements target salient objects sooner than less-salient
objects, and that salient objects are detected more quickly than less-salient
objects. The first sub-goal of this research is to develop automatic
measurements of perceptual salience for auditory events, defined here to be a
center-surround contrast in terms of amplitude, spectrum, or temporal features
such as zero-crossing rate and periodicity. The second sub-goal of this research
is to test salience measurements in an audio event detection paradigm, using the
2007 University of Illinois CLEAR evaluation system (Classification and Labeling
of Events, Activities and Relationships). The third sub-goal of this research is
to compare audio event transcriptions generated by human labelers viewing an
audiovisual record of a meeting vs. transcriptions generated by labelers who
listen to the audio without watching any accompanying video; the experimental
hypothesis states that auditory salience predicts audio-only labels better than
it predicts audiovisual labels. This research is designed as a collaboration
between experts in computer vision and audio signal processing. If successful,
the proposed methods will help to add an audio channel to the video security
monitoring systems currently installed in many hospitals, nursing homes,
government buildings and industrial sites.