* 0803171
* New Mexico Alliances for Broadening Participation in STEM - Senior Level Alliance
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* Ricardo Jacquez, New Mexico State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* A.  Hicks
* 08/31/2014
* USD 3,165,000.00

The New Mexico Alliance for Minority Participation (New Mexico AMP) is a
partnership representing the state's public two-year postsecondary institutions
and the state-supported four-year universities. New Mexico AMP was established
in 1993 under NSF Cooperative Agreement No. HRD-&lt;br/&gt;935215, and funded
again in 1998 and in 2003. New Mexico AMP is aligned with other National Science
Foundation (NSF) programs in New Mexico who share this common vision including
the Regional Alliance for Science, Engineering and Mathematics (RASEM2) for
Students with Disabilities and the New Mexico Alliance for Graduate Education
and the Professoriate (AGEP). New Mexico AMP also manages the Hewlett Foundation
Recruitment and Retention Program, the NSF Computer Science, Engineering, and
Mathematics Scholarship (CSEMS) program, and the NSF STEM Talent Expansion
Program (STEP). These and other programs have resulted in a statewide network
that has become part of the fabric of higher education in the state, allowing
for the managing and leveraging of human and monetary resources, and for quick
and accurate dissemination of information and
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;Collectively, these collaborations and the individual
programs managed by New Mexico AMP are concerned with developing an array of
student interventions and multiple lines of inquiry into the issues of effective
STEM education. Through these efforts, New Mexico AMP?s goal is to increase the
quantity&lt;br/&gt;and quality of minority students who complete their B.S.
degrees and who are currently underrepresented in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROGRAM
OUTCOMES AND GOALS&lt;br/&gt;Since New Mexico AMP began in 1993, the number of
STEM degrees awarded to minorities has more than doubled, from 253 in 1992/93 to
an average of 510 per year during the past five years. Just as significant is
the increase in the percent of minority students receiving STEM B.S. degrees
rising from&lt;br/&gt;23.7% in 1992/93 to 42% during the past five years. Over
the life of the program, 5,759 minority STEM degrees have been awarded to date
to New Mexico's students from the Alliance partner institutions. The goal for
the next five years is to increase the number of STEM degrees awarded to
underrepresented minorities by 75-100 degrees. This represents a 15-20% increase
over the previous five-year period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activities and
research proposed by the New Mexico AMP advances knowledge and broaden
understanding within the STEM disciplines by establishing and disseminating new
and adapted models for nurturing student success, including students who are
historically underrepresented in the STEM fields (low income, ethnic and racial
minorities, and women). Formative assessment activities provides unique
perspectives on student and faculty experiences, which will continuously inform
project development. These processes and outcomes together with summative
evaluation data are shared and disseminated to the NMSU and New Mexico AMP
communities as well as to additional regional and national audiences through
publications and presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The New Mexico AMP
contributes to the graduation and professional success of participating STEM
students, including those who are historically underrepresented, through
improved retention and progression. The program provides mechanisms to further
the individual research experiences of&lt;br/&gt;students, thereby supporting
and enhancing institutional research capability, and institutionalizing
effective changes in STEM education. Aligned with the land-grant mission of
NMSU, the New Mexico AMP will establish the STEM Success and Professional
Development Center, supporting the development and graduation of STEM
professionals who have a broad understanding of their professional opportunities
and social responsibilities, encouraging them to contribute to economic
development and improved living conditions for the citizens of New Mexico.
Dissemination at the regional and national level allow for the sharing of best
practices and challenges with other members of the broader educational
community, thus contributing to their empowerment to impact local
and&lt;br/&gt;national educational practices and policy.