* 0803294
* U.S.-India Workshop:  Heat and Mass Transfer and Biannual ASME-ISHMT Conference, Hyderabad, India, January 3-5, 2008
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2007,09/30/2008
* Srinath Ekkad, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 09/30/2008
* USD 30,250.00

0735721&lt;br/&gt;Ekkad &lt;br/&gt;This award provides support for a delegation
of US thermal scientists and engineers to participate in six research workshops
planned around the biannual ASME/ISHMT Heat and Mass Transfer Conference, which
will be held at the Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University, Hyderabad, India,
January 3-5, 2008. This conference is the premier venue for disseminating
research findings for India's thermal sciences and engineering community. The
American Society of Mechanical Engineers co-sponsors this event to enhance
interactions between Indian and US thermal sciences researchers. The interactive
workshops in six topical areas are designed promote discussion about the next-
generation of thermal challenges and seed corresponding Indo-US research
collaborations in those areas of mutual interest. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The US
delegation includes 13 senior scientists, 4 postdoctoral researchers, and 9
graduate students. The workshops, which target fundamental areas in heat and
mass transfer, are expected to enhance US-India cooperation on future thermal
technologies, share information and build institutional bridges, and promote
educational and cross-cultural experiences for all participants. US delegates
include women and members from under-represented groups who are early-career
faculty, graduate students, or senior researchers. The report on the workshops
and conference will be disseminated through a website so that heat transfer
researchers worldwide will be able to access this information. In U.S., the
results of the India conference and workshops will be reported to a larger
audience at the next major Heat Transfer Conference held in the U.S.
&lt;br/&gt;Funding for this workshop is provided by the Office of International
Science and Engineering and the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental, and Transport Systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;