* 0803200
* Entanglement Theory  in Quantum Many-Body Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2013
* Ramamurti Shankar, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2013
* USD 352,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research
and education at the interface between quantum many-body physics and quantum
information science. A major thrust of the research is to advance the
understanding of the relationship between correlations in quantum many-body
systems, emergence, and entanglement. Concepts in quantum information theory
will be used to investigate how condensed matter systems are entangled. The PI
aims to develop measures of entanglement in Kondo impurity and spin systems, as
well as systems of itinerant fermions and bosons. The PI will also investigate
the connections among entanglement, topological order, and fractional
quasiparticles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of the research is to provide
both qualitative and quantitative measures of entanglement in many-body quantum
systems and to discuss its feasible control in cold atomic systems and in
nanostructures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports training students in
advanced theoretical methods and involving undergraduates in research at the
frontiers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical research and education that will elucidate
connections among two rapidly evolving areas: one concerned with how to use
quantum mechanical states for computation, and the other concerned with
understanding quantum mechanical systems with many interacting particles, like
the electrons that conduct electricity in a metal. Quantum mechanical systems of
interacting electrons can exhibit emergent phenomena, including new states of
matter. Notable among these are magnetism and superconductivity in which a
material is able to conduct electricity without losses. The research enables a
cross-fertilization of ideas that are developed in two contexts, quantum
computation and condensed matter theory, and may lead to advances in both areas.
This research is fundamental and contributes to the intellectual foundations of
new technologies for electronic devices, information technology, and
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports training students in
advanced theoretical methods and involving undergraduates in research at the
frontiers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;