* 0803430
* IRES:   Birds, Insects, Forests, and Coffee -- Investigating Ecosystem Services in a Developing Country
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Michael Mesler, Humboldt State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 09/30/2011
* USD 152,660.00

This award provides funding for Dr. Matthew Johnson, Assistant Professor,
Department of Wildlife, and Dr. Michael Mesler, Professor, Department of
Biological Sciences, Humboldt State University, to provide research experiences
for 5 U.S. undergraduate students per year for 3 years to study the interaction
of tropical forests and agricultural habitats in
Jamaica.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on training students in
applied ecological research, investigating how birds and bees provide pest
control and pollination services to coffee farms adjacent to forested nature
reserves, through a year-long classroom and international field-based learning
experience. Students will take a fall class on ecology, research methods and
Jamaican culture prior to their 5-week winter research experience in Jamaica.
This will be followed by additional class work which includes substantial
mentoring in data analysis and writing. Furthermore, students will have the
opportunity to present their research at conferences, workshops and through
publications. The PI's have included a strong collaboration with Dr. Dwight
Robinson of the University of the West Indies, that will involve partnerships
between faculty and students, as well as use of lab space, equipment, and
assistance in communication with local farmers and Jamaican
agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will help advance our understanding
of the interaction of tropical forest ecology with agriculture while helping to
develop new scientists competent in collaborative international research.