* 0803481
* III-Medium: Reading the Web: Utilizing Markov Logic in Open Information Extraction
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Oren Etzioni, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2012
* USD 963,716.00

This project adresses the challenge of automatically extracting high-quality
knowledge bases from text corpora. Previous work, led by Prof. Etzioni,
developed KnowItAll (http://www.cs.washington.edu/research/knowitall), an
unsupervised, domain-independent, scalable system that learns from the Web in an
open-ended fashion. Another project, led by Prof. Domingos, has formalized and
fully implemented a powerful framework called Markov Logic Networks (MLNs) (see
http://www.cs.washington.edu/ai/srl.html) that enable inference and learning in
large, first-order models. This project integrates KnowItAll and MLNs to build
large-scale ontologies from text corpora: extracting relational tuples, using
joint inference to merge and validate the tuples, mapping extracted phrases to a
taxonomy, and using probabilistic inference rules to answer queries about the
ontology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Consider, for example, the query "how many Nobel
Laureates where born in Europe?" In response, Google merely provides documents
matching the keywords in the query. KnowItAll can only identify people who are
explicitly identified as Nobel Laureates and Europeans. This project
investigates a system that utilizes both information extraction and
probabilistic reasoning to identify candidate answers, not explicitly stated in
the text, and their likelihood of being correct. As a simple example, the system
concludes that Einstein was born in Europe based on the sentence "Einstein was
born in Ulm, Germany". The query "what foods help prevent osteoporosis?" is
answered using a multi-step reasoning chain regarding the ingredients of the
food and their ability to prevent the disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact of this research includes novel methods of building knowledge bases
automatically. Such knowledge bases (after some manual tuning, perhaps) could be
used to support a wide range of applications from question-answering systems, to
knowledge-based systems for medical applications, to background knowledge in
support of machine reading of text. The knowledge bases created by this project
will be made freely available to the research community as a Web-site and also
as a Web-based API via the project Web site
(http://www.cs.washington.edu/research/knowitall/ReadingTheWeb/).&lt;br/&gt;