* 0803937
* III-CXT-Medium: Biological Data Integration Using Large-Scale Molecular Interaction Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Trey Ideker, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2012
* USD 885,206.00

Large-scale measurements of molecular interactions are revolutionizing
biological inquiry. A major challenge of bioinformatics over the coming years
will be to develop methods for mining these interaction networks to formulate
models of cellular machinery and pathways. In the present application, the
multi-campus team extends the field of network integration in three fundamental
directions: [a] Increases in the efficiency of pair-wise and multiple network
alignment, which is a central bottleneck in network analysis; [b] Protein-
network-based diagnosis of disease, through classification of expression
profiles gathered for use cases and controls; and [c] Alignment of physical
interaction networks with expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL)
interactions, which are increasingly important for mapping signaling and
regulatory pathways in mammals. Molecular interactions represent a relatively
new and rapidly accumulating biological data type which has created enormous
challenges and opportunities for Information Integration and Informatics (III).
These data motivate a number of fundamental biological questions and associated
tasks: how best to associate molecular interactions with functional roles; how
to enrich for the true biological signal in often noisy interaction data; and,
perhaps most importantly, how to organize interaction data into models of
cellular signaling and regulatory machinery. A major outcome of the proposed
research will be a suite of biological network analysis tools that are widely
distributed for academic, research, and non-commercial purposes. These tools are
aimed at changing the way biologists use and interpret molecular interaction
data, and they will be key components of a next-generation bioinformatics
toolbox for synthesizing and distilling large genomic and proteomic data sets
into functional models of basic cellular processes and disease. More broadly
still, tasks such as network integration and alignment are basic operations in
many non-biological domains such as circuit analysis, structural chemistry, and
social networks, such that the proposed advances may have far-reaching
implications. Network analysis algorithms and software will be used to develop a
lecture course module for graduate instruction in degree programs in
Bioinformatics and Computer Science. Other broad impacts stemming from this
project include: fostering research opportunities for graduate students;
educating the biological community in the significance and use of new methods
through research publications, the popular press, and an interactive website;
providing software to supplement coursework in bioinformatics; and enhancing
collaborative ties between the areas of Computer Science and
Bioengineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;