* 0803270
* Twinning Studies via Experiments  and  DFT-Mesoscale Formulation
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2008,05/31/2013
* Huseyin Sehitoglu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 05/31/2013
* USD 359,933.00

TECHNICAL: This project is aimed at developing a hierarchical methodology for
advanced materials design utilizing the most advanced tools in a joint
experimental and theoretical approach. It brings new and clear insight into the
role of solute on the fault energies and twin nucleation stress calculations
that cannot be gleaned from solely mesoscopic or atomistic perspectives. PIs
have established that in order to determine the nucleation stress for twinning,
the energy required for the actual atom displacements needs to be evaluated. PIs
plan to focus on low stacking fault energy alloys, Fe-X and Fe-X-N (X=Mn,Cr,Ni)
steels, Cu-Al systems, to develop sequential multiscale design approach. The
deformation behavior of these alloys is characterized by significant twinning
activity, and the changes in nucleation stress with alloying can be rather
complex and require further interrogation. PI will develop a continuum twin
(heterogeneous) nucleation model for multicomponent fcc alloys based on first-
principle calculations. PIs will address the important issues of positional
symmetries associated with twin boundaries, and obtain generalized expressions
as a function of stable and unstable fault energies. PIs will determine how
alloying influences the resultant twin nucleation stress levels, through
intrinsic and/or unstable energies. By conducting experiments on single crystals
with selected orientations, and in conjunction with local strain measurements,
PIs will establish the stress at the onset of twinning with a high level of
precision. The intellectual merit of the work is that PIs are the first to
establish a quantitative correlation between the twinning stress and energy
barriers involved in case of deformation twinning from a theory that is rooted
in quantum mechanics and mesoscale dislocation theory. Unlike previous studies,
PIs will focus on single crystals and develop novel digital imaging techniques
with multiscale measurements to unravel the details of twinning via local strain
measurements. Incorporating the nitrogen effects in complex alloy systems, such
as Fe-X, have not been addressed in past studies, and with confirmation of
theory with experiment PIs will develop the experimental/theoretical tools for
significant advancement in the field, offering predictive design abilities. NON-
TECHNICAL: PIs general methodology is unique and applicable to a wide variety of
materials of research and technological interest, while not suffering from usual
limitations in experiment and theory. The project will accelerate the design of
advanced materials by avoiding the large test matrix approach and optimization
trials. Overall, the strategy is to advance a new modeling/experiment approach
for design of materials by connecting the underlying physics and continuum
scales without the semi-empirical (fitting) constants. The approach has far
outreaching implications in design, education, and teaching of materials and
mechanical scientists.