* 0803101
* Fostering Student Success in STEM Disciplines through Engaged Learning - Phase II
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* cheryl morales, Aaniiih Nakoda College
* Continuing Grant
* Jody Chase
* 08/31/2011
* USD 700,000.00

Fort Belknap College (FBC) is a tribally controlled community college located on
the Fort Belknap Indian &lt;br/&gt;Reservation in northcentral Montana. The
overall goals of the proposed project are to increase student participation
&lt;br/&gt;and success in FBC?s STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and
Mathematics) courses and degree programs. &lt;br/&gt;This Phase II project will
build upon the documented successes of FBC?s Phase I project, while addressing
&lt;br/&gt;persistence challenges identified through the collection and analysis
of Phase I evaluation data. In order to achieve &lt;br/&gt;the project?s dual
goals, project personnel will carry out an integrated implementation strategy
designed to &lt;br/&gt;accomplish eight student-centered objectives associated
with: (1) enrollment in STEM degree programs, (2) &lt;br/&gt;participation in
STEM summer academies, (3) performance on college placement exams, (4)
participation in &lt;br/&gt;research and internship programs, (5) performance in
STEM gatekeeper courses, (6) retention rates, (7) graduation &lt;br/&gt;numbers,
and (8) transfer numbers. Primary project strategies for accomplishing these
objectives include: (1) &lt;br/&gt;extensive outreach and recruiting programs,
(2) pre-college summer STEM academies, (3) summer research and
&lt;br/&gt;internship opportunities, and (4) supplemental instruction and
tutoring for STEM courses. In addition to supporting &lt;br/&gt;these student-
centered project activities, project funds also will be used to support: (1) the
establishment of a data- &lt;br/&gt;driven annual review process for STEM
programs, (2) comprehensive mathematics curriculum reform, and (7)
&lt;br/&gt;ongoing faculty development opportunities. Evaluation activities will
provide project personnel with the &lt;br/&gt;information needed to effectively
monitor the project?s progress, improve its ongoing effectiveness, assess its
&lt;br/&gt;success in achieving project goals and objectives, and communicate
its outcomes to a variety of stakeholders.