* 0803376
* Update of the SIAM Report on Mathematics in Industry
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2008,02/29/2012
* James Crowley, Society For Industrial and Applied Math (SIAM)
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 02/29/2012
* USD 150,092.00

The Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics (SIAM) published the
successful and much read: SIAM Report on Mathematics in Industry (MII96). This
activity was supported by the National Science Foundation and the National
Security Administration. The report continues to be influential and referenced.
SIAM proposes to update this report in response to changes in the economy,
expected new requirements in industry and in order to take a global perspective
not found in the original report.

Intellectual Merit - The economy has changed and industry with it. The economy
has moved from a manufacturing based economy to one in which services are
becoming increasingly important. The requirement for mathematical and
computational scientists to be interdisciplinary will only increase as the
services sector becomes more significant. MII96 only touched on the services
sector. The update of the report will provide a much better focus on services.
However, manufacturing remains a vital aspect of economy and the manufacturing
sector also leads in innovation. The proposed update will focus on the
mathematical and computational sciences role in innovation and address in more
detail the small start-ups or spin-offs that are often the source of innovation.
Finally, in response to the globalization of innovation, the proposed update
will report on the best practices for transfer of technology from the
mathematical and computational sciences to industry.

Broad Impact - The results of this effort is expected to have the same broad
impact as MII96 did on education and modes of technology transfer. The report
will provide guidance to undergraduates for planning their path in graduate
school and guidance to graduates with advanced degrees who are interested in
working in industry in finding a job that matches their training. It will also
recommend best practices for transfer of mathematical and computational
technology to industry based upon a global perspective.