* 0803288
* RI-Medium: Collaborative Research: Learning Multiscale Representations using Harmonic Analysis on Graphs
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Sridhar Mahadevan, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 08/31/2012
* USD 365,407.00

This project exercises and expands upon methods for automatic discovery of new
representations at multiple temporal and spatial scales. The specific framework
generalizes classical harmonic analysis, in particular wavelet-based methods, to
graphs and manifolds, thereby greatly extending the scope and the desirable
characteristics of this multiscale-analysis framework to domains with arbitrary
geometries. This framework, termed diffusion wavelets because it is associated
with a diffusion process that defines the different scales, has unique
properties relevant to learning, function approximation, compression and
denoising. The set of core problems that this project addresses include fast
algorithms for construction of multiscale diffusion wavelets, approximation of
functions on very large graphs and high-dimensional manifolds, out-of-sample
extensions of functions on manifolds and graphs, compression and denoising of
functions on data sets, perturbation analysis, and randomized algorithms for
multiscale analysis. Challenging application domains are being investigated,
including analysis of document corpora, Markov decision processes, and 3D image
rendering. In each case, multiscale diffusion analysis yields interpretable and
meaningful results. For example, when applied to Markov decision processes,
diffusion wavelet analysis yields new optimization methods that dynamically
aggregate states and actions at multiple levels of abstraction; and when applied
to 3D computer graphics, it yields new compression methods that capture
geometric features of objects at multiple resolutions.