* 0803484
* A Workshop for NSF Cyber-Enabled Discoveries and Innovations Initiative in Conjunction with 2007 ASME International Mechanical Engineering Congress &amp; Exhibition; Seattle,WA.
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/15/2007,02/28/2009
* I-Yeu Shen, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 02/28/2009
* USD 43,761.00

The proposed project is to host a workshop for the upcoming 2007 NSF
"Cyber-&lt;br/&gt;Enabled Discoveries and Innovations" (CDI) Initiative. The
workshop will be held at Sheraton Hotel, located in downtown Seattle, WA, on
November 11, 2007, from 1 pm to 8 pm. The proposed workshop is held one day
prior to 2007 American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME) International
Mechanical Engineering Congress and Exhibition (IMECE). The workshop is open for
researchers from all fields and has been advertised through a multitude of
channels including NSF's calendar of events. The objective of the workshop is
two-fold. First, the workshop is to introduce the CDI initiative to researchers
in all disciplines via invited talks, breakout discussions, and a question-and-
answer session. Through the interactive workshop, potential principal
investigators will have a deeper understanding of the scope and spirits of CDI
initiative. The second objective is to obtain feedback from workshop
participants regarding how researchers can better respond to the CID
initiative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop consists of 7 invited talks, a
breakout discussion session, and an&lt;br/&gt;NSF question-and-answer session.
The invited speakers will be outside the traditional engineering disciplines.
The number of participants is estimated to be 60 to 70. Discussions resulting
from the breakout sessions will be recorded and
published.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop provides the participants with
opportunities to interact with researchers of different backgrounds to foster
future collaboration via the CDI initiative. The workshop will also allow
participants to brainstorm and identify critical educational aspects and issues
to be addressed in the CDI initiative. The workshop will invite, and make every
effort to include, participation of young and underrepresented groups of
researchers to enhance the diversity. Also, some seats will be reserved for
students and post-doctoral associates to broaden participant's demography.
Dissemination of workshop results will also enhance public awareness of CDI
initiative.&lt;br/&gt;