* 0804960
* Photophysical Studies of Conjugated Chromophores on Peptide Templates
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2008,05/31/2013
* Lewis Rothberg, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 05/31/2013
* USD 531,061.00

Technical: This project aims to address basic questions that arise in connection
with the solid-state photophysics of conjugated polymers and oligomers, which
are of broad interest in optoelectronic device applications. The questions are:
Why is the photoluminescence (PL) quantum yield in conjugated polymer films so
much lower than in solution even though the excited lifetimes are at least as
long in the films? What fraction of paired charges with uncorrelated spins on
adjacent conjugation segments will recombine to form singlet excited states and
how does this depend on morphology? Do energy transfer and formation of
interchromophore states following photoexcitation compete with charge transfer
in donor/acceptor systems typical of organic photovoltaics? During the project,
Kristi Kiick's group at the University of Delaware will synthesize rigid
peptides as scaffolds where conjugated oligomers can be placed at specific
places on the peptide through reactions with judiciously placed non-natural
amino acids. Lewis Rothberg's group at the University of Rochester will perform
steady-state and transient spectroscopy to measure how the altering the relative
positions and orientations of the chromophores changes the photophysics. By
changing the distance between two identical oligomers on a peptide scaffold, it
is possible to simulate the photophysical behavior of conjugated polymers as
they go from dilute solution to films. The project is designed to measure
singlet-triplet branching in charge recombination that is a limiting factor in
fluorescent organic light-emitting diode technology, to determine whether and
when energy transfer can compete with charge transfer and what the consequences
are for efficiency of photoinduced charge separation, and to find out whether
photogeneration of interchromophore species can suppress charge generation in
donor/acceptor systems characteristic of organic photovoltaics.&lt;br/&gt;Non-
technical: The project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of
materials science with high technological relevance, and is expected to provide
prescriptive information on how chromophores would be best organized for
electroluminescent device applications. This project provides student training
in a highly collaborative and interdisciplinary environment, including organic
synthesis, materials characterization, and laser spectroscopy. Involving
students in closely coordinated collaborative research is an important part of
their training and especially valuable in materials science.&lt;br/&gt;