* 0804719
* Resonant Ultrasound Studies of Complex Chromium and Vanadium Oxide Spinels
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Veerle Keppens, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 07/31/2012
* USD 330,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT One of the most exciting themes of modern condensed
matter physics is the discovery and investigation of novel phenomena and new
forms of order in materials systems of ever increasing complexity. It is one of
the goals of our proposed program to study the elastic properties (i.e. how a
material responds to strain) of a set of novel, complex materials called
spinels. The elastic response of these spinels can be quite exotic, and our
research program will explore if the behavior can be understood with recently
developed theories. Graduate students will gain in-depth experience in the field
of elastic properties and low temperature physics, and will acquire skills in
various techniques in materials science. This proposal includes the development
of outreach activities to high-school students. Special efforts will be made to
reach female students.

TECHNICAL ABSTRACT This research program is designed to systematically study the
elastic response of a set of complex transition metal oxides (TMOs) that we
believe are ideal for elastic property studies: chromium and vanadium spinel
oxides. Specifically, the compounds we intend to study have the formula AB2O4,
where the B cation is Cr3+ or V3+ and the A cation is Zn2+, Mg2+, Cd2+, Mn2+, or
Co2+. These materials are cubic at room temperature, and have only 3 elastic
moduli. As the materials are cooled, they all undergo structural and magnetic
phase transitions that are currently the subject of intense experimental and
theoretical interest. The relevant physics involves crystalline distortions to
relieve magnetic frustration (the spin-Teller effect), orbital ordering and
spin-orbit interactions in a t2g manifold, and magnetic control of orbital
occupation. RUS will be used routinely from 2-400 K and in magnetic fields up to
9 Tesla to obtain the elastic moduli. Pulse-echo measurements will be performed
as appropriate. The elastic response of a solid is a measure of the material?s
?strain susceptibility? to strains of different symmetries. Near phase
transitions, it can provide information about the coupling of the order
parameter to strain. This knowledge is indispensable for understanding the
physics of complex TMOs. Graduate students will gain in-depth experience in the
field of elastic properties and low temperature physics, and will acquire skills
in various techniques in materials science. This proposal includes the
development of outreach activities to high-school students. Special efforts will
be made to reach female students.