* 0804805
* Nucleation and Growth of Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes Catalyzed by Transition Metal Particles
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2013
* Mogus Mochena, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2013
* USD 180,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and education in
theoretical physics in an area related to nucleation and growth of single-walled
carbon nanotubes (SWCNT) catalyzed by transition metal particles. The study is
motivated by the unusual materials properties of these systems, particularly
their remarkable electrical, mechanical, thermal and optical properties. SWCNTs
are the best conductors of electricity and heat and have exceptional
photophysical and chemical properties. The research intends to provide some of
the essential understanding of the processes that occur in creating these
materials so that the potential applications of SWCNTs may be realized. The area
of particular emphasis includes the nucleation and growth of these materials but
in the process researcher will identify processing avenues that make it possible
to control the chirality and diameter of a SWCNT, two important parameters that
determine whether a SWCNT is semiconducting or
metallic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers will use theoretical and computer
simulation techniques to better understand the growth process of SWCNT and how
to achieve the desired uniformities of coherent and defect-free SWCNTs with
controlled diameter, chirality, length and wall structure. This research will
focus mainly on analyzing and describing catalyzed CVD technique, which is the
most promising of the three major techniques for mass production of SWCNTs.
Computer simulations will provide insight into the growth processes which are
difficult to monitor experimentally because they occur at temperatures much
higher than room temperature, in the range of approximately 400 ? 1000 Kn where
the high temperature results in a high pressure, adding to the difficulty of
monitoring the atomic level dynamics involved during the experiment despite
advanced nanoscale measuring techniques. Computational studies are therefore
necessary in order to examine the stages of the growth and pave the way for a
more controlled growth of SWCNTs&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to understand the
factors and parameters determining the chirality and diameter of the SWCNTs,
rigorous quantum mechanical simulations must be done. We intend to perform
all?electron density functional theory (DFT) simulations at the generalized
gradient approximation level (GGA). These calculations will serve as benchmarks
for ab initio molecular dynamics (MD) calculations which can handle larger
systems than the all electron DFT simulations as well as finite temperature
calculations. In the final stage of these simulations tight binding molecular
dynamics calculations will be performed for larger systems and larger time
scales than ab initio MD.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work has both
educational and applied impact beyond the basic research. Scientifically, this
award will impact related research and applied work to develop carbon based
technology at Florida A &amp; M University (FAMU). The computational work will
complement the experimental work in the growth of SWCNTS at FAMU Center for
Nanoscience and Nanotechnology. The proposed work also will complement the
development of the FAMU High Performance Computing Center where a computer
cluster is being acquired for high performance computing and the simulations.
The educational consequence of this includes the development of computational
nanoscience coursework. Participation of minorities in science is supported
through this effort. FAMU, one of the leading HBCUs, has one of the four Ph. Ds
in physics and this grant will support the training of minority students. The
research that has a strong education component involving the training of
graduate students and a continuation of the PI's long history of recruiting
undergraduates in cutting edge research projects with publishable
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports research and education in theoretical physics in an area related to
nucleation and growth of single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNT). These ultra
small tubes are seen as one of the key elements of future nanodevices. The study
is motivated by the unusual materials properties of these systems, particularly
their remarkable electrical, mechanical, thermal and optical properties. SWCNTs
are the best conductors of electricity and heat and have exceptional optical and
chemical properties. The research intends to provide some of the essential
understanding of the processes that occur in creating these materials so that
the potential applications of SWCNTs may be realized. The area of particular
emphasis includes the nucleation and growth of these materials but in the
process researchers will identify processing avenues that make it possible to
control the structure of a SWCNT and the parameters that determine how a SWCNT
is conducts electric current.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers will use
theoretical and computer simulation techniques to better understand the growth
process of SWCNT and how to achieve the desired uniformities and defect-free
SWCNTs with controlled diameter, length and wall structure. This research will
focus mainly on analyzing and describing the most promising techniques for mass
production of SWCNTs. Computer simulations will provide insight into the growth
processes which are difficult to monitor experimentally because they occur at
temperatures much higher than room temperature, and at high pressure, adding to
the difficulty of monitoring the experiments despite advanced nanoscale
measuring techniques. Computational studies are therefore necessary in order to
examine the stages of the growth and pave the way for a more controlled growth
of SWCNTs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work has both educational and
applied impact beyond the basic research. Scientifically, this award will impact
related research and applied work to develop carbon based technology at Florida
A &amp; M University (FAMU). The computational work will complement the
experimental work in the growth of SWCNTS at FAMU Center for Nanoscience and
Nanotechnology. The proposed work also will complement the development of the
FAMU High Performance Computing Center where a computer cluster is being
acquired for high performance computing and the simulations. The educational
consequence of this includes the development of computational nanoscience
coursework. Participation of minorities in science is supported through this
effort. FAMU, one of the leading HBCUs, has one of the four Ph. Ds in physics
and this grant will support the training of minority students. The research that
has a strong education component involving the training of graduate students and
a continuation of the PI's long history of recruiting undergraduates in cutting
edge research projects with publishable outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;