* 0804647
* Anisotropic Self-Assembly of Spherical Nanoparticles in Polymer Nanocomposites
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2011
* Sanat Kumar, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Freddy Khoury
* 05/31/2011
* USD 342,500.00

Technical Summary: The PIs group has recently found that spherical
nanoparticles, which are grafted with long polymer chains, assemble into highly
anisotropic sheets when they are mixed with "matrix" chains of the same
structure but which are longer than the brush. The samples have to be annealed
for extended periods of time above the glass transition temperature of the
polymer for these sheets to form and grow. Initial TEM tomography results
suggest that these sheets are a few (2-5) particles thick, but that their
lateral extent can be as large as tens of micrometers. These dimensions are akin
to those of clay sheets, which have been extensively used in polymer
nanocomposites to achieve unprecedented improvements in mechanical properties,
gas permeation and flame retardancy. This proposal conjectures that the ability
of spherical particles to assemble into sheet-like morphologies should allow for
similar property improvements. At this point the factors which dictate this
unusual assembly process are not understood. Thus, here, a highly integrated
theoretical and experimental effort is proposed with the goal of controllably
achieving morphologies between the limits of uniform particle dispersion (when
the matrix chains are shorter than the brush) and highly anisotropic system
spanning particle structures (when the brushes are shorter than the matrix).
Specifically, the factors controlling the shapes that can be formed by self-
assembling spherical particles, and if they are equilibrium or kinetically
created will be focused on. The relationship between the resulting morphology
and macroscopic properties will also be touched on so that nanocomposites with
desired properties can be obtained.

Non-Technical Summary: The ability to apparently create structures with
controllable anisotropy is exciting in the context of potential applications
since previous work has shown that unusual improvements in properties are
achieved when highly anisotropic objects, such as carbon nanotubes or clay
sheets, are added to polymers. The ability to spontaneously assemble
nanoparticles into 'sheets" with, presumably, controllable lateral dimensions
could allow for the creation of easily processable materials with tunable
electrical, mechanical and transport properties. In addition to the
investigation of an interesting physical situation, the Pt shall continue to
mentor undergraduate and graduate students through a variety of forums. He will
continue to develop REU programs which will target underrepresented minorities.
An established collaboration with Prof. Ramakrishnan (Florida A&M University, a
historically black school) will be leveraged to recruit undergraduate students
with the goal of retaining them in the sciences. The P1 will also develop
courses to teach graduate students the fundamentals of a new field, muttiscale
modeling as applied to condensed phase systems. The P1 also teaches science to
K-12 students in the New York city area, and is currently mentoring an 8th grade
student on an science project.