* 0804581
* Realization of Photonic Band Gap Materials and Photonic Heterostructures By Innovative Material Growth
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2008,05/31/2011
* Toh-Ming Lu, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 05/31/2011
* USD 376,282.00

Technical: This project strives for fundamental innovations including: (i) a
growth approach to make 3D spiral PBG materials by a glancing-angle-deposition
method; (ii) a new design architecture to realize a photonic equivalent of a
semiconductor heterostructure using PBG materials; (iii) control of the flow of
light at microscopic scales by a photonic heterostructure; (iv) a new scheme of
conformal metallic coating to modify the optical properties of a PBG material. A
potential outcome of the spiral PBG and photonic heterostructures is
diffraction-less control of the flow of light on-chip. The approach is based on
thin-film growth of slanted rods at a pre-designed sequence that produces
desirable lattice symmetry. This approach is expected to lead to a spatially
coherent 3D spiral PBG material without using extensive fabrication tools and it
may be scaleable, e.g., up to 6-8 inches. The heterostructure desired has a
3D-2D-3D design that consists of a 2D PBG sandwiched on both sides by 3D PBGs.
This combination provides the high photon confinement of a 3D PBG while offering
the flexibility and ease of creating functional optical devices (waveguides,
bends, filters, cavities) in a 2D PBG material. &lt;br/&gt;Non-technical: The
project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of electronic/photonic
materials science with high technological relevance, and the project represents
a balanced research and educational effort. The investigators have an
established track record of involving undergraduates and graduates in research,
and this will be continued. Such exposure to cutting-edge research instills
confidence, creativity and motivation in students. The PI and Co-PIs also have a
strong partnership with high school outreach as well as interacting with RPI?s
Center for Initiatives in Pre-College Education (CIPCE).&lt;br/&gt;