* 0804782
* Deformations in Heterogeneous Biopolymer Networks
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Daniel Blair, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* David A. Brant
* 08/31/2012
* USD 425,052.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0804782 PI: Urbach, Jeffrey ORG: Georgetown
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Deformations in Heterogeneous Biopolymer
Networks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: Gels of filamentous proteins
such as actin, microtubules, and intermediate filaments determine the mechanical
properties of most cells, and their dynamic rearrangement underlies critical
cell processes such as migration and division. Similarly, the mechanical and
transport properties of the extracellular matrix are, in many contexts,
determined by networks of filamentous proteins such as collagen and fibrin.
These networks share a few common features: The polymers are sufficiently rigid
that they are not well described by rubber elasticity theory, the polymers
themselves make up a small fraction of the total gel volume, and their
biological functions are mediated by a vast array of associated proteins.
Despite their importance, there is no reliable quantitative theory for the
propagation of stresses in gels that is appropriate for most biopolymer
networks. This proposal describes a series of experiments designed to directly
measure the motion of filaments in biopolymer networks and their response to
controlled, localized perturbations. The motion of the biopolymers and the
solution will be independently assessed, with the goal of providing a basis on
which to develop and test models of stress transmission and material transport
in biopolymer networks. The measurements will determine the conditions under
which the deformation field of the network and the displacements of the solution
are accurately described by continuum viscoelasticity, and provide the basis for
extensions of continuum theory into regimes of heterogeneous response. These
measurements are made possible by a unique high-speed confocal microscope with
integrated laser tweezer that is operational in the lab of the PI. The work will
focus initially on actin and collagen networks, with properties controlled by
varying concentration, filament length, filament rigidity (through filament
bundling), and cross-linker and bundler type and density. In the last phase of
the project, mixed networks of microtubles (rigid) and actin (semi-flexible)
will be investigated, with and without passive and active (motor protein)
linkages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: The broader impacts
of the proposed activity include training an interdisciplinary workforce and
furthering the translation of quantitative techniques to biological researchers.
The PI and co-PI have recently initiated a Soft Matter Seminar Series that
involves speakers from Georgetown Physics and Chemistry Departments, as well as
from NIH and NIST, and will soon broaden from there. With University support,
they have launched the Mid-Atlantic Soft Matter Workshop, with the inaugural
event held at Georgetown on November 30, 2007. This highly interdisciplinary
workshop drew upon researchers from academic, industrial, and national
laboratories in the Mid-Atlantic Region. The PI has also established a strong
working relationship with Tecnologico de Monterrey in Mexico which involves
student exchanges in both directions. Students working on this project are
thereby afforded a wealth of scientific contacts extending well beyond the
borders of their university. The PI is the co-director of the new Georgetown
University Program on Science in the Public Interest (SPI). SPI was conceived
with the view that Georgetown in uniquely positioned to educate a new generation
of citizen scientists, capable of bridging the gap between science and public
policy. SPI is designed to give science students hands-on exposure to the
workings of the Government and to societal problem-solving. Formed in 2005, it
now has an annual budget of over $150,000, and the PI is actively engaged in
fundraising to expand its activities to reach a larger audience. Two seminar
courses are offered, Shaping National Science Policy and Science and Society:
Grand Challenges, and students are placed in internships in diverse
organizations including the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, the AAAS Center for
Science, Technology, and Security Policy, and the National Academies Board on
Global Health. They organize an annual Congressional Visit Day, a day-long event
divided between presentations on the process of creating legislation, science
policy discussions, and visits with staff from individual offices representing
the home districts of the participating student.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;