* 0804038
* Collapsing and relative hyperbolicity
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Igor Belegradek, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2012
* USD 151,847.00

Abstract

This project involves relatively hyperbolic groups of geometric origin, and
collapsing with two-sided and lower sectional bounds. These seemingly unrelated
themes naturally appear in studying structure and rigidity of finite volume open
manifolds of negative sectional curvature, where the (collapsed) cusp ends
correspond to peripheral subgroups in the fundamental group of the manifold.
Belegradek recently showed that negatively curved finite volume manifolds often
lead to fascinating classes of relatively hyperbolic groups, such as the
fundamental groups of hyperplane complements in compact real or complex
hyperbolic manifolds. As a sample application, Belegradek proved that these
groups exhibit Mostow-type rigidity. A natural continuation of this work would
be to show that the groups are quasi-isometrically rigid. Furthermore, by
analogy with a result of Toledo, one could suspect that the groups are not
residually finite, which would imply the existence of a non-residually-finite
hyperbolic group. Belegradek also plans to investigate relative hyperbolicity
for more intricate hyperplane complements that appear as moduli spaces of
algebraic surfaces via recent deep works of Allcock-Carlson-Toledo. Negatively
curved cusp ends can be studied via collapsing theory, yet a comprehensive
structure theory is available only when the curvature is pinched negative. The
project aims to study situations where one could construct cusp cross-sections
with good geometric properties ensuring that cusp cross-sections collapse. This
builds on Belegradek's work with Kapovitch in the negatively pinched case, as
well as on seminal works by Cheeger, Gromov, Fukaya, and Rong. Other projects
involve convergence of manifolds under a lower curvature bound. Aiming to
improve on Perelman's stability theorem, it is planned to study topology of
manifolds that admit DC (difference concave) structures, with possible
applications to smooth stability, and natural connections to geometry of
Alexandrov spaces. Another project is to prove relative versions of fibration
theorems of Yamaguchi and Fukaya with expected applications to collapse and
finiteness for normal bundles to souls in nonnegatively curved open manifolds.

Collapsing theory studies spaces that appear lower dimensional at a certain
small scale, and a basic goal is to understand the structure of collapsed
regions under suitable curvature assumptions. Hyperbolicity is a way to bring
geometric insight into otherwise rigid algebraic objects. The two concepts fit
together as hyperbolicity prevents collapsing on most of the space, which gives
hope that the collapsed parts can be described in detail. The proposed research
may shed light on several fundamental problems in geometry and group theory.