* 0804444
* RUI:  Self-Assembled PEG-Peptide Copolymers for Biomedical Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Sarah Goh, Williams College
* Continuing Grant
* David A. Brant
* 08/31/2012
* USD 230,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0804444 PI: Goh, Sarah ORG: Williams
College&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: RUI: Self-Assembled PEG-Peptide Copolymers
for Biomedical Applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The broad
goal of this proposal is to develop polymeric micelles for biomedical
applications from amphiphilic poly(ethylene glycol)- block-peptide copolymers
with peptide segments (conjugates) that display lower critical solution
temperatures (LCSTs). Amphiphilic block copolymers self-assemble to form stable
micelles with hydrophobic cores to encapsulate hydrophobic drugs. With an LCST
range of 22-35Â°C, these biomimetic polymers will undergo an additional assembly
of the hydrophobic peptides, further stabilizing the micellar delivery vehicle.
The relationships between copolymer structure, LCST, micellization behavior, and
peptide secondary structure for this class of amphiphiles are not well
understood. A fundamental study of these relationships is proposed by varying
the length of each polymer block, the peptide identity, and the copolymer
architecture. Peptides with known LCST behavior will be investigated, in
particular, the elastin-like peptide (ELP) VPGVG, as well as hydrophobic
peptides that demonstrate secondary structures, such as poly(valine),
poly(proline), and poly(alanine). Both linear and branched copolymer
architectures will be synthesized using a combination of standard peptide
coupling techniques and reversible addition fragmentation chain transfer (RAFT)
controlled polymerization methods. The proposed research has the following
objectives: (1) Identify key structural requirements for micelle formation in
PEG-ELP copolymers. (2) Discover new peptide sequences that form LCST-based
biomaterials. (3) Evaluate the efficacy of PEG-peptide copolymers as drug
delivery vehicles. By carrying out these experiments, the project will elucidate
the effects of structure and polymer properties as they relate to performance of
micellar drug delivery vehicles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: Tunable
vehicles for delivery of drugs, genetic material, and contrast agents have not
yet been perfected. This proposal offers a new approach that is well worth
pursuing. The proposal provides a model for integration of research and
education at the undergraduate level. The project lends itself to being
subdivided into modules differing in scope and complexity so that undergraduate
students at all levels can participate effectively. Each undergraduate will be
given an individual project, but they will work together to advance the overall
aims of the proposal. Each student will be responsible for a primary literature
search for relevant information concerning their own project. The PI provides
clear and explicit detail about her laboratory management procedures and
describes the group meeting experiences that will be provided to integrate the
several components and to ensure that each student knows not only about his/her
own component but understands how it fits with the overall goals. Reports,
theses, manuscript drafting, and group meetings, along with opportunities to
present at regional and national meetings, will allow the students to develop
their skills at communicating the intellectual context and research results of
the overall project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;