* 0804833
* High-Throughput Measurements for High-Fidelity Thermodynamic Databases
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Ji-Cheng Zhao, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Taleff
* 06/30/2012
* USD 330,000.00

TECHNICAL: Computational thermodynamics using the CALPHAD (CALculation of PHAse
Diagrams) approach is one of the most important tools used in multicomponent
alloy design and optimization. Its applications are, however, severely limited
by the lack of accurate thermodynamic databases with wide elemental coverage.
The rate-limiting step in the development of high-fidelity thermodynamic
databases is to acquire substantial experimental data inputs including: (a) all
the key ternary phase diagrams; (b) knowledge of crystal structures and zero-
dimensional (0D) defects such as ordering, site occupancy, site preference, and
compositional point defects (vacancies, interstitials, and anti-sites) in order
to develop best thermodynamic models for intermetallic phases; (c) specific heat
capacity (CP), heat of formation, and heat of transition of the phases and phase
transformations; and (d) magnetic transition temperature and magnetic moments as
a function of composition to take into account the magnetic contribution to the
Gibbs free energy. This project aims to develop robust, high-throughput tools
that will revolutionize the measurements of (c) and (d). The research will
extend an emerging micro-scale CP measurement tool to both low and high
temperatures to enable localized measurement of CP as a function of temperature.
Integration of CP over a phase transition temperature range can be used to
evaluate the heat of transition which is another important thermodynamic
quantity. The research will also develop accurate, micro-scale measurement tools
for magnetic moments using both the magneto-optical Kerr effect and magnetic
resonance force microscopy. By using these tools to perform measurements on
solid solutions and intermetallic phases formed in diffusion multiples, valuable
data such as temperature- and composition-dependent CP and composition-dependent
magnetic moment can be obtained with high efficiency and high accuracy without
making individual alloys. These data together with phase diagrams and 0D defect
information obtained from diffusion multiples can greatly improve the accuracy
and accelerate thermodynamic assessments to extend the elemental coverage of
thermodynamic databases. The development of the diffusion-multiple technique and
micro-scale property mapping tools will fundamentally change the way essential
experimental data are gathered for fast establishment of high-fidelity
thermodynamic databases. The tremendous amounts of materials property data
generated from such measurements would greatly enhance our ability to augment
materials design, materials informatics, and understanding of complex materials
behaviors. Moreover, the micro-scale tools with mapping capabilities constitute
a new suite of materials property microscopy that may become as widely used as
SEM, thus reshaping the way experimental materials research is performed in the
future. The program will help to training students to use these tools and
disseminate the data via web-based tools. NON-TECHNICAL: High-fidelity
thermodynamic databases with wide elemental coverage will have a tremendous
impact on alloy design by: 1) cutting down the trial-and-error experiments, 2)
providing thermodynamic data for kinetic and property modeling, and 3) reducing
the long-term exposure experiments that are usually required to test the
propensity of alloys against detrimental phase formation. The timely design and
insertion of high-performance materials are critical to the global
competitiveness of the U.S. economy.