* 0804838
* Carbon Nanotube Induced Polymer Crystallization, Structure and Morphology
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2008,05/31/2013
* Christopher Li, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2013
* USD 538,249.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The extraordinary mechanical, electrical and optical
properties of carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have attracted great attention in recent
years. The demand for products containing CNTs has created a pressing need to
transfer these properties from nano- to macro- scale. One essential step towards
this goal is assembling/processing CNTs, which involves dispersing them in an
organic solvent/polymeric matrix. To this end, soft materials, polymers in
particular, have been used to modify CNT surfaces. By using a controlled
solution polymer crystallization method, the PI?s lab recently demonstrated that
polymer lamellar single crystals could grow on CNT surface, leading to an
intriguing hybrid nanostructure named as Nano Hybrid Shish Kebab (NHSK). NHSK
provides a unique nanoscale platform that can be used for a variety of
applications. The proposed research aims at systematically studying the
structure and formation mechanism of this unique hybrid system. Specifically,
the PI will, 1) fabricate NHSKs using a variety of crystallization conditions
and explore the correlation between crystallization conditions and NHSK features
such as periodicity as well as the kebab sizes; 2) demonstrate that NHSK is a
general feature for CNT-crystalline polymer systems. The generality of the NHSK
is two-fold: a) NHSK could form for different types of CNTs as well as for a
variety of crystalline polymers; b) NHSK can be formed not only by solution
crystallization, but also by other crystallization techniques such as physical
vapor deposition of crystalline polymers as well as bulk crystallization; 3)
fabricate uniformly patterned NHSK using block copolymers (BCPs).
Semicrystalline BCPs will be used to form CNT/BCP NHSKs. It is anticipated that
the uniformity of the NHSK structure could be improved by using BCPs instead of
homopolymers. Because crystalline polymers can be readily functionalized, this
approach represents a unique way to functionalize CNT and it is different from
all the other reported methods. NHSK also provides a platform to realize
numerous possible applications of CNTs, ranging from nanocomposites, sensors to
catalysis supports. BCP NHSKs could open the door to patterning on CNTs with a
precise periodicity control, which is one of the major hurdles for applying CNTs
in nano electronics.

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY: Due to their wonderful mechanical, electrical and optical
properties, carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have been proven to be one of the most
fascinating materials recently discovered. One of the major challenges of
bringing CNTs to the marketplace is their poor processibility. To this end, the
PI?s lab recently discovered that polymer single crystals could grow on CNTs in
a controllable manner. Since polymers can be easily end-functionalized, this
discovery immediately leads to a unique CNT functionalization technique which is
different from all the existing methods. The hybrid structure generated, named
as nano hybrid shish kebabs (NHSK), possesses much higher specific surface area
compared to that of pristine CNTs. This could facilitate using CNTs in sensor
and catalysis support applications. The crystalline nature of the kebabs also
enables a more efficient mechanical load transfer, which could directly lead to
stronger composite materials. The educational component of the proposal
includes: 1) addressing the need for the education of modern developments in
polymer nanoscience and nanotechnology by developing a ?Hybrid Polymeric
Materials? module which will be used in the ?Nanostructured Polymeric Materials?
course; 2) involving high school students and teachers, particularly under-
represented populations, in the proposed research activities. These proposed
educational activities encompass a broad impact. First, the proposed plan will
help bridge the existing gap between levels of educational developments by
involving high school students and teachers in research activities through a
number of mentoring programs. Secondly, due to the high population of under-
represented groups in the Philadelphia region, the proposed outreach program
will be specifically geared towards encouraging the participation of under-
represented populations. Thirdly, the proposed research results will be widely
disseminated through publications in scientific journals, conference
presentations and more highly trained secondary education teachers.

