* 0804039
* Research Starter: Population Dynamics and Evolution of  Emerging Viruses
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2010
* John Dennehy, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 07/31/2010
* USD 67,848.00

About five percent of the world's population died when the last major influenza
pandemic swept the world in 1918. Yet our understanding of emerging infectious
diseases has increased only superficially in the past century. Some viruses
spread pandemically through populations, whereas others appear only briefly
before disappearing. Theory indicates that a virus's ability to adapt to its new
host is critical its emergence, and that its ability to adapt is partially a
function of virus immigration into an evolving population. The proposed
laboratory experiments test how immigration affects an emerging virus's ability
to adapt, by manipulating the number of immigrants entering an experimental
population. Contrary to intuition, if theory is correct, there may be a positive
relationship between immigration and adaptation. This result would challenge
conventional wisdom regarding local adaptation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will permit a better understanding of how viruses emerge, and
potentially allow us to predict which ones are greater threats than others to
host populations. The project has broader implications beyond the study of
disease emergence. The PI is himself disabled, and as such provides a role model
for other such individuals. The PI's institution has a large minority
population, and the PI will integrate minority graduate, undergraduate and high
school students into his research program.