* 0804198
* Collaborative Research: Fast Functional MRI
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Martin Lindquist, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2011
* USD 54,610.00

The problem addressed by the proposal is to find, for a given higher cognition
task, one or more regions of the brain where oxygen is consumed in performing
the task. The investigators approach is to use the so-called initial negative
dip, which is caused by the initial consumption of oxygen in the blood reserve
pool in an active brain region, in order to observe, in real time the location
and timing order of brain activation when a human performs the higher cognition
task. The standard approach, which relies on the stronger but much slower
positive rise, due to the resupply of blood to the regions several seconds after
activation, is inadequate for determining the temporal ordering of brain
activity in different regions. The investigators have developed an elegant and
highly efficient echo-volumar imaging (EVI) sampling scheme for performing fast
functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI), along with the necessary tools
needed for image reconstruction and statistical analysis of the resulting data
sets. They have used their techniques to conduct higher cognition experiments
using a variety of paradigms, and were consistently able to detect the negative
dip and exhibit its statistical significance. In addition, they demonstrated
that the negative dip appears in different brain regions in the same temporal
sequence as the corresponding brain activation according to the experimental
paradigms, and that the timing of the positive rise is at times confounded. The
proposed research, which will further develop the investigators methods,
includes the design of EVI trajectories for the newest and most powerful 7 Tesla
scanners and more complicated multiple coil systems, in order to improve the
spatial and time resolutions of their approach. New image reconstruction methods
will also be developed for the multi-coil data and the investigators statistical
analysis tools will be validated and carefully improved.

This proposal focuses on developing statistical methods and related theory for
performing fast fMRI. The proposed research will further advance and use the
methods developed by the principle investigators and their collaborators to
sharply improve the time-resolution for the blood oxygen level dependence
technique of functional magnetic resonance imaging. In its current
implementation the investigators method is able to measure brain volumes every
100ms compared to 2000ms for standard fMRI, thereby allowing fMRI studies to be
performed at an unprecedented temporal resolution. Fast fMRI is expected to have
profound and far-reaching consequences in the understanding of brain function, a
problem of central scientific interest at the present time.