* 0804625
* NMR Studies of Field-Induced Phases and Phase Transitions
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Stuart Brown, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 06/30/2012
* USD 376,000.00

non-technical abstract

Superconductivity is probably the most widely known example of a quantum
mechanical phenomenon manifested at a macroscopic level. The physical properties
attributed to the superconducting state are spectacular and include the flow of
electrical current without loss and the expulsion of magnetic flux from the
interior of a superconducting sample. These same properties make
superconductivity uniquely useful for many applications. Of important scientific
and technological importance is to understand how superconductivity survives to
high magnetic fields. Many years ago, it was predicted that this is possible
through a mechanism producing a state of matter inhomogeneous on a microscopic
level. In this project, magnetic resonance techniques will be used to study
superconducting systems for which there is evidence for formation of a new phase
at high fields, including an exploration of their physical properties, with the
aim of identifying the inhomogeneous phase and characterizing its properties.
This work will be complemented by investigations of new forms of field-induced
magnetic states in a class of magnetic insulators. Magnetic resonance is
suitable for this type of problem because it is sensitive to the environment
locally proximate to the nuclear spins being probed. Graduate students will
engineer and carry out the experimental program under a range of extreme
conditions, including very low temperatures and high magnetic fields.
Undergraduate students will assist in the design and construction of specific
components.



technical abstract

The nature of magnetic field-induced phases in superconductors and quantum spin
systems, stabilized by large magnetic fields, will be studied using nuclear
magnetic resonance techniques. In the case of the superconductors, the materials
are organic superconductors with highly anisotropic superconducting properties
which weakens orbital pair-breaking. Evidence exists for distinct high-field
phases in each case, making them excellent candidates for inhomogeneous
superconductivity in a form predicted forty years ago but not yet confirmed, and
for which its properties remain untested experimentally. Magnetic resonance
accommodates easily the necessary extreme conditions, and it is a local probe
sensitive to inhomogeneities. The quantum spin dimer system is an S=1 system in
which the dimers sit on a layered hexagonal lattice, and for which thermodynamic
measurements give evidence for multiple phase transitions as the field is varied
at temperatures T<1K. Graduate students will design and carry out the
experimental program, and are assisted by undergraduates who will learn how to
engineer specific components. Evidence for inhomogeneous states will be looked
for, from which new quantum effects are expected to emerge.