* 0804554
* Collaborative Research:  Synchrotron X-Ray Scattering Experiments on Solid Helium
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Moses Chan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 08/31/2012
* USD 50,964.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative award supports a
program primarily directed towards issues that stem from recent experimental
observations of a supersolid state. A supersolid is a new state of matter in
which part of the atoms in the solid show frictionless motion with respect to
the rest of the solid, or the container that holds it. This resembles such
phenomena as superconductivity and superfluidity. The precise nature of the
supersolid state is currently a matter of lively debate. A combination of
mechanical and x-ray experiments aims at correlating phenomena observed at the
macroscopic level with the microscopic structure of the solid. This will provide
critical information for a more general understanding of supersolidity. The
project is a vehicle for intensive and sustained collaboration between research
groups at the University of Delaware, Western Michigan University, Northern
Illinois University, and Pennsylvania State University focused on experiments at
the Advanced Photon Source at Argonne National Laboratory. This setting gives
both the undergraduate and graduate students involved a much wider view of the
physics enterprise, and their potential role in it, than is usually the case. It
also provides a mechanism for the students to build up a network of contacts
among peers early on and forms an excellent preparation for a scientific
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;The central
goal of this collaborative project is to provide critical information necessary
to interpret recent observations of a possible supersolid state in 4He. A series
of combined x-ray diffraction, torsional oscillator (TO) and dielectric constant
experiments will be used to investigate several questions: 1. Are there features
in the x-ray diffraction directly indicative of a supersolid transition? E.g., a
careful study of the Debye-Waller factor may provide limits on the Bose
condensate fraction. 2. What aspects of crystal quality are important for the
formation of a supersolid state? X-ray measurements will be used to determine
the crystal quality, and will be combined with TO measurements in a simultaneous
experiment. In addition, disorder will be introduced in a controlled way by
growing the solid in porous media such as aerogels. 3. Does 4He form a
commensurate solid at T = 0, or is the zero-point vacancy concentration &gt; 0?
High precision measurements of the temperature dependence of the lattice
constants at constant volume, can distinguish between thermal and non-thermal
vacancy populations. The training of graduate as well as undergraduate students
forms an important part of this project. Its collaborative nature, as well as
the fact that part of the work is done at the APS/ANL, gives students a much
broader exposure to modes of research than is normally the case, and will form
an excellent preparation for a scientific career.