* 0804972
* Sixth International conference on Nanochannels, Microchannels and Minichannels
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2008,02/28/2009
* Satish Kandlikar, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Theodore L. Bergman
* 02/28/2009
* USD 17,140.00

CBET-0804972, Kandlikar&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award partially supports the
6th International Conference on Nanochannels, Microchannels and Minichannels,
which will be held at the Technische Universitaet in Darmstadt, Germany, on June
23 - 25, 2008. The purpose of this meeting is to continue this important series
of international meetings that are focused on the emerging field of small-scale
channel flow and transport processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to the
intellectual merit of the conference, fluid flow and heat and mass transport in
confined channels, ranging from millimeter-size channels down to nanometer-sized
channels, is an increasingly important area of research. Pertinent applications
include photonics, heat exchangers, micro turbines, and lab-on-a-chip devices.
This series of meetings has brought together an interdisciplinary group of
researchers, from around the world. The importance of this topic has been
recognized by several major journals, including the ASME Journal of Heat
Transfer, the AIP Journal of Biomicrofluidics, and Nanofluidics and
Microfluidics, which have agreed to publish special volumes containing some of
the conference papers, provided enough papers are accepted at the
meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the conference include an
active engagement of undergraduate and graduate students. A novel Students?
Forum will be organized and run by students at the meeting. In addition, a
number of women and underrepresented minorities will take part in the meeting,
and will receive partial financial support from this award. Given the
international flavor and venue, all the participants will benefit from
interactions with their colleagues from around the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;