* 0804881
* Temperature-Sensitive Complex Fluids
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Arjun Yodh, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2013
* USD 480,000.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT**** This experimental program will explore the
fundamental properties of complex fluids such as colloidal suspensions,
emulsions, polymer and surfactant solutions, liquid crystals, and mixtures
thereof. These soft materials find applications in the paint, food science, and
cosmetics industries, in the practical control of fluid flow and micro-fluidics,
in cell & tissue biology, and in high-technology problems such as photonics,
lithography, biochemical sensors which require new approaches to materials
design and processing. Specifically, the research will create new materials to
elucidate a variety of basic phenomena such as melting, crystallization,
jamming, frustration and other classes of self-assembly. Knowledge gained will
improve our ability to directly observe and manipulate micro- and nano-particles
and, more generally, macromolecules in solution. This research, in turn, offers
insight for the practical problems listed above. Technology developed as part of
this research has potential economic benefit, e.g. it has led to the formation
of two start-up nanotechnology companies as well as a broad collaboration with a
much larger company based in PA. The program will also educate a new generation
of scientists and engineers about soft materials and about optical techniques;
these students and post-docs strengthen the technological infrastructure of the
nation.

****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT**** This program proposes experiments on complex fluids
to elucidate effects such as melting and self-assembly. Complex fluids are soft
materials including colloidal suspensions, emulsions, polymer & surfactant
solutions, liquid crystals, and mixtures thereof. These soft materials find
applications in a variety of ?everyday products? such as the paint, food and
cosmetics; soft materials concepts are also proving to be useful for
understanding cell & tissue biology, and for developing high-technology
materials in photonics, lithography and biochemical sensing. A unifying feature
of the present program is the creation and use of small particles based on
temperature-sensitive polymers. These particles swell and contract in response
to environmental stimuli such as temperature, and thereby enable experimenters
to induce phase transformations that can then be studied in-situ by optical
microscopy and scattering techniques. The research will elucidate a wide-range
of phenomena including geometric frustration, melting mechanisms in two- and
three-dimensions and in few-layer films, jamming, and the chiral instabilities
of particles in ?tubes?. The program will train a new generation of scientists
and engineers about soft materials, optical microscopy and micromanipulation,
and the knowledge gained will teach us to manipulate micro- and nano-particles
in solution, thereby offering insight into the practical problems listed above.