* 0804914
* Information Geometry of Quantum Phase Transitions
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Stephan Haas, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2011
* USD 390,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research, and education with an aim to develop a quantum
information geometry approach to critical phenomena, and to apply it to
correlated many-body systems of high physical relevance. Specifically, the PIs
will combine analytical, for example development of quantum distinguishability
measures, application to exactly solvable models, and computational techniques,
such as Quantum Monte Carlo and strong-disorder renormalization group, to
investigate the emergence of topological order in quantum spin systems, analyze
the effects of disorder on quantum phase transitions, and study the consequences
of environment-induced decoherence on quantum criticality.&lt;br/&gt;In contrast
to traditional approaches, the proposed information geometry analysis of phase
transitions is not based on an a priori identification of order parameters, and
hence does not require knowledge of symmetry breaking patterns. Instead, systems
are analyzed using fidelity measures which quantify the proximity of two system
states with different parameter sets. So, the PIs hope this strategy will enable
them to gain physical insight into traditionally hard problems, systems for
which the order parameter is either unknown, hidden or not
defined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This metric approach shifts the traditional
emphasis from Hamiltonians to the analysis of quantum states themselves, or put
another way, from studying order parameters to universal geometrical structures
underlying the way quantum matter organizes itself into different
phases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports an outreach effort that
involves a collaboration with local physics teachers who work at underprivileged
inner-city high schools in the Los Angeles area. This activity supports a
network for participating teachers through annual workshops, training sessions
and frequent campus visits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research, and education with an aim to develop a different approach to
understanding how one state of matter transforms into another. The way atoms are
organized can distinguish different sates of matter, for example atoms arranged
on a regular array in crystalline solid verses a random arrangement of atoms in
liquid. Recent research suggests that this notion is not complete and there are
more subtle distinctions between states of matter. This research combines ideas
from the emerging area of quantum information theory and computer simulation
methods used to study magnetism and other states of matter in complex materials,
to investigate new states of matter that may emerge from strong interactions
among electrons that may have more subtle differences that are not distinguished
in the standard theory of phase transitions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
is fundamental but involves the interaction of the emerging area of quantum
information science with condensed matter theory. The synergy between these
areas may lead to new advances and new directions. The research may also have
impact on the fundamental principles that may enable the exploitation of the
ability to manipulate quantum mechanical states for computation and
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Apart from educating the next generation of
scientists in advanced theoretical methods, this award supports an outreach
effort that involves a collaboration with local physics teachers who work at
underprivileged inner-city high schools in the Los Angeles area. This activity
supports a network for participating teachers through annual workshops, training
sessions and frequent campus visits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;