* 0804528
* Effects of Nanoscale Grain Boundary Composition Fluctuations on Mechanical Behavior of Metals and Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2014
* Richard Vinci, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 07/31/2014
* USD 536,157.00

TECHNICAL: Changes in the local composition of metals and alloys are key to many
fundamental aspects of materials science and engineering (MS&E). These
variations may be large in compositional difference, but they are usually small
in spatial extent, often occurring over a nanometer or less. When composition
fluctuations are associated with defects in polycrystalline materials, they may
induce deleterious property changes, such as the catastrophic brittle failure of
metals and alloys via, for example, hydrogen-, temper-, or irradiation-enhanced
embrittlement. Until recently, it has not been possible to measure these
composition changes directly and relate them to the mechanical behavior, the
crystallography, the electronic structure, and the defect structure of the
material. However, such measurements are now possible. In a previous NSF grant,
the PI has developed methods for mechanical testing of small volumes of
material, including samples that can contain a single grain boundary. In two
prior NSF grants, the co-PI has participated in the acquisition of two
aberration-corrected transmission electron microscopes (TEMs) and has developed
computer-processing methods to detect and quantify sub-nanometer scale
composition changes at large numbers of grain boundaries (GBs) and precipitates.
Initial data have been obtained in model systems and commercial alloys. The
objective of this project is to explore and accurately quantify nanoscale
composition changes associated with GB segregation in metals and alloys, and to
establish the connections between GB character and mechanical behavior through
direct testing and through modeling. The assembled team of international
collaborators has combined skills that will enhance understanding of the complex
interplay between GB crystallography and local chemistry via a unique
combination of the most advanced electron microscopy/spectroscopy and 3D atom-
probe methods with the latest first-principles simulations and in-situ
mechanical testing techniques. The research will generate hitherto-unobtainable
composition and mechanical behavior data associated with grain-boundary
segregation, selecting specific interfaces from hundreds or even thousands that
can now be analyzed for the first time. NON-TECHNICAL: The broader impact of
this research will arise through the potential to revise the basic understanding
of the role of composition variations on segregation and mechanical properties,
which are central to the education and training of all MS&E students. These
latest advances in materials characterization will enhance the research and
education infrastructure and will be taught to many classes of Lehigh students
and hundreds of industrial attendees at Lehigh?s Annual Microscopy School, now
in its 38th year. The results will be disseminated to the materials community
through technical presentations, publications and a new textbook. Improvements
in the measurement of nanoscale elemental changes in metals and alloys have the
potential to modify basic theories of segregation, and will lay the groundwork
for similar studies of precipitation in the future. In turn, this knowledge may
permit the re-design of standard fabrication and processing methods that control
the properties of materials. Thus the long-term result may affect society in the
broadest sense through improved metals and alloys for the physical
infrastructure, the hydrogen economy, aerospace and automobiles.