* 0804408
* Magnetic Resonance Investigations of Symmetries, Interactions and their Consequences in Electronic Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2008,02/29/2012
* Stephen Hill, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 02/29/2012
* USD 365,000.00

Non-technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on multi-
functional synthetic materials composed of molecular units that can be expected
to play a key role in the future development of molecular electronics. Efforts
will be directed towards gaining new understanding of organic superconductors
and molecular nanomagnets. A unifying theme involves the use of magnetic
resonance to obtain detailed structural information for these molecule-based
materials, with a particular focus on the importance of molecular and/or crystal
symmetries and their consequences in terms of the resulting material properties.
The proposed research relies heavily on new experimental methods developed
recently by the PI, permitting studies in magnetic fields of up to 45 tesla at
the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory (NHMFL). Combining these
capabilities with high pressures will also be explored. This is an
interdisciplinary research field that is ideally suited to a university/national
lab setting, and especially suitable for student research experiences. Work will
be performed predominantly by graduate and undergraduate students at Florida
State University and at the NHMFL. As in the past, the PI will also train young
scientist through several local programs which support summer research
experiences for local high school students and undergraduates from
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore the consequences of
electronic interactions in anisotropic crystals, with particular focus on the
role of symmetry in stabilizing electronic and magnetic order. Magnetic
resonance spectroscopy is perfectly suited to this problem: studies as a
function of field orientation will probe the spatial symmetry of the underlying
Hamiltonian, and dipole selection rules will provide information about
additional symmetries. Specific problems include: (i) the origin of ?missing?
Drude weight in organic superconductors; (ii) the correspondence between
electronic structure and superconducting symmetry in organics and oxides; (iii)
the search for a spin-supersolid; and (iv) the relevance of antisymmetric
exchange in molecular nanomagnets and ordered spin systems. The proposed
research relies on spectroscopic techniques developed recently by the PI,
permitting studies in fields up to 45 tesla at the National High Magnetic Field
Laboratory (NHMFL). Combining these capabilities with high pressures will also
be explored. Work will be performed by graduate and undergraduate students at
Florida State University and the NHMFL. As in the past, the PI will also train
young scientist through several local programs which support summer research
experiences for local high school students and undergraduates from
underrepresented groups.