* 0804506
* Collaborative Research:  Biomagnetic Glasses: Preparation, Characterization and Biosensor Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2011
* Emanuela Andreescu, Clarkson University
* Continuing Grant
* David A. Brant
* 02/28/2011
* USD 184,000.00

Lead ID: DMR/BMAT(7623) 0804464 Lead PI: Stanciu, Lia ORG: Purdue
&lt;br/&gt;Non-Lead ID: DMR/BMAT(7623) 0804506 Non-Lead PI: Andreescu, Emanuela
ORG: Clarkson &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Biomagnetic
Glasses: Preparation, Characterization, and Biosensor Applications
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The goal of this proposal is to create
a generic approach for the fabrication of biofunctional materials with magnetic
capabilities, so called "biomagnetic glasses." These will be used in the design
of highly stable, magnetically separable enzyme-based systems. The project
focuses on creating hybrid composite materials containing enzymes, magnetic
nanoparticles, and silica glasses and on the development of generic strategies
that will be used to prepare these materials. Three enzymes have been selected
as model examples: horseradish peroxidase (HRP), acetylcholinesterase (AChE),
and glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PDH). As an example of proposed
applications, the AChE based biomagnetic glasses will be suitable for use as the
sensing component in the development of a cheap and autonomously operating
bioanalytical device for detecting pesticides in food products, agricultural
fields and other security situations. It is proposed that the magnetic
properties of the sensor materials will permit them to be localized with respect
to the potential analytes using permanent magnets. The specific objectives of
the project are: (1) synthesize and characterize silica-iron oxide magnetic
nanoparticles with controlled microstructure and properties. (Purdue); (2)
encapsulate model enzymes (HRP, AChE, G6PDH) within the silica magnetic
nanocomposites and monitor the biocatalytic activity and stability (Purdue); (3)
use screen printed electrodes to exploit the biomagnetic glasses in biosensors
(Clarkson); (4) build calibration plots of the biosensors upon application of
various concentrations of target analytes (e.g. hydrogen peroxide, pesticides,
glucose-6-phosphate) (Clarkson). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: Bio-
based sensor technology that is sensitive and selective across a broad dynamic
range remains in great demand for analysis of chemical species in biotech
process streams, in the environment, and in the security area. This proposal
addresses, in particular, the issue of useful lifetime of enzyme-based
biosensors. The project provides an excellent platform for multidisciplinary
training of graduate and undergraduate students. Both PIs encourage
undergraduate participation; funding for support of undergraduates is included
in the Clarkson budget. The Purdue-based PI plans to incorporate materials on
biosensors in courses that she teaches in the two Schools of which she is a
member. Both PIs will engage in outreach to local public schools. At Clarkson
these relationships are established and on-going, while the PI at Purdue is
developing the necessary relationships with the school system. She is also
active in the Purdue Women in Engineering program and has been successful in
recruiting female students into her research group. Both PIs demonstrate a
sensitivity toward broadening participation among underrepresented minority
students. The PIs are connected with ongoing minority recruitment programs on
their respective campuses.