* 0804424
* NSF Minority Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for FY2008
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Jessica Ware, Ware                    Jessica        L
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 08/31/2010
* USD 123,000.00

This action funds an NSF Minority Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for FY 2008.
The fellowship supports a research and training plan in a host laboratory for
the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden participation in biology through
innovative outreach. The title of the research and training plan for this
fellowship to Jessica L. Ware is "Understanding the evolution of sociality and
symbiosis in the lower termites (Isoptera: Hodotermitidae): a molecular and
morphological approach" The host institution for this research is the American
Museum of Natural History and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. David Grimaldi.

Termites (from the scientific classification order Isoptera) are unique social
insects that are involved in a complex symbiosis with cellulose-digesting
microorganisms residing in their hindguts. A thorough phylogenetic analysis of
basal termite relationships is needed to understand the evolution of these
isopteran features, social behavior and gut-symbiosis. This research is creating
the first total-evidence phylogenetic hypothesis of Isoptera with a global
sample of lower termite species and extant fossil data. Phylogenetic
reconstructions are being recovered using both molecular and morphological data.
Divergence estimation analyses, biogeographical analyses and ancestral-state
reconstruction are being used to evaluate the ecological conditions under which
these fascinating organisms evolved.

The training objectives of this research include learning fossil morphology
techniques and a systematics computer program used at AMNH. The broader impacts
will shed light on the systematics of "lower" termites and evolution of complex
symbiosis. Broadening participation of under-represented groups will be
encouraged through informal science education and radio broadcasts.