* 0804900
* Topics in the Theories of Elasticity and of Liquid Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2008,12/31/2012
* Tom Lubensky, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2012
* USD 324,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This proposal supports theoretical research and
education in three distinct areas: isoststatic and nearly isostatic materials,
imprinted liquid crystal elastomers, and the interplay between line
(disclination) and point (hedgehog) defects in nematic liquid crystals. A major
part of this research studies the many peculiar and fascinating properties of
periodic isostatic lattices, like the simple square and cubic lattices, and
their nearly isostatic forms created by adding rigidity-by including additional
springs like the cross beams on a bridge. These systems offer insight into
general isostatic systems in a context that is not complicated by the off-
lattice randomness inherent in more studied ?jammed" systems.&lt;br/&gt;Using
modern synthetic and photo chemistry, it is now possible to create spatially
varying patterns of anisotropy characterized by the director in polymer or
related nematics and to freeze in those patterns via a chemical cross linking
process. For example, one might create a thin-film elastomer whose director,
restricted to the plane of the film, rotates by 90 degrees between the film's
top and bottom surfaces. This imprinting makes the top and bottom surfaces
different and causes them to respond differently to changes in temperature, pH,
or light intensity and, thereby, to produce shape changes in the film. These
films are thus ideal candidates for mechano sensors of various sorts. A major
research effort focuses on calculating the elastic and other properties of
elastomer films and narrow tubes imprinted with various director
patterns.&lt;br/&gt;Colloidal particles can now be dispersed in a controlled way
into liquid crystals to create particle lattices entangled with arrays of
topological defect lines called disclinations. Closed loops of these lines
produce director patterns equivalent to those of point defects called hedgehogs.
In a third research thrust, the PI aims to formulate ways of characterizing the
amount of hedgehog charge a line defect carries for each unit of its length. The
goal will be to provide a mathematical characterization of this charge density
and to use it to help understand networks of disclinations like those in
colloidal dispersions.&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the proposal is expanding
the experience, education and training of students and post-docs in the
interdisciplinary field of soft-matter physics. Bringing these new
interdisciplinary aspects of research to the larger community, the PI plans to
write a major review article on nonlinear elasticity and to begin the process of
updating his popular text book, "Principles of Condensed Matter Physics." The PI
is Chair of his department and encourages Department outreach programs, one of
which brings in several hundred local high school students each year to see
captivating demonstrations of physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-
TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This proposal supports theoretical research and
education in areas of soft condensed-matter physics. The program builds on the
PI's previous experience in liquid crystals, elasticity, and phase transitions.
Liquid crystals, a class of materials widely known because of liquid crystal
display (LCD) application, are materials that have a rich variety of internal
structures with molecules in spatial arrangements less organized than solid
crystals but with directional patterns formed the orientation of the constituent
molecules. With molecular orientation an added variable to the spatial
organization, researchers have found that the internal structure of liquid
crystals, polymers and other soft matter systems can be extraordinarily complex,
but very logically patterned. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Patters and structure are
connected with strength and stability. It is well known that engineers do not
build bridges with a motif of only horizontal and vertical struts in a square or
rectangular pattern; rather they put in diagonal cross beams to increase
structural stability. In fact, a square or cubic lattice with nearest neighbor
vertices frictionlessly connected by springs that can only support loads
directed along their axes are inherently unstable. These lattices represent a
general category of what are called isostatic systems that have almost, but not
quite, enough constraints to make them stable. There are many systems in nature,
including piles of sand, spherical beads compacted until they become jammed, and
even glasses, that are nearly isostatic. A major part of this research is to
study the many peculiar and fascinating properties of periodic isostatic
lattices, like the simple square and cubic lattices, and their nearly isostatic
forms created by adding rigidity-increasing springs like the cross beams on a
bridge. These systems offer insight into general isostatic systems in a fashion
that is free from many complications that appear in systems that are
traditionally studied. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Liquid crystal elastomers are
fascinating materials that combine the orientational properties of liquid
crystals with the remarkable stretching properties of rubber. Liquid crystalline
elastomers are formed by chemically binding together (cross linking) long-chain
molecules (polymers) with liquid-crystal forming molecular subunits to create a
liquid crystalline network that can withstand stretching. Using modern synthetic
and photo chemistry, it is now possible to create and ?freeze in? spatially
varying patterns of orientational order. For example, one might create a thin-
film elastomer in which the orientation of the long-chain molecules twists
smoothly from one orientation at the top surface to another at the bottom. This
imprinting makes the top and bottom surfaces different and causes them to
respond differently to changes in temperature, pH, or light intensity and,
thereby, to produce shape changes in the film. These imprinted films and other
imprinted geometries such as tubular elastomers are ideal candidates for mechano
sensors of various sorts. The PI aims to calculate the properties of imprinted
films and tubes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the proposal is
primarily the education and training of students and post-docs in the
interdisciplinary field of soft-matter physics. Bringing these new
interdisciplinary aspects of research to the larger community, the PI plans to
write a major review article on nonlinear elasticity and to begin the process of
updating his popular text book, "Principles of Condensed Matter Physics." The PI
is Chair of his department and encourages Department outreach programs one which
brings in several hundred local high school students each year to see
captivating demonstrations of simple physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;