* 0804718
* Fabrication of a Novel Nanocoaxial Biosensor
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2010
* Dong Cai, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 06/30/2010
* USD 120,625.00

In this exploratory research project the PI and his collaborators propose to
fabricate and test the proof-of-concept of a novel carbon nanotube-based
biosensor. The detection of biomolecules and biological agents represents a
critical aspect of environmental sampling for pollutants and contaminants and
also in pharmaceutical quality control monitoring, forensic analysis, and
clinical diagnosis. Conventional biosensors currently in use, include plaque
assays, immunological assays (ELISA-based), chemically sensitive field-effect
transistors, and PCR-based testing of nucleic acids. In this exploratory
research proposal, the PI will develop a prototype of a new, ultrasensitive
multiplex carbon nanotube (CNT) biosensor (termed, nanobiosensor) that will
incorporate electrochemical detection, thereby affording high sensitivity and
compatibility for miniaturization. The proposed nanobiosensor relies on a highly
novel nanocoaxial architecture, recently developed by several members of the
research team, which is believed will afford a dramatic improvement over
conventional and CNT-based sensors by providing: 1) real-time; 2) multiplexing;
3) miniaturization; and 4) high sensitivity and selectivity. There are three key
objectives during the funding period: I. Complete the fabrication of a
functional nanocoaxial sensor platform. II. Optimize the parameters involved in
the immobilization of antibodies to the inner CNT structure, which will serve as
the biorecognition molecule. III. Evaluate the amperometry, electrochemical
impedance spectroscopy and broadband dielectric spectroscopy for detection
following capture of the target antigen by the biorecognition antibody. The
proposed project will significantly advance small sample (approaching and
including single molecule) biomolecule detection for use in pathogen, virus,
disease and bioterror targets, with specificity. The proposed research will also
integrate research and promote student training in biochemistry and physics at
several levels, including undergraduate and graduate. This interdisciplinary,
research will bring together elements of biochemistry, molecular biology, and
condensed matter and material physics (in the form of carbon nanotube design and
fabrication) and in doing so will promote research and learning in forefront
integrated science areas that will greatly benefit its student participants as
well as advance biosensing technology. The results of this research will be
communicated in the form of published papers and posters/talks at conferences.
The experimental design is collaborative, bringing together faculty and graduate
students from the Physics and Biology Departments. The applicants are firmly
committed to science education, having mentored dozens of high school students
and biology and physics undergraduates, a large number of whom have gone on to
graduate programs. The PI currently serves as a mentor for the Beckman Scholars
undergraduate research program at Boston College and has a long standing record
of providing research opportunities to underrepresented minorities, having
served as a mentor for the McNair Scholar program and as a National Minority
Medical Fellows Mentor. The co-PIs have longstanding policies of including high
school students and undergrads in their laboratories for summer internships and
academic research opportunities.