* 0804295
* A Novel Faraday Filter-based Spectrometer for Studying the Sodium Airglow and Measuring the Atomic Oxygen Mixing Ratio in the Upper Mesosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2011
* Chiao-Yao She, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Farzad Kamalabadi
* 05/31/2011
* USD 100,000.00

This project will develop and deploy a new optical instrument, a compact
spectrometer, that will enable new measurements of the mesospheric sodium
nightglow. One of the primary aims is to determine the ratio of two sodium
emission lines, the D2 and D1. Early studies predicted that the D2/D1 ratio
might differ from its quantum statistical value of 2 due to chemical
interactions. However, measurements taken three decades ago using a Fabry-Perot
instrument reported a value of 1.98Â±0.1; since then, 2 has taken to be the
correct value without further investigation. Recently, T. G. Slanger, J. M. C.
Plane and others have searched through sky spectra from Keck telescopes taken
over 8 years, and deduced that depending on atmospheric conditions, the value
NaRD = I(D2)/I(D1) lies between 1.2 and 1.8. A clear seasonal dependence of this
ratio, with higher values in equinox and lower values in solstice, was noted as
well. They proposed a modified Chapman mechanism which suggests competing
pathways of NaO+O reactions produce Na nightglow emission. Substantiated by
laboratory experiments, they concluded that the ratio NaRD is a reliable proxy
for the measurement of the [O]/[O2] ratio. Since atomic oxygen is probably the
most important species in determining the chemistry and dynamics of the
mesosphere and lower thermosphere (MLT), even an indirect real-time
determination of [O]/[O2] could greatly advance our understanding of the MLT
energy balance, especially since there is no direct ground-based method for
observing the atomic oxygen concentration, [O]. Through this project, a novel,
compact spectrometer, based on a pair of modified Na vapor Faraday filters, will
be designed to measure Na nightglow and to determine NaRD. In addition to NaRD,
the method can also determine the pathway fractions of the two possible
reactions in the modified Chapman process. The NaRD spectrometer will be
deployed at the Colorado State University lidar site for intitial testing and
calibration. The project involves a research scientist as Co-PI and a graduate
student for his Ph.D thesis. The research would lead to the development of an
inexpensive compact spectrometer that could be used at other observatories with
a simple sodium lidar. The project will contribute to studies of atomic oxygen
in the mesopause region as more data are gathered from various sites in the
future. Such measurements will improve the understanding of the aeronomy of
airglow processes, most of which involve interactions with O.