* 0804191
* 2008 Defects in Semiconductors Gordon Conference; New London, NH; August 3-8, 2008
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Matthew McCluskey, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 06/30/2009
* USD 6,000.00

Technical. A Gordon Research Conference on Defects in Semiconductors will be
held at Colby-Sawyer College in New London, NH, August 3-8, 2008. The goal of
the conference is to promote fundamental understanding of defects and defect-
related phenomena in homogeneous and structured semiconductors. These defects
occur, or are introduced, during growth and/or processing of electronic
materials. The conference will provide a forum for interaction between
university, government and industrial scientists. Topics include control of
defects in ZnO, GaN, diamond, and organic semiconductors during growth and
processing; interface defects that occur during heteroepitaxial growth of Si,
SiC, and GaN; and discussions of atomic-scale imaging techniques, combined with
state-of-the-art theoretical methods addressing fundamental atomic-level
mechanisms of defects. Topics that are controversial and/or forward-looking will
be emphasized. The conference deals with defects in a broad range of bulk and
nanoscale electronic materials to assist advancing fundamental understanding in
emerging materials such as wide-band-gap semiconductors and doped nanoparticles.
&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical. An important impact of this conference will be to
increase the attendance of young scientists from underrepresented groups. Gordon
conference setting and format encourage interactions on multiple levels, and
among senior staff and those early in their careers. Efforts will be made to
improve the inclusion of women and minorities in fields related to electronic
materials. Along with the opportunity to assess the field and future directions,
it is expected that new ties will be established among universities, research
institutions, and industry. The requested NSF funds will be used to facilitate
participation in the meeting by young faculty, postdoctoral research associates
and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;