* 0804305
* International Research Fellowship Program:  The Role of Gap-Junction Mediated Synchrony in Sensory Information Processing
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/2008,11/30/2010
* John Apergis, Apergis                 John
* Fellowship Award
* Francis J. Wodarczyk
* 11/30/2010
* USD 198,572.00

0804305 Apergis-Schoute

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four month research fellowship by Dr. John
Apergis-Schoute to work with Dr. Simon Schultz at Imperial College in London,
UK.

Understanding how the brain transforms the physical world into perceptual
experience is a central question in modern neuroscience. Through analysis of the
functional architecture of primary sensory cortices, research has shown that
many fundamental principles of sensory encoding are conserved across sensory
modalities. For example, the architecture of most sensory cortices dictates that
information regarding the sensory world is distributed across anatomically
distinct cortical locations. But how then does the cortex link these fractured
sensory representations into a unified percept? An important clue is that
synchrony between neuronal pairs is modulated by stimuli which drive them both
effectively. Such synchrony has been proposed to be the ?glue? of perceptual
integration, either by supporting low-level conjunctive sensory coding or
?temporal binding?. A prevailing mechanistic theory behind both models states
that gap junction-coupled interneurons support sensory integration by quickly
synchronizing rhythmic activity across cortical domains. However, due to
limitations in selectively recording from identified interneurons in vivo, most
conclusions regarding gap junction-coupled interneurons? contributions to
network function have come from studies where network function was compromised.
Using anaesthetized transgenic mice whose neurons expressing the gap junction
protein connexin-36 (Cx36) somatically express yellow-fluorescent protein (YFP)
the PI and host will monitor visually-driven intra- and juxtacellular signals
from Cx36-YFP neurons. Specifically, they will first plan on determining how the
identity and position of Cx36 neurons within the cortical network results in
their receptive field properties. This will be achieved by comparing the
chemical composition and cellular morphology of Cx36 neurons with their visual
response properties. Next, they will assess the temporal relation between gap
junction-coupled interneurons and V1 network activity monitored using multi-
electrode arrays. Information-theoretic analyses will allow us to directly
compare the contributions made by different cell types to the overall mutual
information regarding stimulus structure. Finally, they aim to modify visually-
driven activity patterns in cortical networks by modulating the excitability of
Cx36-coupled networks via current injections into individual neurons. These
experiments will allow them to unify a large body of anatomical, physiological,
and theoretical work aimed at understanding the origin of the stimulus-dependent
synchrony, and ultimately, to help them understand how these processes
contribute to the way perceptions arise.