* 0804775
* Novel Quantum Phases in Orbital and Large Spin Systems with Cold Atoms
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2008,10/31/2011
* Congjun Wu, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 10/31/2011
* USD 240,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education on novel quantum phases in orbital and large spin systems with cold
atoms. The research explores novel quantum phases and emergent symmetries with
cold atoms which are not accessible in usual solid state systems and provides
guidance for new experiments. The application of symmetry principles is
essential for this project which not only deepens our understanding but also
provides the guidance to new discoveries. A variety of methods in condensed
matter physics and field theory are employed, including bosonization, the
renormalization group, the large-N method, the self-consistent mean-field
theory, and band structure calculations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first research
topic is the study of novel quantum phases in high orbital bands in optical
lattices. The p-orbital bosons exhibit complex-valued many-body wave functions
characterized by the formation of on-site orbital angular momentum moments. The
research encompasses orbital superfluidity in various lattices which exhibit
collinear ordering (e.g., staggered and stripe-like), non-collinear ordering,
and ''frustrated'' distributions of orbital angular momentum moments. For
fermionic orbital systems, the research will focus on the honeycomb lattice,
which is a p_xy-orbital counterpart of graphene. The second research topic is
the study of large spin physics with cold fermions. Particular attention is paid
to spin-3/2 systems which possess a generic SO(5) symmetry without fine tuning.
The symmetry gives rise to important consequences such as the protected
degeneracy in collective excitations, new properties of the quantum Monte-Carlo
sign problem, the quintet pairing superfluidity, and the four-fermion
quartetting superfluidity. Planned investigations include quantum magnetism in
the spin-3/2 systems and other large spin systems as well, such as the
pseudospin-1 systems and the spin-5/2 systems. The research will provide new
ideas on exotic orbital superfluidity, orbital exchange physics, and emergent
quantum magnetic states. It also suggests new directions for future experiments.
Knowledge gained from this research deepens our understanding on strong
correlation physics in both cold atom and condensed matter
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research lies at the interface between
condensed matter and cold atom physics and will benefit both fields. Students
will receive training in the application of the symmetry principles and the
research will stimulate students to develop broad interests and skills in the
frontiers of strongly correlated systems. Aspects of the research, particularly
the underlying theoretical techniques, form part of the subject matter of the
advanced physics courses being developed by the PI at his
university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports theoretical research and education that seeks to predict new states of
matter composed of ultracold atoms in artificial crystals of light. Researchers
have found that atoms can be trapped in modulated laser beams much like
electrons are trapped in the force fields of atomic nuclei in a crystalline
solid. Electrons have two internal configurations; these are related to their
magnetic properties. Atoms can have many more internal configurations, leading
to possible new states of matter that have no counterparts in conventional
materials, but have intriguing properties and may display interesting phenomena.
The research develops theories to explain the novel quantum mechanical
properties of these cold atoms in crystals of light. The theories provide
guidance for new experiments, deepening our understanding of quantum physics and
states of matter and leading to new discoveries. This is fundamental research
that lies at the interface of atomic and condensed matter physics. However,
systems of cold atoms are intriguing and may hold possibilities for future
technologies. Conspicuous among these is the potential to realize powerful new
methods of computation based on the principles of quantum mechanics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research lies at the interface between condensed
matter and cold atom physics and will benefit both fields. Students will receive
training in the application of the symmetry principles and the research will
stimulate students to develop broad interests and skills in the frontiers of
strongly correlated systems. Aspects of the research, particularly the
underlying theoretical techniques, form part of the subject matter of the
advanced physics courses being developed by the PI at his
university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;