* 0804863
* Nanowire-Based High-Frequency, High-Q Electromechanical Resonators
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Wei Lu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2012
* USD 300,000.00

ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to develop
high-frequency, high-quality factor (Q) nano-electromechanical resonators and
integrated resonator/sensor systems. The approach is to build flexural-mode
electromechanical resonators using chemically synthesized nanowires, either
after growth or through a controlled direct-growth method. The nanowire
resonator system offers both GHz operation potential and reduced internal and
clamping losses due to its small size, single-crystalline material structure,
smooth surfaces and a large aspect ratio.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merits: A systematic approach to improve the quality factor and the resonance
frequency will be carried out through carefully designed material studies,
device fabrication and analysis. Integration of nanowire resonators with other
on-chip components will be explored through selective growth of nanowire
bridges. Quantum-limited position measurements will be attempted by coupling a
GHz resonator with an electrical transducer. The high-frequency, high-Q system
will be suitable for a number of applications including ultra-sensitive mass,
force and position detection, and open new frontiers such as mechanical quantum
states and entanglement of the mechanical/electrical degrees of freedom.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This program will provide educational and
training opportunities for at least one graduate and one undergraduate student
at any given year, with an emphasis on recruiting students from underrepresented
groups. Knowledge and techniques developed during research will be incorporated
into a new, comprehensive undergraduate course and disseminated to the general
public through publications, technology transfer, websites and a textbook.
Students in inner-city, high-need school districts will also be engaged through
a research experience for teaches program, high-school class visits and online
exhibits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;