* 0804107
* Modeling the Tropical Atmosphere-Ocean System:  Determining the Causes of Near Future Subtropical Drying
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Mark Cane, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 06/30/2012
* USD 543,251.00

Drying of the subtropics is a ubiquitous and robust result within model
projections of 21st century climate. This drying impacts several areas with
important agricultural economies and rising populations, most notably northern
Mexico, the southwestern United States, southern Europe, North Africa and the
Middle East. According to the models, this drying sets in immediately in the
future. The projected amplitude is such that the U.S. Southwest will go over to
a permanent Dust Bowl or 1950s drought level of aridity in the next few years to
decades. While the future drought raises the specter of a return of conditions
akin to Medieval mega droughts those have been linked to persistent La Nina-like
states but future droughts appear to be a result of general
warming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research will be conducted to determine the causes
of the drying of the Southwest and the subtropics using coupled General
Circulation Models (GCMs) and simplified models. Both thermodynamic changes -
whereby rising humidity leads to amplification of existing patterns of water
vapor transport by the mean circulation, making dry areas drier and wet areas
wetter - and changes in atmospheric circulation that shift patterns of
precipitation and evaporation are involved. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators will &lt;br/&gt;a) determine within coupled GCMs the relative
contributions of thermodynamical and dynamical mechanisms to subtropical drying
and what changes in atmospheric circulation (MMC, transient eddies and
stationary waves) are responsible for the dynamical contribution to drying
indifferent areas,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;b) use diagnoses of coupled GCM and a
hierarchy of simplified models to determine the causes of the changes in
atmospheric circulation, examine the impacts of changes in tropical and
extratropical SSTs and tropospheric temperatures, and study low level warming at
higher latitudes and stratospheric cooling,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;c) determine
the interactions between eddies, the mean circulation and water vapor transports
that underlie shifts in precipitation and evaporation zones and subtropical
drying, examining both winter and summer seasons, and&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;d)
contrast the dynamics of tropical forcing of naturally-occurring droughts with
the dynamics of anthropogenic drought as a means to identify the causes of
current and future drought.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit of the
research comes from understanding the fundamentals of how the tropical and
global atmosphere circulation and hydrological cycle respond to external forcing
which will lead to an improved understanding of the general circulation, in
particular, the interactions between eddies, the mean flow and moist
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader implications of the research concern the
future of water resources in the arid lands of North America. The work will
improve understanding of model projections of human-induced climate change and
subtropical drying and, hence, aid assigning of confidence to the predictions.
The PIs will communicate results to the climate research community and also to
those making water-related decisions and work to educate a wider public on these
matters through publications, open addresses, the media and the
internet.&lt;br/&gt;