* 0804597
* Regularized Dimension Reduction for High Dimensional Data
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Sunduz Keles, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2011
* USD 100,001.00

With the recent advancements in biotechnology such as the use of genomewide
microarrays and high throughput sequencing, regression-based modeling of high
dimensional data in biological sciences has never been more important. The
investigator aims to develop a regularized dimension reduction method for very
high dimensional linear regression problems. The main thrust of the research is
based on a well-established dimension reduction technique named Partial Least
Squares (PLS) regression which has been heavily used in several scientific
research areas where ill-posed problems commonly arise. The proposed work 1)
theoretically investigates the suitability of PLS for very high dimensional
regression settings where the number of predictors highly exceeds the available
sample size; 2) proposes a regularization scheme that promotes variable
selection in addition to dimension reduction; constructs rigorous mathematical
formulations of the regularization scheme and characterizes their analytical
solutions; 3) develops an efficient algorithm implementing the proposed
framework. Extensions to interrelated classification and censored data settings
are also considered.

The proposed work, when completed and disseminated, will provide a powerful
simultaneous dimension reduction and variable selection framework relevant for
all fields of scientific research that concern high dimensional ill-posed
regression problems. This will allow scientists to analyze high-dimensional data
with efficient dimension reduction and increased interpretability. The PI is
actively involved in collaborations with biologists, biochemists, geneticists,
and medical doctors. The research emanating from this proposal will therefore
have strong interdisciplinary flavor and will be implemented, tested and tuned
to address many real scientific questions of interest. The PI will apply the
proposed research to problems arising in studying the variation of gene
expression, transcription regulation, and binding properties of DNA binding
proteins, where the selection of relevant variables is as important as having
excellent predictive power. The project will integrate research and education by
working closely with both graduate and undergraduate students.