* 0804158
* Polyoxometalate-Containing Diblock Copolymers: Synthesis, Self-Assembly and Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Yong Wang, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* Freddy Khoury
* 06/30/2012
* USD 300,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;One exciting development in recent years on
polyoxometalates (POMs), a fascinating type of molecular anionic cluster with
sizes in the nanometer region, is that new chemistry has finally allowed the
rational and controlled incorporation of POM clusters into organic ?à-conjugated
systems. It is now conceivable to envision next-generation POM-containing
hybrids which offer morphological control and possess ordered micro- (and/or
nano-) domain structures. This proposal indeed aims at preparing unprecedented
hybrid diblock copolymers with one flexible block containing POM clusters as
pendants and the other block a ?à-conjugated polymer. One fundamental question
to be carefully addressed is how attached ¡§giant¡¨ ionic clusters affect the
self-assembly process and what new morphologies may result. One specific
application to be targeted is for solar cells. If phase-separated bicontinuous
networks can be realized from hybrid rod-coil diblock copolymers where the POM
clusters aggregate in one domain while conjugated ?à-segments arrange in the
other, efficient photoinduced charge separation and transport may be attainable.
Such hybrid diblock copolymers are thus potentially new efficient photovoltaic
materials. In addition to achieving efficient charge transport through diblock
copolymer self-assembly, sub-phase liquid crystal order, including both nematic
and discotic liquid crystalline phases, are judiciously designed to further
improve charge transporting properties. &lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:
&lt;br/&gt;Energy shortage is one of the most important issues facing
industrialized nations in the 21st century. Harvesting solar energy using solar
cells is one of the most appealing and environmentally friendly approaches.
While conventional semiconductor-based solar cells have been in existence for
over half a century now, these cells are still too expensive for broad
applications. Compared to traditional solar cells, polymer-based cells enjoy a
variety of advantages such as low fabrication cost, light weight, substrate
flexibility, good mechanical properties, etc. The issue with polymer solar cells
has been the poor power conversion efficiency. This proposal aims at developing
conceptually new hybrid polymers where electron-accepting inorganic clusters are
brought together with organic block copolymers to facilitate photo-induced
charge separation and subsequent charge transport. These hybrid polymers not
only represent a brand new type of material on which fundamental scientific
questions can be addressed, but are also potentially highly efficient
photovoltaic materials. The economic and social impact of a breakthrough in
polymer solar cell research is enormous. The project¡¦s multidisciplinary nature
will offer students, including undergraduates and high school students, ample
opportunities to develop intellectual and technical skills in a diverse area.
The project will also allow the PI to continue to expand his outreach to more
underrepresented and disadvantaged students in the greater Kansas City
metropolitan area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;