* 0804363
* Control of Electrostatic Interactions in Complex Biological Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2008,02/28/2010
* Gerard Wong, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* David A. Brant
* 02/28/2010
* USD 256,140.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0804363 PI: Wong, Gerard ORG: University of Illinois

Title: Control of Electrostatic Interactions in Complex Biological Systems

INTELLECTUAL MERIT: This research program aims to use recently developed
knowledge of electrostatics in aqueous media to understand and control complex
biological systems governed by a hierarchy of interactions, of which
electrostatics is only one part. The aim is to go beyond academic, prototypical
electrostatic problems, and engage outstanding unsolved problems in biology. In
biological systems, electrostatics coexists with other interactions such as the
hydrophobic effect, hydrogen bonding, and geometric/osmotic effects. The
proposal addresses three unsolved problems for which such hybrid interactions
are essential. First is the formation of complexes of antimicrobial proteins
(i.e., lysozyme) with oppositely charged polyelectrolyte (i.e., F-actin) to
understand and then control the tendency to form stable complexes. In addition
to its potential for biomedical impact, this study is motivated by basic
questions about the interactions between periodic charge-densities with
different periodicities. Second is a set of X-ray studies of mixtures of model
lipid vesicles and pore-inducing TAT (trans-acting activator of transcription)
proteins. This section will include studies of the particular role of the
positively charged amino acids arginine vs lysine (which seems to go beyond the
role of electrostatics to some other mechanism) and include exploratory studies
on the ability of TAT to carry cargo across a membrane. The third major activity
is a study of synthetic pore-forming antimicrobial compounds synthesized by a
collaborator at the University of Massachusetts. X-ray scattering will be used
to measure pore structure as a function of concentrations in model membranes and
the results will be compared to bacterial response for different variants of the
antimicrobial compound.

BROADER IMPACTS: Most interactions of biological macromolecules involve forces
of several types. The proposal attempts to understand the resultant effect of
these hybrid forces in complex systems. The mode of action of membrane pore
forming peptides, especially the antimicrobial peptides, is not yet understood.
This project seeks fundamental understanding of how naturally occurring and
synthetic antimicrobial peptides and other membrane pore formers work. The
project provides for highly interdisciplinary training of students and
postdoctorals who will gain experience not only in the basic physics and
physical chemistry of biological systems but who will also become familiar with
the resources of national and international light source facilities. The PI has
an excellent record of involving undergraduates in his research program, many of
whom are coauthors on publications. He plans to continue to host undergraduate
researchers and to give these students the opportunity to experience a research
environment that leads many to continue on a research pathway in graduate and
professional school. The PI is anxious to expand his outreach activity to the
K-12 educational sector beyond the typical "one-shot" university Open House
programs and to develop a more enduring relationship with K-12 students and
teachers. To this end he has established a partnership with a local middle
school, and he will make repeated visits to the school with the goal of "making
the strange familiar and the familiar strange" through a series of presentations
and activities that give the students and teachers hands-on experience with the
properties of interesting materials.



