* 0804133
* Study of random walks in random environments, and random matrices
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Ofer Zeitouni, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 09/30/2012
* USD 280,000.00

Random walks are arguably the stochastic processes most studied by
mathematicians, having the widest range of applications in fields as diverse as
the physical sciences, engineering, and the social sciences. Though the theory
of random walks is by now well developed, this is not at all the case when one
changes the medium in which the walk evolves to a random medium, thus obtaining
a random walk in random environment (RWRE). Such RWRE's can be used to model
many problems of motion in random media in the physical and engineering
sciences, and are mathematically appealing because on the one hand the model is
very simply stated, while on the other hand established tools for studying
processes in random media are not applicable in the study of RWRE. The goal of
the current proposal is to develop new basic probabilistic techniques that will
allow one to make provable predictions concerning the behavior of RWRE. It is
expected that such techniques will be useful in the study of other processes,
and link naturally to the study of trapping models and reinforced random walks.
While not explicitly targeted in this proposal, trapping models have recently
been used to study the environmental impact of nuclear waste, and RWRE's can
naturally be used in this context to model the spread of contamination in a real
environment, once the required mathematical background and tools are in
place.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary focus of the proposed
research is the long term behavior of RWRE (random walks in random
environments). More precisely, one looks at random walks on thed-dimensional
lattice, whose transition probabilities form a random field indexed by the
vertices of the lattice. Not only is the RWRE providing a serious mathematical
challenge, many of the results proved in this field, especially in the one
dimensional case, stand in sharp contrast with the behavior of classical random
walk. For example, in dimension 1, subdiffusive behavior and aging phenomena are
present, whereas in high dimension one may construct RWRE's with nonzero
(averaged) local drift pointing in one direction while the walk drifts away
(with positive speed)in the opposite direction. Some of the mathematical
challenge emanates from the fact that in the multidimensional case, conditioned
on the transition probabilities random field, the RWRE is not reversible. This
precludes the use of much of the available theory of homogenization, and
requires the development of new techniques, most notably through the use of
regeneration times and of renormalization ideas. In spite of rapid progress that
was achieved in the last few years by several researchers including Bolthausen,
Sznitman, Varadhan, Zerner, and the PI, many fundamental questions remain
unanswered. Among these one notes the existence of 0-1 laws, laws of large
numbers in full generality, transience and recurrence criteria, the existence
(or non-existence) of sub-diffusive behavior for high dimension, and the
behavior of RWRE's in mixing (as opposed to i.i.d.)environments. One direction
of intensive study will be the extension of existing renormalization techniques,
in order to fully resolve the perturbative regime of RWRE.