* 0804873
* Protein Adsorption and Activity on Phase Separated Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Christopher Siedlecki, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Srinivasarao
* 08/31/2012
* USD 375,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0804873 PI: Siedlecki, Christopher ORG: Penn State
Medical College&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Protein Adsorption and Activity on
Phase Separated Polymers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: Polyurethane
biomaterials dominate blood-contacting applications, but the fundamental basis
for the hemocompatibility of these materials has yet to be understood. The goal
of this proposal is to elucidate fundamental relationships between polyurethane
microphase separated structures having characteristic dimensions similar to
plasma proteins and biologic responses at the molecular scale by judicious
application of materials imaging, characterization, and molecular analysis. In
particular, the proposal seeks to relate polyurethane phase segregation at the
hydrated polymer interface with the activity of adsorbed proteins to test the
central hypothesis that: The chemical nature and nanoscale properties of phase
separated biomaterials creates a distribution of unique interfacial environments
that, in aggregate, influences conformation and activity of adsorbed blood-
plasma proteins, in a manner that understandably correlates with phase
distribution and chemistry. This hypothesis will be tested by investigating the
role that molecular level surface properties play on the adsorption, structure
and activity of plasma proteins in surface-induced thrombogenesis through
completion of the following three tasks. (1) Characterize the interfacial
environment of the separated microphases under physiologic buffer conditions for
films of polyurethane copolymers by using atomic force microscope probes
modified with self-assembled monolayers of controlled chemistry and with
relevant plasma proteins. Determine the distribution of microdomains and the
surface area occupied by both individual domains and hard segment/soft segment
in aggregate for different polymer chemistries. (2) Quantify the adsorption of
selected proteins to hard and soft polyurethane domains using atomic force
microscopy under physiologic buffer conditions. (3) Determine changes in
individual protein molecules by assessing the activity of adsorbed proteins
using functional labeling of individual protein molecules and AFM bioadhesion
measurements in order to establish structure/function relationships for each of
the different polymer phases. Compare molecular measurements to traditional
platelet adhesion measurements in order to address the role of microdomain
properties on hemocompatibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: A
persistent issue for materials intended for applications in contact with living
tissue is compatibility between the tissue and the exogenous material. Materials
intended for contact with blood must not provoke clotting if they are to be
useful. This study addresses fundamental issues of blood protein-biomaterial
interactions. While focusing on polyurethane materials, the generality of its
approach promises to illuminate the broader field of protein-biomaterial
compatibility. Integration of research and education is addressed here primarily
in terms of research experience for students. Postdoctoral and summertime
undergraduate students will be supported by the award. The PI has an excellent
record of hosting high school students in his laboratory and plans to continue
this practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;