* 0804068
* 2008 Bi-Lateral Workshop Under the Sino-US Earthquake Studies Protocol, May 20-23, 2008, Boulder, Colorado
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2007,11/30/2011
* E.Robert Engdahl, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Leonard E. Johnson
* 11/30/2011
* USD 152,474.00

0804068&lt;br/&gt;Engdahl&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides support for a
bi-lateral workshop under the SINO-US protocol for earthquake studies to be held
in Boulder, Colorado between May 20 and 23, 2008.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Protocol for Scientific and Technical Cooperation in Earthquake Studies among
the Chinese Earthquake Administration (CEA), the National Natural Science
Foundation (NSFC) on the Chinese side and the National Science Foundation (NSF),
the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) on the U.S. side was first signed in January,
1980 and has been extended in five year increments since then. Both sides have
affirmed the value of the Protocol and consider it to be one of the most
successful S&amp;T protocols between the two countries. Activity under the
Protocol covers various aspects of earthquake research, earthquake engineering
and hazard mitigation and data exchange. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the chief
reasons the Protocol has been so successful is because it has been flexible
enough to take advantage of the evolving opportunities presented by big changes
in the science and technology of earthquake research. At the last Protocol
coordinator's meeting in Beijing in 2007, it was agreed by both sides that we
are now at a point in the evolution of our cooperation where we are truly equal
partners in every sense of the word. We both now have large arrays of various
kinds of instruments producing vast amounts of data; we both have the necessary
tools and theoretical expertise to analyze the data; and we both have now
developed the infrastructure to support these activities. It was further agreed
that the next step in the evolution of the Protocol should be an increased
emphasis on cooperative research projects where scientists from both sides are
involved in the fieldwork (be it in China or in the US), in the analysis of the
data and in the publication of the results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop
will be the first in a series that aims to plan and develop the coordination
needed for scientific collaboration to move forward efficiently, effectively,
and in a timely fashion. A particular focus will be on promoting the exchange of
data, methodology, and software, the training of students and fostering
collaboration and exchange of early-career scientists. The workshop(s) will be
designed to catalyze scientific collaborations, including plans for extended
visits between US and Chinese scientists. There will be three principal research
focus areas for the first workshop: (1) Natural hazards; (2) Structure of the
crust and uppermost mantle; and (3) Crustal deformation and active continental
tectonics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On May 24, 2006 there was a ceremony
celebrating the opening of NSF's research operations office in Beijing. At that
ceremony, Clark Randt, US Ambassador to China said, "With China's increasing
importance as a world science and technology 'player', it is vital for the U.S.
to sustain interactions with international counterparts and specifically with
China's rapidly growing science sector." In addition, William Chang, director of
the new office, pointed out that, "It is important for the U.S. scientific
community, especially young researchers, to be aware of and consider
collaborating with colleagues in China in this environment" The workshop
supported by this award will promote these goals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;