* 0804984
* Collaborative Research: Enabling Magnetoplasticity in Polycrystalline Ni-Mn-Ga by Reducing Internal Constraints Through Porosity
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2012
* Peter Mullner, Boise State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Taleff
* 04/30/2012
* USD 336,000.00

TECHNICAL: Magnetic-field-induced twinning is responsible for the high
magnetoplastic strains achievable in monocrystalline Ni-Mn-Ga. By contrast,
polycrystalline Ni-Mn-Ga shows no magnetoplasticity because twinning is
inhibited by internal incompatibility stresses developed between adjacent
grains. The PIs recently discovered that porosity, because it reduces internal
stresses, allows limited twinning to occur in polycrystalline Ni-Mn-Ga foams,
resulting in magnetoplastic strains. Then, designing the foam architecture and
grain microstructure will allow tuning continuously the magnetoplastic strain of
these foams between those of a polycrystal (~0%) and a single crystal (~10%). In
this basic study, PIs will develop a fundamental understanding of how foam
architecture and grain microstructure enable magnetic-field-induced strains in
polycrystalline magnetic shape-memory alloys, leading to experimentally-
validated models that can quantitatively predict the magnitude of magnetoplastic
strain for a given foam structure. To achieve this goal, fundamental
experimental and theoretical studies of the mechanisms responsible for
magnetoplasticity in the individual struts of foams will be carried out. The
foam architecture will be varied, in terms of node and strut volume fraction as
well as strut size and aspect ratio, by using two foam manufacturing methods
(casting and powder metallurgy). The foam grain size and texture will be
tailored: the ratio of grain to strut diameter will be varied from much smaller
than unity (polycrystalline microstructure) to comparable to unity (bamboo
microstructure), and the texture will be varied from random to strong fiber
texture. Finally, the magneto-mechanical properties of the resulting foams will
be characterized and numerically modeled on two length scales: at a shorter
length scale, models based on dislocation-dislocation and dislocation-interface
interactions will be developed to predict the effect of free surfaces on the
constitutive behavior of Ni-Mn-Ga in small volumes; at larger length scale,
finite-element models (FEM) will be created to predict, based on the
constitutive behavior, the overall foam magneto-mechanical behavior. NON-
TECHNICAL: The novel magnetic shape-memory foams, produced by the PIs in
preliminary research, exhibit strains and response times comparable to Terfenol
D, the best commercial magnetostrictive material, and are expected to show
further improvements based on these fundamental study. As compared to Terfenol
D, Ni-Mn-Ga foams have lower density and contain less expensive metals, and may
thus grow rapidly in industrial importance, thus having a transformative effect
on various sensor and actuator technologies. Also, while the present research
will focus on Ni-Mn-Ga, the mechanisms studied are general in nature, and will
thus apply to all other magnetic shape-memory alloys. Beyond sensor and actuator
applications, the open foam porosity may enable new applications such as (i)
micropumps without moving parts where fluids are displaced by magnetically
deforming pores, or (ii) efficient magnetic cooling devices with high heat-
transfer rates due to the large specific areas of foams. Finally, this project
will educate two graduate students and several undergraduate students, whose
recruitment will emphasize women and minorities. Beside research, the students
will participate in various outreach activities using the shape-memory materials
to introduce materials science and technology to young women, minorities, and
grade school (K-12) students. The PIs have submitted a provisional patent and
intend to pursue industrial applications which is key for transitioning the
field to the US high-technology industry.