* 0804737
* Solid State NMR Studies of Disordered Solids-Ionic Conductors and Battery Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Clare Grey, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 06/30/2012
* USD 375,000.00

This renewal award to SUNY Stony Brook by the Solid State Materials Chemistry
program in the Division of Materials Research is aimed at understanding how
electrode materials and anionic conductors function under operating conditions.
With this project, Professor Grey will be building, testing and utilizing a NMR
probe designed to acquire NMR spectra of functioning and intact lithium-ion
batteries. Lithiated silicon anode materials, which are in metastable
crystalline phase, will be studied using a combination of in and ex-situ 7Li and
29Si Magic Angle Spinning Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy and pair
distribution function analysis of x-ray and neutron scattering. A second
application involves the investigation of nanoparticles of layered materials
such as LixCoO2, to determine the effect that size and morphology have on the
various phase transitions that occur on charging this material, and the
stability of the charged materials in the electrolyte. Nanoparticulate cathode
materials are expected to have applications in high power batteries in, for
example, hybrid electric or electric vehicles. The role of local structures on
long-range anionic conductivity of electrode materials such as perovskite (such
as LaGaO3) and browmillerite (such as Ba2In2O5) along with materials that can be
viewed as intermediates between these end-number structures will also be studied
as the second part of this study. Variable temperature NMR spectroscopy (e.g.,
71Ga, 89Y NMR) of the B sites will be used to determine the coordination
environments of the cations as a function of temperature, while 17Â¬O NMR
spectroscopy will be used to determine the mobility of the oxide ions in
different local environments of the electrode
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The materials investigated by this program will
have significant technological relevance for the design of the next generation
of materials for use in Lithium ion batteries and fuel cells. The use of silicon
as an anode material for a Lithium ion batteries is likely to be of great
commercial interest. In addition, the project will provide fundamental insight
in the design and development of the next generation of materials for energy
sources, improved batteries and fuel cells. Graduate, undergraduate and high
students working in this project through their research and classroom
experiences will be trained in sophisticated techniques with an appreciation to
their use to solve important technical problems. &lt;br/&gt;