* 0804109
* Materials and Mechanisms of Multiferroicity
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Sang-Wook Cheong, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 08/31/2012
* USD 360,000.00

**Non-Technical Abstract**&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magnetism and ferroelectricity
are imperative bases for current technology and the quest for multiferroic
materials is of great technological and fundamental importance. The significant
cross-coupling effects between magnetism and ferroelectricity tend to occur at
low temperatures--far below room temperature. To discover new multiferroics with
enhanced cross-coupling effects at room temperature, and consequently to exploit
tunable multifunctional devices with multiferroics, the project will investigate
the microscopic origin of multiferroicity, attempt to unveil the dynamics
relevant to the coupling effects, and explore new materials. The proposed
studies will have a significant impact not only on specific issues in the field
of multiferroics but also on a broad class of multifunctional complex materials,
where lattice structuring plays an essential role in electronic and magnetic
properties. The centerpiece of the proposal is a wide spectrum of collaboration,
so a multiplicity of techniques and skills will be utilized. The proposed study
will further strengthen the role of research in all levels of education. For
example, high school students will be involved in the proposed research through
the Partners in Science program, organized by the Liberty Science Center, Jersey
City, New Jersey, which the PI has continuously involved in for the last 10
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;**Technical
Abstract**&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These projects focus on exploring new materials
and understanding mechanisms of multiferroics, where magnetism and
ferroelectricity coexist and can be cross-coupled to each other. The spin-
lattice coupling, which is the ultimate driving force for the novel effects in
multiferroics, is often relatively weak in these compounds. In addition, the
critical temperature, Tc, below which couplings of various degrees of freedom
take place is frequently well below room temperature. In order to discover new
multiferroics with enhanced cross-coupling effects and Tc, and consequently to
exploit tunable multifunctional devices with multiferroics, this project will
attempt to connect multiferroicity with microscopic spin-orbital
coupling/exchange striction and unveil the relevant dynamics. These proposed
studies will have a significant impact not only on specific issues in the field
of multiferroics but also on a broad class of multifunctional complex materials,
where lattice plays an essential role on the electronic and magnetic properties.
The centerpiece of this proposal is a wide spectrum of collaboration, so a
multiplicity of techniques and skills will be used. The proposed study will
further strengthen the role of research in all levels of education. For example,
high school students will be involved in the proposed research through the
Partners in Science program, organized by the Liberty Science Center, Jersey
City, New Jersey, which the PI has continuously involved in for the last 10
years.