* 0804428
* RUI: The Study of Multiple Hydrogen Bonds on Mesophase Structure and Stability
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2012
* Kurt Wiegel, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 05/31/2012
* USD 180,000.00

This RUI award to University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire by the Solid State
Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research is to study
the creation of new liquid crystalline systems, which will provide valuable
insight into the ability of a mesophase to stabilize using multiple hydrogen
bonding associations. Initial investigations by Professor Wiegel in this field
have pointed to three ideal systems for this study: a) benzoic acid/pyridine
associations (single hydrogen bonds); b) pyridone dimers (double hydrogen
bonds); and c) imide/diaminotriazine assemblies (triple hydrogen bonds). Each of
these systems forms a strong overall association and conceptually possesses the
linearity and rigidity to form calamitic, discotic and banana-shaped liquid
crystals. In order to study the effects of various mesogenic shapes and sizes,
the project will alter the rigidity of the mesogens, as well as the flexibility
and length of the tails/spacer groups and forming both small molecules (for each
of the mesogen types) and polymers (for the calamitic and banana mesogens).
These systems will be studied using spectroscopic, X-ray and thermal analytical
techniques. Results from this project are expected to provide insight into the
nature of the formation of a mesophase, and a comparison of the quantity and
strength of supramolecular forces involved in the formation of liquid crystals.
In particular, we will learn how the mesophase is stabilized when the number of
hydrogen bonds is increased. In addition, these data could have a broad impact
on the field of supramolecular liquid crystals. The applications of hydrogen
bonded mesogens are limited by the fragility of the associative chain structure.
An understanding of the stability of a mesophase as a function of hydrogen bond
strength and multiplicity could have considerable impact on the optical display
industry. The multiple hydrogen bond polymer and network assembles have shown
physical properties superior to their covalent analogs. Imparting similar
characteristics to supramolecular liquid crystalline systems would provide new
materials, combining the stabilities of covalent species with the lability and
healing capabilities of hydrogen bonded associative chain structures.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Liquid Crystals have become a mainstay of the scientific and
technological community, emerging as one of the most important optical materials
of the past decade. The assembly of liquid crystalline materials using non-
covalent interactions offers many interesting areas involving living polymeric
systems and the ability of the mesogens to self ?heal? and repair macroscale
structural defects. A study of liquid-crystalline systems capable of forming
one, two or three hydrogen bonds per association will lead to an understanding
of the stability of liquid crystalline phases as related to the assembly of the
associative chain structures. In addition, this research will be used to enhance
research infrastructure and support human resource development at University of
Wisconsin- Eau Claire, which is a low-cost public institution that has a long-
established tradition of strong undergraduate/faculty research collaboration.
Almost half of the students at the University are of first generation students
from low-income families, and about 60% female. The research activities
described could greatly enhance student training and intellectual development
through hands-on experience with sophisticated equipment and the opportunity to
present their findings at regional and national meeting. These experiences will
be valuable steps in the training of the next generation of
scientists&lt;br/&gt;