* 0804449
* Periodic Polymeric Materials: Deaf and Blind Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Edwin Thomas, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Freddy Khoury
* 06/30/2012
* USD 540,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY Periodic and quasiperiodic polymeric structures at the sub-
micron and nano scale offer many interesting scientific opportunities for
fundamental studies of material behavior at these length scales. This proposal
describes a unified approach for the experimental investigation and theoretical
modeling of periodic polymer materials which can simultaneously act as
hypersonic phononic crystals and visible wavelength photonic crystals.
Structures will be fabricated using block polymer self-assembly and interference
and electron beam lithography. We plan to explore novel photonic bandgap
structures fabricated via double inversion techniques as well as through direct
fabrication with unique organic-inorganic hybrid monomers. Brillouin light
scattering is an ideally suited method for the direct experimental measurement
of phonon dispersion relations while transmission and reflection measurements of
incident light will be employed to assess the optical dispersion relations. FEM
modeling provides the ability to model elastic wave propagation in a wide range
of bicomponent periodic structures and numerical techniques are well established
for modeling light wave propagation. The combination of these tools and
approaches constitutes a complete methodology for fabrication and
characterization, measurement and modeling of this exciting new class of
materials.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY Dual band gap materials for sound and light (?Deaf and
Blind Materials?) are a step towards creation of material systems with unusual
properties. Success in the present endeavor will provide a pathway forward for
construction of multicomponent, hierarchically structured materials designed to
provide a set of key properties. This work will help us understand the basic
nature of the propagation of light and sound through nanostructured polymeric
materials. This work promises to enhance the foundations for experimental
studies of phononic, photonic and importantly dual band gap photonic-phononic
crystals and open new pathways towards achieving new material properties
(e.g.tailored thermal conductivity, significantly enhanced acousto-optical
coupling) that can have important technological applications since the
properties of the periodically structured material are no longer just due to the
inherent material properties, but can be dominated by the role of wave
interference within the structure to give novel and indeed revolutionary
properties (e.g. localization of sound and light to specific places in the
material) that are simply unattainable otherwise. Our efforts will develop both
experimental techniques and skilled people to use them at the cutting edge of
what is really the emerging new field of ?periodic materials.? Moreover, working
with sound and light waves is a tremendous advantage for inspiring young minds
to the wonders of science. This is because light waves and sound waves are
ubiquitous ? we are essentially immersed in them every day and are continually
receiving and sending such waves. The non-intuitive interactions of these waves
with periodic structures elicits genuine awe. We plan to provide block copolymer
films on substrates that can be readily manipulated by ?kitchen chemistry? using
various stimuli such as vinegar and salt solutions. Motivated by our interests
to introduce students to the interesting ways that waves interact with
periodically structured materials at the micro- and nano- scale to create new
properties as well as to highlite/motivate the study of certain topics in
freshman year math, including Fourier series, we have just completed a
monograph, ?Periodic Materials and Interference Lithography: photonics,
phononics and mechanics,? to be published in summer, 2008 by Wiley-VCH.

