* 0804477
* Theory of Quantum Electromechanical Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Miles Blencowe, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2012
* USD 204,000.00

Technical Summary:

This award supports theoretical research and education with an aim to advance
understanding of how classical dynamics arises from quantum mechanical dynamics.
The quest to demonstrate behavior described by quantum mechanics in the
mechanical properties of nanoscale and larger structures is of fundamental
significance for understanding how the macroscopic classical world emerges by
approximation from the quantum world, as well as for advancing the state of the
art in ultrasensitive measurement technology. Experimental efforts are currently
underway that employ either optomechanical or solid state electromechanical
schemes to realize these goals. In the former schemes, the quantum coherent
nature of optical cavity modes are employed to drive a typically larger-than-
micronscale mechanically compliant mirror into a nonclassical state, as well as
to measure this state. In the latter schemes, a controllable quantum coherent
superconducting device drives a nano-to-micronscale mechanical resonator into a
nonclassical state via capacitive or inductive coupling, as well as measures
this state. This research project consists of three interrelated thrusts that
are particularly relevant to the superconducting device schemes, commonly called
?Quantum Electromechanical Systems.? The first thrust will investigate the
significance of nonlinearities in amplifier dynamics for approaching the quantum
limit of displacement detection, as well as for the related issue of using
detector back-action to cool the mechanical resonator to its quantum ground
state. The second thrust will address the contribution of tunneling two level
system defects to the damping and decoherence rates of nano-to-micronscale
mechanical resonators at dilution fridge and lower temperatures. The third
thrust will analyze schemes to generate and detect entangled and superposition
states of nano-to-micronscale mechanical resonators, as well as measure their
decoherence rates. The schemes involve superconducting qubits embedded within
microwave cavities that are employed for both qubit state control and readout.
This theoretical research project is closely linked to experiments.

The activity outlined in project one will provide training for a graduate
student in theoretical physics. Projects two and three are intended for two
rising junior undergraduates with an introductory-level understanding of quantum
mechanics. Through working on the projects during their junior and senior years,
they will graduate with a relatively advanced understanding of open system
quantum dynamics.

Non-Technical Summary:

This award supports theoretical research and education with an aim to advance
our understanding of how the familiar world governed by classical mechanics
emerges from the seemingly counterintuitive laws of quantum mechanics that
describe phenomena on the scale of atoms and across even smaller length scales.
In close connection with experiment, the PI will study tiny mechanical
resonators that are driven to oscillate by devices that are described by the
rules of quantum mechanics. The operation of this sort resonator device lies at
what seems like an interface between the world governed by classical mechanics
and that governed by quantum mechanics. The study of these kinds of systems
advances fundamental knowledge and also addresses some very practical questions,
including: What are the fundamental limits of measurement? What is the most
sensitive measurement device that can be made? Questions of this kind become
more pressing as our science and technology press to every smaller length scales
with the vision of devices, electronic and mechanical, that are perhaps only few
atoms in one or more dimensions and somehow have one aspect that appears
squarely in the world of quantum mechanics and others that appear to be squarely
in the world of classical mechanics.

This research will provide valuable educational experiences for a graduate
student in theoretical physics, as well as for junior undergraduate students
with an introductory-level understanding of quantum mechanics. Through working
on the projects during their junior and senior years, the undergraduate students
will graduate with a relatively advanced understanding of dynamics at the
?divide? between classical and quantum mechanics.