* 0804189
* The Formal Proof of the Kepler Conjecture
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Thomas Hales, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2011
* USD 445,958.00

In 1972, Robin Milner created a proof-checking program at&lt;br/&gt;Stanford
University called LCF (Logic for Computable Functions). The proof-checking
program LCF and subsequent systems have been under continual development by a
dedicated group of researchers over the past 35 years. These programs have
finally reached the level of maturity that they are capable of checking every
logical inference of complex proofs such as the Four-color theorem by G.
Gonthier, the Jordan curve theorem by the PI, and the Prime number theorem by J.
Avigad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Kepler Conjecture asserts that the density
of&lt;br/&gt;a packing of congruent spheres in three dimensions is never greater
than pi/18^1/2, or approximately 0.74048. This is the oldest problem in discrete
geometry and is an important part of Hilbert's 18th problem. The problem
remained unsolved for nearly 400 years until it was finally cracked in 1998 by
S. Ferguson and the PI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of the Flyspeck project
is to produce a formal proof of the Kepler conjecture. The research of this
proposal will complete the formal proof of the key parts of the Flyspeck
Project. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This proposal intends to follow the same general
strategy that was pursued by G.&lt;br/&gt;Gonthier in the formalization of the
Four-Color theorem, that is, "to turn almost&lt;br/&gt;every mathematical
concept into a data structure or a program." This proposal&lt;br/&gt;provides
detail about how the published text of the proof of the Kepler conjecture is to
be converted to data structures or program. Specifically, many intricate proofs
can be represented in terms of a collection of labeled rooted trees. Another
part of the proposal gives details about how to automate the proofs of a
collection of problems in geometry.&lt;br/&gt;The Flyspeck project has become a
high-profile project in&lt;br/&gt;math and computer science. It has already been
the subject of many invited presentations at international conferences in math,
computer science, and philosophy. A number of graduate students
(internationally) have become involved in the project. This broad participation
will continue. The PI's Flyspeck proposal has been described in a large number
of publications with wide circulation, including the Economist (2005), Science
(2005), Nature (2003), and the New York Times.&lt;br/&gt;This proposal has the
potential to reshape the way mathematicians approach large-scale computer-
assisted proofs. Formal verification methods&lt;br/&gt;in general have the
potential to unprecedented levels of reliability to long and complex
mathematical proofs. This proposal explores novel methods to formalize a highly
complex proof.&lt;br/&gt;