* 0804145
* Theoretical Approaches to Bridge Timescales in Polymer Dynamics
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2013
* Marina Guenza, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2013
* USD 390,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education in statistical and dynamical properties of polymers. The work is
supported by the Division of Chemistry and the Division of Materials Research.
The theory enhances the basic ability to predict macroscopic properties, as
measured experimentally or described in computer simulations, based on the
microscopic molecular structure and physical parameters. The research uses
traditional methods of equilibrium (integral equations) and non-equilibrium
statistical mechanics. Guenza and coworkers employ an original approach to
describe the cooperative dynamics of a group of interacting macromolecules in
dynamically heterogeneous environments, i.e. the Cooperative Dynamics
Generalized Langevin Equation (CDGLE). This is a microscopic, site-specific,
mean-field theory, which has successfully explained the experimentally observed
center-of-mass anomalous diffusion in polymer melts, and the anomalous
relaxation of their normal modes, on the basis of intermolecular time-dependent
correlation, originated from the dynamically heterogeneous nature of polymer
liquids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research develops along three main lines or
subprojects. The first focuses on testing CDGLE and extending its range of
applicability to liquid of polymers with increasing degree of polymerization,
i.e. across the unentangled-to-entangled transition. In the second line, CDGLE
is modified to describe polymer dynamics in dilute solutions, including polymers
of biological significance such as proteins. Intramolecular potentials are
derived from molecular dynamics computer simulations. This research will build
on past success where the theory has been able to make predictions in good
quantitative agreement with experimental data of NMR relaxation, X-ray
Debye?Waller temperature factors and NMR order-parameters for the test protein
CheY. Further testing against different proteins and other experimental data is
undertaken to ensure the generality of the approach. Finally, the third
subproject extends the coarse-graining procedure, developed by Guenza and
coworkers, which maps polymers into collections of interacting soft-colloidal
particles. This procedure provides the effective intermolecular potential
entering CDGLE. The approach is extended to include a refined intramolecular
coarse-graining and the development of a procedure for multiscale modeling of
polymer liquids. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of the project extends beyond
the research. The development of this project produces computer codes which
predict these polymer properties. Once tested, the codes will be available to
the scientific community through a user-friendly website. The project is an
opportunity for the PI to continue her efforts to engage women and minorities as
she has done in past research projects. Because the work is design to have
realistic consequences, there are close collaborations with experimental groups
which further enhances the value of the professional experience for the students
in the project. Students are also involved in outreach activities to publicize
their research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports theoretical research and education in statistical and dynamical
properties of polymers. The work is supported by the Division of Chemistry and
the Division of Materials Research. The theory enhances the basic ability to
predict material properties, as measured experimentally or described in computer
simulations, based on the molecular structure and physical parameters of
constituent polymer molecules. The use of a unified approach to polymer dynamics
aids in developing a comprehensive understanding of polymer motion. The latter
has been a long-standing goal of both practical and fundamental interest in
polymer physics, since all polymeric materials (fibers, plastics, coating
materials, etc.) are processed in their liquid state. The goal is to provide a
theoretical tool that formally connects the effect of chemical parameters (e.g.,
polymer type, weight, concentration, and temperature) to the global properties
(e.g., ease of flow, hardening temperature). The tools developed will be useful
in designing custom-tailored polymeric materials of synthetic or biological
significance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of the project extends beyond the
research. The development of this project produces computer codes which predict
these polymer properties. Once tested, the codes will be made available to the
scientific community through a user-friendly website. The project is an
opportunity for the PI to continue her efforts to engage women and minorities as
she has done in past research projects. Because the work is design to have
realistic consequences, there are close collaborations with experimental groups
which further enhances the value of the professional experience for the students
in the project. Students are also involved in outreach activities to publicize
their research.&lt;br/&gt;