* 0804549
* FRG: Metalloproteins: Computational Challenges, Methods, and Tools
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Lee Pedersen, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2012
* USD 1,470,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research and the Office
of Cyberinfrastructure contribute funds to support this work. This award to an
interdisciplinary focused research group supports computational research and
education to investigate key issues related to the structure and function of
selected metalloprotiens. As this of necessity involves a multi-method approach,
the group will develop a set of computational tools for large-scale biomolecular
simulations as part of its program.&lt;br/&gt;The research team will build on
the achievements under prior NSF support through an award made on a proposal to
the Information Technology Research solicitation. Some achievements include: the
development of the highly parallel Particle Mesh Ewald Molecular Dynamics,
PMEMD, code currently incorporated into AMBER; a fast implementation of higher-
order electrostatic multipoles that is the basis of an efficient coding of the
AMOEBA force fields in AMBER; a new partitioning of the molecular electrostatic
potential; the development of pfaffian wavefunctions for quantum Monte Carlo
simulations; the coupling of ab initio molecular dynamics; and the establishment
of the new quantum Monte Carlo open source package QWalk.&lt;br/&gt;The team
will focus on investigating: (i) signal transduction Ras proteins; (ii) Vitamin
K-dependent coagulation proteins; (iii) select DNA repair enzymes, and (iv) the
folding/unfolding of metallopeptides and metalloprotein domains. Methods
development thrusts include: (i) new quantum Monte Carlo /molecular dynamics
methods and new types of variational wave functions based on pairings and
pfaffians, which allow for accurate treatment of quantum processes with
complicated multi-reference correlations; (ii) the accurate description of
electrostatics for the classical region based on Gaussian basis sets and
distributed multipoles; (iii) further development of quantum mechanics and
molecular mechanics interfaces; and (iv) developing new free-energy methods
based on adaptively biasing potentials. The developed methods will be
incorporated into the above packages and tested on multiple architectures
including the new generation of petaflop machines. This award supports
continuing curricula development in computational methods and science at the
Center for High Performance Simulation, which was founded at NC State as part of
the previous funding cycle. The group will also develop a new undergraduate
Computational Physics course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research and the Office of
Cyberinfrastructure contribute funds to support this work. This award to an
interdisciplinary focused research group supports computational research and
education to investigate key issues related to the structure and function of
selected protiens that consist of a metal atom or cluster bound to a group of
proteins that are held together by protein-protein interactions. In the process,
the team will develop a set of computational tools for large-scale computer
simulations of large molecules that occur in living
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reliable computer simulations of large complicated
molecules are extremely challenging. The team will focus on metalloproteins and
metalloenzymes ? which consist of a metal atom or cluster of atoms bound to a
group of proteins that are held together by protein-interactions. The metal atom
controls the shape of the molecule and so its biological function. It may also
enable particular biochemical reactions without directly participating in them.
These are an important class of proteins in life?s processes. Their malfunction
is the root cause of many fatal diseases. The team will develop computer
simulation techniques that will capture physical phenomena that dominate on
different length scales to make the complicated simulations to understand their
role in various processes important to life, for example how proteins are
synthesized and how DNA is repaired. The resulting cybertools will be made
available to the broader scientific community through well known suites of
cybertools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports continuing curricula
development in computational methods and science at the Center for High
Performance Simulation, which was founded at NC State as part of the previous
funding cycle. The group will also develop a new undergraduate Computational
Physics course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;