* 0804593
* Studies on Polymer Glasses, Melts, and Solutions
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Jane Lipson, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2011
* USD 300,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and education in
studies of polymer glasses, melts, and solutions. The award is being support by
the Division of Chemistry and the Division of Materials Research. The activity
largely resides in two areas, polymer phase transitions and the impact of
deuteration and local branching on the miscibility of polymer solutions and
blends.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymer thin films are studied which exhibit a
glass transition where the polymer transforms from a glassy to a rubbery solid
upon heating, a phenomenon which is usually explained through local relaxations.
Though a glass transition is not itself unusual, the recent observation that the
presence of a substrate and/or a free surface may have a long-range and
significant impact on the glass transition of the polymer stimulates this
research. The research develops theoretical models and computer simulations to
address questions such as the why shifts in the glass transition of polymeric
films may persist over tens of nanometers from the surface or substrate. There
are two scenarios investigated. In one, the polymer film is supported by a
substrate, in which case the glass transition of the film has been observed to
occur tens of degrees above the bulk temperature. Conversely, the influence of a
surface leads to a steep drop in the glass transition, particularly when the
film is free-standing (has two free surfaces). In all cases the magnitude of the
temperature shift depends on the choice of polymer and the film thickness. This
proposal outlines a new model for the glass transition of thin film polymers,
one which will address both the magnitude of the temperature shifts and the
length scales over which they occur.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second area of
research focuses on the impact of deuteration and local branching on the
miscibility of polymer solutions and blends. The replacement of hydrogen for
deuterium is employed in small angle neutron scattering experiments to study
such systems. This isotopic exchange has an impact on miscibility which ranges
from essentially nil to extremely significant. In the research carried out here,
a theoretical analysis is outlined which will lead to a predictive tool for
assessing the anticipated effect of deuteration. Another local change results in
measurable shifts in miscibility is the incorporation of branches. These
variations in local chain connectivity are characteristic of polyolefins.
Research done here builds upon initial evidence that the theoretical methods
developed to study deuteration effects can also apply for this category of
structural change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effort undertaken has broader
impacts with both technological and educational consequences. In this work the
theoretical tools developed by the PI to study complex fluids will be used to
make testable predictions on polymer glasses and mixtures. The outcome is that a
more sophisticated combination of strategies, accessible to the materials
community, will be available in solving problems relating to understanding
connections between microscopic structure and macroscopic behavior. The polymer
thin films studied here are the subject of significant interest due to their
potential for application in areas such as optics, catalysis, and electronics,
as well as their ubiquitous presence in polymer nanocomposites. The polyolefins
specifically are a class of polymers which have wide industrial application. The
research activities involve graduates and postdoctoral fellows who are being
trained in computer simulations methods and associated theory of polymer
materials. Research results are disseminated through conference presentations by
the PI and her research group at national meetings and in refereed publications.
The PI's efforts in research and teaching mentorship have resulted in an
increase in the number of women in the ranks of graduate and postgraduate
students and in faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and education in studies of
polymer materials. The award is being support by the Division of Chemistry and
the Division of Materials Research. The activity largely resides in two areas,
polymer phase changes and the mixing properties of polymer solutions and
blends.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymer thin films are studied which exhibit a
glass transition where the polymer transforms from a glassy to a rubbery solid
upon heating. Though a glass transition is not itself unusual, the recent
observation that the presence of a surface may have a significant impact on the
glass transition of the polymer stimulates this research. The research develops
theoretical models and computer simulations to address questions such as the why
shifts in the surface structure of polymeric films may persist deep into the
film. There are two scenarios investigated. In one, the polymer film is
supported by a substrate, in which case the glass transition of the film has
been observed to occur tens of degrees above the usual temperature. Conversely,
the influence of a surface leads to a steep drop in the glass transition onset,
particularly when the film is free-standing (has two free surfaces). In all
cases the magnitude of the temperature shift depends on the choice of polymer
and the film thickness. This proposal outlines a new model for the glass
transition of thin film polymers, one which will address both the magnitude of
the temperature shifts and the length scales over which they
occur.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second area of research focuses on the impact of
deuteration and local branching on the mixing of polymer solutions and blends.
In the research carried out here, a theoretical analysis is outlined which will
lead to a predictive tool for assessing the anticipated effects. One factor
investigated is the changes in mixing properties when the polymer molecules have
side branches as opposed to being primarily long chains which is a
characteristic of polyolefins. Research done here builds upon initial evidence
that the theoretical methods developed in previous studies can also apply for
this category of structural change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effort undertaken
has broader impacts with both technological and educational consequences. In
this work the theoretical tools developed by the PI to study complex fluids will
be used to make testable predictions on polymer glasses and polymer mixtures.
The outcome is that a more sophisticated combination of strategies, accessible
to the materials community, will be available in solving problems relating to
understanding connections between molecular level structure and behavior of the
material as a whole. The polymer thin films studied here are the subject of
significant interest due to their potential for application in areas such as
optics, catalysis, and electronics, as well as their ubiquitous presence in
polymer nanocomposites. The polyolefins specifically are a class of polymers
which have wide industrial application. The research activities involve
graduates and postdoctoral fellows who are being trained in computer simulations
methods and associated theory of polymer materials. Research results are
disseminated through conference presentations by the PI and her research group
at national meetings and in refereed publications. The PI's efforts in research
and teaching mentorship have resulted in an increase in the number of women in
the ranks of graduate and postgraduate students and in faculty&lt;br/&gt;