* 0804570
* GSE/SGER: Characterizing Broader Impacts:  An Exploratory Study of Metrics and Measures for the Research on Gender in Science and Engineering Program
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/2007,12/31/2008
* Patricia Freitag, Academy for Educational Development
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 12/31/2008
* USD 161,600.00

This exploratory research study takes a first step toward characterizing
measures of the broader impacts for the Research on Gender in Science and
Engineering Program (GSE) at the National Science Foundation (NSF). A review of
the GSE funded studies and products will be conducted to identify metrics and
measures that are used in research on gender and as indicators of change. A well
articulated logic model for evaluation and a set of benchmarks will result from
interviews with principal investigators and the GSE program officer.
Recommendations for measures of broader impact that may capture the intended
interactions between research, dissemination, and extension service projects
will be derived from the emergent program logic. Finally, a report of the
broader impact measures and metrics identified for each of the three GSE Program
components will be prepared, linking the evaluation logic model components to
the strategic goals of NSF and to existing national data that frame the context
for research on gender in science and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merits of this proposal include the emphasis on metrics and
measures that may be used to capture the dynamic interactions among contributors
to the GSE learning community. Exploring various indicators and asking how to
capture the nature of links between logic model components as well as the short
and long term "broader impacts" of the GSE Program are also novel and on the
cutting edge of measurement research. Through this study, implicit theories of
action, underlying evaluation logic, and relevant metrics and measures will be
identified. The proposed principal investigator (PI) and grantee organization
bring strengths in drawing together knowledge of large scale data resources to
triangulating quantitative and qualitative insights necessary for exploratory
research. Some of this experience in measurement and evaluation has come from
previous and successfully completed evaluations of NSF-EHR programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this study will inform principal
investigators by providing a focused review and annotated inventory of measures,
protocols, and instruments that may be appropriate for their work. GSE
researchers will benefit from the identification of knowledge gaps and testable
assumptions that result from articulating the evaluation logic model and
corresponding implicit theories of action. Finally, program officers, policy-
makers, and the public will benefit by having an array of possible measures to
use in evaluating the broader impacts of federally funded programs.