* 0804126
* Perpendicular-Current Spin-Polarized Transport Studies
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2012
* Jack Bass, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 04/30/2012
* USD 450,000.00

Technical:&lt;br/&gt;This program involves two related projects with
technological potential. Current-Perpendicular-to-Plane Magnetoresistance of
metallic magnetic multilayers is a competitor for next generation read-heads for
hard-disks. Comparing measured specific resistances (sample area times
resistance) of interfaces between new pairs of carefully chosen metals, with no-
free-parameter calculations made by collaborators, will let the MSU group test
fundamental understanding of transport in multilayers, thus providing the basis
for technological design. Spin-transfer-torque induced magnetization switching
and generation of GHz radiation in magnetic multilayers is of interest for
writing magnetic random access memory and as a current-controlled source of
radiation. To clarify the underlying physics, the MSU group will measure how
switching currents and radiation vary with different combinations of magnetic
and non-magnetic metals. The group also plans to study generation of vortices in
nanopillars and with point contacts (the latter a collaboration), including in
multilayers with antiferromagnets. These projects will give graduate and
undergraduate students experience in planning and carrying out cutting-edge
research. The program involves international collaborations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical: &lt;br/&gt;This program involves two
projects, both involving metallic magnetic multilayers, alternating layers of
magnetic and non-magnetic metals, with each layer only a few atoms thick. The
change in electrical resistance with applied magnetic field, measured with the
current flowing perpendicular to the layer planes of the multilayer, is a
competitor for next generation read-heads for computer hard-disks. The MSU group
will compare measurements of specific resistances (sample area times resistance)
of interfaces between carefully chosen pairs of metals, with no-free-parameter
calculations by collaborators. This comparison will provide the basis for
technological design. Until recently, the magnetizations of magnetic layers
(effectively, tiny magnets) in magnetic nanopillars could be reversed (switched)
only with an external magnetic field. However, it was predicted, and then shown,
that a new phenomenon, spin-transfer-torque (STT), lets such switching be
induced by passing a large enough current density through the nanopillar. Such
current-induced switching is of interest for writing multilayer magnetic random
access memory. STT also allows generation of high-frequency (giga-Hertz)
electromagnetic radiation with the technologically interesting ability to change
the frequency by varying the applied current. Studies of combinations of
different magnetic and non-magnetic metals will clarify the physics underlying
both phenomena, thereby assisting technological design. These projects give
graduate and undergraduate students experience in planning and carrying out
cutting-edge research. &lt;br/&gt;