* 0804748
* Using Disorder to Detect Local Order: Noise and Nonequilibrium Effects of Stripes in the Presence of Quenched Disorder
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Erica Carlson, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2012
* USD 240,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

This award supports theoretical research and education on strongly correlated
electron materials with a focus on spontaneous electronic pattern formation at
the nanoscale.

The PI will develop new ways of studying materials, explicitly including
disorder, and using noise, nonequilibrium effects, and mesoscopic geometries in
order to elucidate the local electronic patterns. For example, stripes (like
other proposed real space orders) may be important for high temperature
superconductivity, but they have only been observed in a subset of cuprate
superconductors, most notably in cases where the stripes exhibit true long-range
order. However, even disordered or slowly fluctuating stripes (invisible to many
standard bulk probes) are sufficient for a stripes-based mechanism of high
temperature superconductivity. The PI recently mapped the problem of disordered
stripes to the random field Ising model. The PI will use simulations on this
model to make predictions about how to detect disordered stripes using noise and
nonequilibrium effects in, e.g., transport, STM, neutron scattering, and
magnetic hysteresis.

This award also supports the PI?s efforts to continue to develop the mentoring
program she began for graduate women in the physics program at her home
institution, by initiating a program to invite graduate physics alumnae back to
campus to discuss career options with current graduate and undergraduate
students in physics. The PI will also continue to visit local high schools to
discuss her research. This outreach combines interactive hands-on
superconductivity demonstrations with education about contemporary condensed
matter research. In addition, the proposed work will advance the training of one
graduate student and two postdoctoral associates.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: This award supports theoretical research and education
aimed at understanding fundamental questions raised in the study of high
temperature superconductors. These are materials that can transport electric
current without loss at sufficiently low temperatures. The physical mechanism by
which electrons enter this cooperative quantum mechanical state of
superconductivity remains a subject of intense research for the high temperature
superconductors. These materials exhibit superconductivity at much higher
temperatures, but still well below room temperature, than the much better
understood superconducting materials that one might encounter in a medical
magnetic resonance imaging machine. Understanding the mechanism for
superconductivity may lead to the discovery or engineering of materials that
exhibit superconductivity at still higher temperatures, with the possibility of
enabling economical new technologies for power transmission and new electronic
devices. The research will focus on an interesting aspect of the puzzle, the
spatially varying patterns of characteristic quantum mechanical properties of
electrons that have been observed in experiments on some high temperature
superconductors.

This award also supports the PI?s efforts to continue to develop the mentoring
program she began for graduate women in the physics program at her home
institution, by initiating a program to invite graduate physics alumnae back to
campus to discuss career options with current graduate and undergraduate
students in physics. The PI will also continue to visit local high schools to
discuss her research. This outreach combines interactive hands-on
superconductivity demonstrations with education about contemporary condensed
matter research. In addition, the proposed work will advance the training of one
graduate student and two postdoctoral associates.

