* 0804801
* Amorphous Steels: Atomic Structure Characterization via Experiment and Modeling
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2008,05/31/2012
* Despina Louca, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Taleff
* 05/31/2012
* USD 303,343.00

TECHNICAL: A key issue in materials science and condensed matter physics is to
understand the reasons for bulk glass formation that occurs in some alloys and
not in others. The time is now right to expand on the fundamental study of
metallic alloys as recent discoveries of bulk amorphous metals have opened up
the possibilities for new industrial applications. The objective of this project
is twofold: 1) Combine experimental structural characterization and molecular
dynamics (MD) simulation- Measurement and modeling of amorphous metals to
determine the atomic and nanoscale structures; and 2) Understand structure-
property relationships - Relate results from modeling to thermodynamic
properties; investigate brittle-ductile properties to structural features
observed in the amorphous phase. For example, the amount of free volume in the
amorphous structure may determine the ductility of the amorphous metal. The goal
is to define the essential features of the driving mechanism of the glass
forming ability and to understand the competing mechanisms among the
thermodynamic, kinetic and structural processes that take place at a local
level. Through an integrated research and educational program, the project will
be realized by involving the active participation of students in implementing
theoretical modeling and experimental tools to understanding glass forming
ability in new amorphous alloys. The bulk glass capabilities of these alloys
will potentially lead to new technological applications that make use of their
properties that far exceed those of pure metals, conventional metallic glasses
and crystals. Representative amorphous metals of Fe-based alloys that exhibit
different glass forming abilities and crystallization behaviors will be
investigated by scattering techniques to obtain their local topological
arrangement. These will be combined with ab-initio quantum mechanical
calculations addressing fundamental issues that can lead to important
revelations about glass formation ability and predictions of new bulk metallic
glass compositions. NON-TECHNICAL: Scientifically, the study of novel amorphous
metals could accelerate the development of a new approach to modeling complex
alloys. Additionally, it could also lead to new predictions of glass forming
ability and structure-property relationships for guiding as well as stimulating
the design of new structural materials. The nature of the program is
interdisciplinary and collaborative. It involves sample characterization through
the use of neutron/x-ray probes for the investigation of atomic structures that
will allow students to understand structure-property relationships. The project
also involves ab-initio modeling and simulation that includes collaboration with
another university. Project goal is to bridge the gap between large-scale
modeling and experiment by constructing a foundation for direct validation of
models from the experimental output. The combination of both approaches will
provide valuable training and research experience for undergraduates and
graduate students. This project will become the PhD thesis of at least one
graduate student. The long term plans include expanding the collaboration with
other groups from other universities that work on similar systems to develop a
program where the local structure-modeling capabilities of amorphous materials
become widely available.