* 0804543
* GOALI: Mechanically Robust Structural Color System Based on Biomimetic Principles
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Caroline Schauer, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Gary Fischman
* 07/31/2012
* USD 293,786.00

Nature has perfected the use of structured materials that prevent (or enhance)
high external reflection and produce intense coloration. The research objective
of this award is to develop a mechanically robust color system, based on the
structural mechanisms which give butterfly wings and beetle shells such intense
color. The research approach combines thin film modeling to design a range of
biomimetic structures with laboratory created analogs of single and multilayered
thin films. The work will further focus on improving naturally occurring
structures by providing structures capable of withstanding the rigors of
industrial processing. Deliverables include a catalog of index of refraction
raising materials and their effects as thin film composites; a demonstration of
the effects of introducing air pockets into the thin films and the tunability of
the refractive index; modeling thin structurally colored films; creation and
characterization of multilayered biomimetic structures; and finally transition
into an industrially relevant form.

If successful, this proposed work advances the knowledge of structural
coloration and the mechanical properties of such materials, which are typically
mechanically weak in nature. This proposal explores the interface between
materials science and engineering, optics, and chemistry in both academic and
industrial settings and how to transition them from an academic structure to an
industrially relevant and utilizable product. The research has potential to be
directly utilized in a wide range of industries from paints, fabrics, display
technology, personal care and cosemetics and antifouling coatings. This project
will impact a wide range of individuals working in the PIs lab, including, high
school students, high school teachers, undergraduates and graduate students.
Students working on this project gain insight not only into the science behind
structural coloration, but into industrial applications.