* 0804105
* Resonant Ultrasound Spectroscopy and Supersolid Research
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2008,10/31/2012
* Julian Maynard, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 10/31/2012
* USD 333,000.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;Virtually all processes, most
importantly those used in energy production and distribution, involve friction
or resistance, with the consequence that the processes suffer significant losses
of energy. However, a major result of modern physics (specifically quantum
mechanics) is the existence of substances which have absolutely no friction or
resistance. Notable examples include superconductors, which can carry electrical
currents with no energy loss and are candidates for future electric energy
applications, and superfluids, which can flow without viscosity. A very recent
discovery is the supersolid, which despite being a solid, can flow like a
superfluid. How this can happen is currently a mystery, and a thorough
scientific understanding of the phenomenon is necessary before any applications
may be considered. As has been found for superconductors, the understanding of a
"super" phenomenon may be advanced through measurements of the substance's
elastic properties, or its rebound response to an applied force. This award
supports a project that will incorporate a new method for measuring elastic
properties of a supersolid in an attempt to increase our understanding of this
material. The research will train young scientists in state-of-the-art methods
of the often overlooked, but nontheless important, field of
acoustics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;One of the
most remarkable recent discoveries in condensed matter physics has been the
experimental observation of a supersolid state for 4He. It is quite an
astounding phenomenon, and its physical origin remains a mystery. Most
experimental studies involve a torsional oscillator, with the conventional
interpretation that an increase in the oscillator's natural frequency indicates
a "lost mass" which occurs when part of the helium in the cell becomes
supersolid. Complete decoupling of a solid requires that the solid's shear
elastic modulus and its shear viscosity vanish completely. An alternate
possibility is that the frequency of the torsional oscillator increases because
the 4He shear elastic modulus increases, and recent experimental measurements
provide evidence for this possibility. This individual investigator award
supports a project to make precise measurements of the 4He elastic constants
over a range of temperatures passing through the supersolid transition. Resonant
ultrasound spectroscopy, in which measurements of the cell's natural frequencies
of vibration, together with a numerical (finite element) model of the cell, will
be used to determine the elastic constants of the 4He. The research will train
young scientists in novel methods of acoustics.&lt;br/&gt;