* 0804679
* Role of the Surface in the Electrical and Optical Properties of GaN and ZnO
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2008,05/31/2012
* Alison Baski, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 05/31/2012
* USD 307,475.00

Technical. This project addresses the role played by surfaces and interfaces in
the electrical and optical properties of GaN and ZnO. It thought that surface-
related effects may be responsible for reduced efficiency of emitters, shorter
laser operation lifetimes, and earlier degradation of elec-tronic devices.
Additionally, the irreproducible and unstable p-type conductivity of ZnO may be
related to peculiarities of the surface conductivity in this material. This
project aims for an in-depth investigation to gain a comprehensive understanding
of the processes at and near the sur-face for both GaN and ZnO. Electrical and
optical properties will be probed under different am-bient conditions,
temperatures, and illumination. Band bending near the surface and its variation
under illumination (photovoltage) will be studied using two methods: 1) a Kelvin
probe com-bined with an optical cryostat; and 2) a microscopy technique
combining local charge injection with subsequent imaging of the surface charge.
The underlying mechanisms for surface band bending will be related to sample
preparation, temperature, and ambient environment. Effective passivation schemes
will also be explored to improve the performance of optical and electronic
devices based on these wide-bandgap semiconductors.&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical. The
project addresses fundamental research issues in a topical area of elec-
tronic/photonic materials science having technological relevance. This effort
may lead to higher reliability, longer lifetime, and higher efficiency bright
light sources based on GaN and ZnO. The proposed research program will leverage
strong collaborations between research groups in the Departments of Physics and
Electrical Engineering at Virginia Commonwealth University (VCU), as well as
initiate a collaboration with the Department of Chemistry and Physics at
Longwood University, a nearby undergraduate institution. The project provides
support for graduate students at VCU and undergraduate students at both VCU and
Longwood, where all of the students will be involved in collaborative efforts
between multiple research groups. Women and underrepresented minority groups
will be actively recruited and supported within this pro-ject. VCU is a growing
urban university with a diverse student body (18% African American, 22% other
minorities), and the PI?s have a record of mentoring students from
underrepresented groups in their laboratories. An international collaboration is
also planned with the Ioffe Physical Technical Institute of the Russian Academy
of Science.&lt;br/&gt;