* 0804891
* US-Egypt Workshop on the Use of Fiber Reinforced Polymers (FRP) for Sustainable Structures, May 26, 2008, Hurgada, Egypt
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2008,03/31/2009
* Sami Rizkalla, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 03/31/2009
* USD 25,000.00

0804891 Rizkalla

Description: This award is to support a "US-Egypt Workshop on the Use of Fiber
Reinforced Polymers (FRP) for Sustainable Structures" to be held in Hurghada,
Egypt on May 26, 2008. The U.S. organizer is Dr. Sami Rizkalla, Department of
Civil Engineering, North Carolina State University (NCSU), Raleigh, NC. The
Egyptian organizer is Dr. and Dr. Abdel-Hady Hosny, Ain Shams University in
Cairo, Egypt. The workshop is planned for one day immediately following "The
Fifth Middle East Symposium on Structural Composites for Infrastructure
Applications 2008 (MESC-5)". It brings together researchers in this area from
U.S., Canada, Europe, Japan and Egypt.

Intellectual Merit: The workshop is to facilitate exchange of information,
disseminate research findings, and to identify areas for viable research
collaboration, between the U.S. and researchers from Egyptian Universities, on
the use of FRP material as construction material for new structures, as well as
for strengthening or repairing existing civil infrastructure. There will be an
opportunity for experts to interact and to identify topics for collaborative
projects on the use of FRP for innovative sustainable structures, life cycle
costs, and structural health monitoring. Several of the participants hold
important positions on professional committees that have a broad based knowledge
of many of the current issues associated with FRP technologies. Participants
will make written contributions on the topics covered in the workshop. The
workshop proceedings will be published by the US PI team and the counterpart
from Ain Shams University, in coordination with the MESC-5 Steering Committee.
They will be posted to the workshop web site , the Ain Shams University web site
and the NSF I/UCRC on "Repair of Buildings and Bridges with Composites" (RB2C)
web site http://www.ce.ncsu.edu/centers/rb2c. They will also be distributed
internationally through the International Institute for FRP in Construction
(IIFC) web site http://www.iifc-hq.org.

Broader Impact: Deterioration of civil infrastructure and structures in
particular, has been documented and recognized as a serious problem worldwide.
In the last decade innovative structural materials, including Fiber Reinforced
Polymers (FRP), have set ambitious goals in the vast civil infrastructure
markets. The proposed workshop will lay the groundwork for the future research
collaboration between the U.S., Egypt and other Middle East countries. Direct
dissemination of the workshop findings to key US codification agencies will
enhance the value of the workshop. The U.S. participants include faculty that
represent underrepresented groups, two graduate students, junior faculty and
senior faculty from different geographical regions of the country.