* 0804902
* Expanding the Capabilities of Photoelectron Spectroscopy as to Reveal the Coupling of Different Degrees of Freedom in Complex Electron Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Norman Mannella, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 08/31/2011
* USD 300,000.00

Non-technical Abstract

Complex electron systems with unusual properties, such as magnetism and
superconductivity or large resistivity in a magnetic field, promise
revolutionary technological applications. A unifying characteristic of these
systems is the capability of exhibiting spectacular and unexpected phenomena
arising from the interplay and competition of several intrinsic properties such
as charge, crystal structure and magnetism. Unraveling the details of this
interplay will help us understand the physics behind the functionality of
complex materials. This project pursues the objectives of growing novel oxide
materials and studying them in-situ with optical and x-ray techniques. Studies
of previously characterized systems will also be made for comparison. The
different tasks and project activities are designed with the goals to reach out
to undergraduate and high school students, contribute to science infrastructure
and integrate science and education. Educational/research programs will be
available to allow the participation of students ranging from high school to
graduate level. Intellectual infrastructure of this project is expected to aid
in the development of new magnetic and superconducting devices.

Technical Abstract

Transition metal oxides such as cuprate high temperature superconductors and
colossal magnetoresistive manganites are prototypical complex electron systems
with unusual properties promising revolutionary technological applications. A
unifying characteristic of these systems is the capability of exhibiting
spectacular and unexpected phenomena arising from the interplay and competition
of several intrinsic properties such as charge, lattice and spin. Unraveling the
details of this interplay will consolidate our understanding of the physics at
play behind the functionality of complex materials. This project pursues two
main objectives, namely the carrying out of 1) the growth with Molecular Beam
Epitaxy and in-situ Angle Resolved Photoemission studies of binary oxides,
Fe3O4, VOx, EuO and V2O3, which will function as models systems for studying the
many-body physics at play in more complex materials, and 2) time-resolved
photoemission experiments on well-characterized systems, either with ultrafast
optical techniques and/or x-rays, or whose nature of the interactions has
already been extensively investigated with static measurements. The
accomplishment of these goals on well-characterized systems will form a solid
body of experience for extending the project to more complex materials. The
different tasks and project activities are designed with the goals to reach out
to undergraduate and high school students, contribute to science infrastructure
and integrate science and education. Educational/research programs will be
available to allow the participation of students ranging from high school to
graduate level. Intellectual infrastructure of this project is expected to aid
in the development of new magnetic and superconducting devices.

