* 0804527
* Collaborative Research:  Transport Imaging of Semiconductor Nanowires
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2008,12/31/2012
* Nancy Haegel, Naval Postgraduate School
* Interagency Agreement
* Z.  Ying
* 12/31/2012
* USD 209,948.00

Technical: This project combines VLS (vapor-liquid-solid) growth/processing of
bridged SiC and Si nanowires with a nanoscale imaging technique to study
relationships between synthesis, processing, and contact/transport behavior.
Transport imaging combines the scanning resolution of near field optics with the
charge generation beam control of a scanning electron microscope (SEM). A goal
is to "image transport" by monitoring the motion of charge via the recombination
emission of light. The technique builds upon standard cathodoluminescence (CL),
but is significantly different, since it maintains spatial information of the
emitted light, which allows for direct measurement of spatially resolved
minority carrier diffusion, mobility-lifetime products under applied fields, and
contact resistance--parameters otherwise difficult to measure on a single
nanowire. The project aims to take this imaging to the ~ 50-100 nm scale with
the use of an atomic force microscope (AFM)/near field scanning optical
microscope (NSOM) operating inside an SEM. By decoupling the e-beam excitation
from the optical collection, one can image transport of charge over distances
from ~ 100 nm to microns along wire lengths. A Nanonics MultiView 2000 system
will be used, which allows for independent scanning of fiber tip or sample.
Measurements will be performed on individually bridged SiC and Si nanowires, as
well as ZnO and GaN wires. VLS nanowire synthesis/processing research is an
integral part of the collaborative research. This technique has been
successfully demonstrated for the growth of solid whiskers and nanowires;
bridged growth has been demonstrated within silicon microtrenches. The bridged
structures have been found to make rigid connections to the receiving side of
the trench, making them of interest for large scale device fabrication. They
also provide ideal structures for application of external bias for transport
imaging. Specific goals include 1) demonstration of direct transport imaging in
semiconductor nanowires, 2) transport measurements as a function of nanowire
diameter, 3) measurement of contact resistance and carrier injection, 4) study
of the role of VLS process catalyst and surface passivation on optical and
transport properties. &lt;br/&gt;Non-technical: The project addresses basic
research issues in a topical area of electronic/photonic materials science with
high technological relevance. Additionally, the project provides education and
training for three graduate students and a minimum of 6-8 undergraduate and high
school students. NPS educates active duty officers in all branches of the US
forces, as well as students from 30+ countries. The students reflect the full
diversity of the US active duty force and many take their technical education
into positions of leadership in the regular workforce upon completion of their
service. A UC Berkeley graduate student will work in collaboration, and UCB will
take advantage of its SUPERB ((Summer Undergraduate Program in Engineering
Research at Berkeley) program to involve undergraduate and summer students.
Special emphasis will be placed on recruitment of women and underrepresented
students. Both PIs have strong records of mentoring women and underrepresented
groups and have been active in undergraduate and K-12 outreach. The results will
be disseminated through publication and presentation, as well as public outreach
venues at both NPS and UCB.