* 0804564
* Quantum Phenomena in Solids
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Leon Balents, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2012
* USD 330,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: This award supports theoretical research and education on
quantum correlation phenomena in solids. The long-term goals are to develop new
materials and structures with useful functionality not currently available, and
to extend the basic scientific framework to understand matter in new regimes and
new phases. The research thrusts span bulk materials and heterostructures. In
the former, the PI will study (1) frustration and fluctuations, and their
consequences and applications; (2) magneto-electric coupling; and (3) orbital
fluctuations and ordering. In the heterostructure area, the PI will consider
interfaces between correlated electron materials, which are becoming a very
exciting subject experimentally. The PI aims to address key outstanding
questions raised by experiments in quantum magnets, multiferroics, spin-orbit
coupled materials, and more complex Mott insulators. The breadth of topics is an
asset to this research program; by viewing one material or structure in a
broader context, the PI aims to obtain insights into the relative importance of
the very many effects that might be involved. The theoretical techniques ? e.g.
statistical mechanics, field theory, renormalization group, numerical methods,
constraint counting ? which will be used to study competing interactions and
fluctuations are also widely applicable across all these problems. Advances in
the past 5 years in growing high quality atomic precision interfaces between
transition metal oxides by pulsed laser deposition are remarkable. This is an
extremely exciting new venue for correlation phenomena and also eventual
applications building semiconductor-style heterostructures from correlated
materials with their additional functionalities. The PI will carry out
fundamental research aimed at elucidating the new physics occuring at these
interfaces and how they differ from semiconductor heterostructures. This award
supports the education of graduate students and postdocs in forefront areas of
condensed matter theory. New course materials will be developed to convey the
excitement of the fields to new students.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: This award supports theoretical research and education to
motivate and explain experiments and properties of materials. The PI will focus
on particular areas which he believes are those most likely to lead to
revolutionary technological impacts. These areas also advance fundamental
science. Experiments reveal materials that have the necessary ingredients to
become magnets, but do not exhibit magnetism. On the scale of atoms, there is a
competition between the interactions that would favor aligning the fundamental
building blocks of magnetism and the geometrical arrangements of the atoms. This
frustrates the tendency to magnetic order. Experiments continue to deliver more
examples, like the minerals Herbertsmithite and Volborthite, enabling the test
of theoretical ideas that new states of matter will arise from failed magnetism.
The PI will also study materials where electron charge and magnetism are closely
coupled. Multiferroics are an example class of materials; they simultaneously
exhibit magnetism and the electric charge analog of magnetism. The PI will also
study phenomena that arise from the coupling of spin and charge in a new class
of insulating materials, called topological insulators, that are rich with
possibilities for new phenomena involving magnetism that arise from the motion
of electrons. A recent experimental advance enables the joining of two different
oxide materials, analogous to the interfaces between semiconductors that form
the basis of modern electronics. In this case the oxide materials have unusual
properties that arise from strong interactions between electrons. The interfaces
so created are rich with the potential for new phenomena and new materials
properties that may have technological impact. The PI will use sophisticated
theoretical tools to understand recent experiments and predict new phenomena.

The fundamental tools of advanced quantum mechanics are needed to understand
experiments on these systems and to illuminate new possibilities with
predictions that motivate further experiment. This work contributes to the
foundations of future electronic and information technologies. This award helps
provide a quality educational experience for students at the graduate and
postdoctoral level.