* 0804440
* Observations of the Spatial-Statistical Structures of Precipitation
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Arthur Jameson, RJH Scientific Incorporated
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 09/30/2012
* USD 448,262.00

Radar-derived estimates of rainfall intensity and accumulations offer
unsurpassed spatial and temporal resolution, and are thus critical not only for
issuance of flash-flood warnings but more broadly as input to agricultural and
hydrological models for cropland and river/streamflow management. These
measurements are thus a critically important product of the nationwide WSR-88D
"NEXRAD" radar network. This research effort is focused on improved rainfall
estimates through detection of departures from well-behaved "Rayleigh-type"
radar signal behavior that may induce errors in deduced rainfall. The
presumption that well-behaved Rayleigh-type statistics dominate observed storm
properties is at the foundation of current radar-based precipitation estimation
techniques. Though strong spatial gradients of rainfall intensity characteristic
of thunderstorms are one potential source of non-Rayleigh signal behavior,
research suggests that this complication may also arise in the context of more
homogeneous precipitation for certain types of radars and radar scanning
strategies (including measurements of differential radar reflectivity and
derived hydrometeor type from polarized radars). In extreme cases--again
generally associated with the heaviest areas of precipitation--induced errors
may locally approach the magnitude of the derived rain rate itself. Within the
context of this study, the existence of this statistical complication will be
conveyed via computation of a "clustering index (CI)."&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;With the advent of high-resolution weather forecast models, radar
observations will likely soon be assimilated into these in real-time to help
better guide their predictions. The ability to reduce radar errors (or even
simply better quantify the degree of uncertainty inherent in these measurements)
would be of particular value in the context of modern data assimilation schemes.
This proposal seeks to process high-resolution radar data collected by the NSF-
supported CHILL radar in eastern Colorado to better relate the volumetric
structure and evolution of CI anomalies to storm morphology and underlying cloud
microphysical processes, as well as to extend CI measurements to snow, graupel
and hail events. Other potential contributors to radar reflectivity bias
(including "Bragg scattering," generally regarded as arising from the turbulent
mixing of media with differing indices of refraction, as may occur at
cloud/plume edges) will also be examined. The availability of high resolution
measurements from CHILL (viz. radial data spacing as fine as 30 m) will further
facilitate this work. Subsidiary efforts will address independent data sources
such as surface-based disdrometer raindrop size distributions to shed additional
light on non-Rayleigh precipitation behavior. The intellectual merit of this
effort thus focuses on improved radar signal processing and associated
understanding of the structure and dynamics of a wide variety of precipitating
clouds. As suggested above, Broader Impacts will include the potential for
appreciably improved measurements and short-term forecasts of precipitation
intensity and amount.