* 0804944
* RUI: Phage-Based Components for Nanoscale Assembly
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Karl Johnson, Haverford College
* Continuing Grant
* David A. Brant
* 07/31/2012
* USD 180,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0804944 PI: Johnson, Karl ORG: Haverford
College&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: RUI: Phage-Based Components for Nanoscale
Assembly&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: This proposal aims to develop
the filamentous bacterial virus M13 as a component for the assembly of higher-
order structures. To accomplish this the PI proposes the following specific
tasks: (1) Systematically explore relationships between fluorochrome density,
brightness, and quenching for single-color fluorochromes linked to the phage
protein coat in order to optimize the ability to image and track individual
phage. (2) Use cross-linking chemistries to link FRET (Forster Resonance Energy
Transfer) dye pairs and other functional groups to phage and study energy
absorption and transfer along the extended protein-DNA backbone in order to lay
the groundwork for applications involving photonic energy absorption and
transfer. (3) Develop a collection of phage that bind specifically to diverse
substrates such as nickel, plastics, silicon, or semiconductor materials in
order to target phage SAMs (self assembled monolayers) to unique surfaces. (4)
Develop ways to join phage using biomolecular affinity interactions, such as
biotin-streptavidin binding or peptide coiled-coil formation, to link phage to
each other and around hubs in defined geometries in order to build on these SAM
?foundations?. (5) Study the structural bases of wool-like and cable-like phage
networks using fluorescence, atomic force, and electron microscopies. (6) Extend
these aggregate measurements to the measurement of individual phage spectral
intensities using digital fluorescence microscopy to validate the use of
individual pH-sensitive-dye-labeled phase particles (pHages) as tools for the
measurement of pH values on ultrafine spatial scales and incorporate these
sensors into our higher order assemblies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS:
This RUI project will take place at Haverford College, a small liberal arts
institution with a diverse student body and a strong tradition of undergraduate
student involvement in research. The liberal arts environment is a rich training
ground for the nation?s future leaders in science and medicine, and the
opportunities made possible by this project will expose students at all levels
to the research process. These effects will be magnified by outreach activities
involving secondary school students and their teachers through both off-campus
talks and on-campus workshops, and will enhance the research-rich environment at
the College through support of this interdisciplinary project. Between 4-6
students per year will be involved in accomplishing the objectives of this
proposal. The research team will include both underclass students and seniors in
the process of doing science over the summer and during academic terms. The
training aspects of this proposal develop the human component of US scientific
infrastructure by reaching students at a critical point in their careers where
they are learning new things and making decisions about future directions. These
students will be full participants in this project by their involvement in these
experiments, their presentation of their work at national meetings, and their
co-authorship on publications in leading journals describing their contributions
to this shared endeavor. In a previous RUI grant to the PI involving a total of
30 students, 70% of the undergraduate trainees were female and 43% were members
of underrepresented groups. The current project expects to continue these
efforts to broaden participation in the nation's scientific enterprise.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;