* 0804770
* Dipolar Field Effect Enhanced Photochemical Reactions
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Paul Salvador, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2012
* USD 500,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Certain ceramic materials can catalyze water
photolysis and produce hydrogen from water and sunlight. As a fuel for the
future, hydrogen is especially attractive because it has three times the energy
density of oil and its combustion does not create dangerous emissions,
greenhouse gases, or radioactive byproducts. While electrical power generated
from photolytic hydrogen is sustainable and generates no toxic or radioactive
byproducts, it is also more expensive than the power generated by conventional
systems that use fossil or nuclear fuels. This presents an exciting challenge
for scientists and engineers to have a truly beneficial and widespread impact on
the wellbeing of our society and environment. Therefore, the ultimate goal of
this research is to develop the understanding needed to design composite
materials for the lower cost synthesis of photolytic hydrogen.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: Previous research has shown that when a
thin titania film is supported on a ferroelectric BaTiO3 substrate, its
photochemical reactivity is greater than that of bulk titania. The phenomenon is
called the dipolar field effect. The dipolar field effect can potentially be
used to create improved photolysis catalysts, self-cleaning materials, or
materials for the photocatalytic degradation of pollutants. At the basis of any
such technological developments, there must be a firm scientific understanding
of the mechanism of the reactivity enhancement. Therefore, the aim of the
current project is to develop a mechanistic model for the dipolar field effect.
The research is guided by two hypotheses about the mechanism of the dipolar
field effect. The first is that fields within the ferroelectric substrate,
incompletely screened, bend the bands in the titania overlayer in such a way
that electrons and holes are driven in opposite directions. The second
hypothesis is that there is an ideal size for the domains that maximizes
reactivity by providing adequate separation, while also preventing
depolarization and providing adequate surface area. These hypotheses are being
tested by quantitative microscopy experiments on idealized ferroelectric//TiO2
heterostructures. To test the generality of these findings, several exploratory
experiments with ferroelectric//WO3 and ferroelectric//Fe2O3 heterostructures
are also being conducted. The results of this project will provide the
quantitative details necessary to confirm the proposed mechanism of the dipolar
field effect and, therefore, provide the scientific basis for the design of a
composite photolysis catalyst with improved efficiency. As energy prices rise,
there is an increased interest in renewable and sustainable energy sources. The
development of materials to efficiently catalyze the synthesis hydrogen at a
reduced cost could have a transformational effect on our energy supply and
economy. The project will also have impact through the education of students for
careers in science and engineering. Undergraduates will be involved in this
research through design groups working on a real world problems involving
photochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;