* 0804169
* Paleoclimate Reconstruction Based on the Stable Carbon Isotopic Composition of Bone Collagen from Small Herbivores Recovered in Archaeological Assemblages
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Robert Hard, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2012
* USD 151,357.00

With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Raymond Mauldin, Debajyoti Paul,
and Robert Hard will conduct collaborative research focused on developing short-
term, local measures of past ecological conditions using patterns of stable
carbon isotopes in collagen extracted from small herbivores from archaeological
sites. The two year project brings together staff from the Laboratory for Stable
Isotope Geochemistry (LSG), graduate and undergraduate students from the
Department of Geology at the University of Texas at San Antonio (UTSA),
researchers from the Center for Archaeological Research (CAR), and graduate and
undergraduate students from the Department of Anthropology at UTSA.

Most paleoclimate reconstructions in archaeology operate at large temporal
scales (hundreds of years) and unknown, poorly defined, or extremely large
spatial scales. Human foragers, however, do not initiate adaptive shifts in
response to changes that occur over centuries, but in response to short term
events that commonly operate at a seasonal or yearly timeframes, and that cover
kilometers rather than continents. While long-term, large scale climate changes
will certainly influence which adaptive strategies are ultimately successful, it
is at these smaller temporal and spatial scales that adaptive decisions are
initiated. This research differs from most other archaeological paleoclimate
investigations in that it targets small herbivores, such as jack rabbits and
cottontails, which can provide data on climate at scales appropriate for
exploring human adaptations. These herbivores consume a variety of plants that
use one of two different photosynthetic pathways, termed C4 or C3, to extract
carbon dioxide from their environment. Measurements of carbon isotope ratios in
collagen extracted from herbivore bones can provide an estimate of the relative
contribution of C4 or C3 plants in herbivore diet. As these two different plant
pathways are favored by different environmental conditions, with C4 plants more
common in warm, arid settings, and C3 plants more common in cooler, moister
settings, the relative contribution of C4 or C3 plants in jack rabbit and
cottontail bone collagen can provide data to reconstruct aspects of past
vegetation and climate.

Jack rabbits and cottontails have a number of distinct advantages in the
development of appropriate spatial and temporal measures of past climates. They
have short life spans, seldom exceeding 3 years in length. Lifetime range sizes
are commonly less than 1 square kilometer. As such, the diets of these small
herbivores reflect local, short-term patterns of vegetation. Collagen extracted
from jack rabbit and cottontail bones, collected from well-dated archaeological
contexts, can provide a record of vegetation, and shifts in vegetation, at short
temporal and small spatial scales directly relevant to understanding human
adaptations.

While using archaeological samples obtained from three ecologically distinct
areas of Texas, and focused on hunter-gather adaptations that span the last
4,000 years, this research has broad implications for investigations of human
adaptation. Small herbivores are present in archaeological and paleontological
sites throughout much of the world, and from a variety of temporal contexts.
Therefore, the findings of this collaborative research between the LSG
(Geology), Anthropology, and CAR at UTSA will be of interest to the broader
scientific community, both nationally and globally.

