* 0804266
* Nonequilibrium Superconductivity in Disordered, Granular and  Hybrid Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Alex Kamenev, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2012
* USD 285,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Mathematical Sciences
and the Division of Materials Research contribute funds to this award.
&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and education with aim to
develop a kinetic theory of fluctuating superconductivity in disordered,
granular and hybrid systems. This work is motivated by experiments on a variety
of systems including: quasi one-dimensional superconducting nanowires,
disordered two-dimensional films, granular arrays, hybrid metal-superconductor
nanostructures, and ultracold fermionic atoms in optical
traps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key element of this theory is the interplay
between strong fluctuations of the order parameter and nonequilibrium dynamics
of electronic degrees of freedom. The developed theory will be applied to a
broad range of experimentally relevant observables, such as transport, thermal
and magnetic properties, as well as shot noise, Coulomb drag and fluctuations.
Advanced field-theoretical approaches to the kinetics of disordered, out-of-
equilibrium systems will be employed and further developed during the course of
work on the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports the education
of two graduate students and possibly a post-doc. Aspects of this work will be
carried out in close collaboration with experiment. The research also involves
international cooperation with researchers from Germany and Russia.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division
of Mathematical Sciences and the Division of Materials Research contribute funds
to this award. &lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and education
motivated by experiments on a variety of materials and systems that are close to
exhibiting superconductivity. Superconductivity is a state of matter
characterized by the cooperative behavior of electrons choreographed by quantum
mechanics. One signature of the superconducting state is that it can carry
electric current without loss. Near the onset of the superconducting state, the
fleeting appearance of microscopic precursors of superconductivity lead to new
phenomena and can alter the properties of a material or system. The PI aims to
develop a theory can predict the consequences of being in close proximity to
superconductivity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports the education
of two graduate students and possibly a post-doc. Aspects of this work will be
carried out in close collaboration with experiment. The research also involves
international cooperation with researchers from Germany and Russia.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;