* 0804492
* The Use of Vibrational Spectroscopy to Probe the Conformational Propensities of Amino Acid Residues in Unfolded Peptides
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Reinhard Schweitzer-Stenner, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2012
* USD 439,165.00

In this project funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program in the
Chemistry Division, Professor Reinhard Schweitzer-Stenner and his students will
employ a battery of spectroscopic techniques to investigate the structure of
unfolded peptides in water. For a long time, it was assumed that the
biologically active ("native") form of most proteins involves one of the well
known folded states, such as the alpha helix or beta sheet. In recent years, the
discovery of native unfolded proteins has challenged the physical chemistry
discipline to develop approaches to determine and understand their structure.
While "unfolded," these protein systems are not completely random, but have
local order or "propensities" that can, in principle, be determined with
spectroscopic techniques. The first aim of the research will be to determine the
intrinsic propensity of individual amino acids. Different amino acids will be
inserted into a host glycine peptide chain, and examined using conventional
infrared, Raman, and two dimensional nuclear magnetic resonance (2D NMR)
spectroscopies, and also advanced techniques such as vibrational circular
dichroism (VDC) and Raman Optical Activity (ROA) spectroscopies. In
collaboration with Professor Minghaeng Cho at Korea University, the infrared,
Raman and NMR spectra will be modeled using quantum mechanical and molecular
dynamics simulations. The second aim is to explore the dependence of amino acid
conformational propensities on the structure and charge of adjacent amino acids
in the peptide chain. For example, what happens to the conformational tendencies
of a given amino acid if the next acid in the chain is the branched species
alanine? The third part of the project is aimed at exploring the structure of
unfolded alanine based peptides. While conclusive evidence now suggests that
alanine has a high preference for polyproline II like conformations, it is yet
unclear whether extended conformations are maintained in longer peptides which
contain between 6 and 12 amino acid residues. Finally, energy transfer
experiments will be performed on specifically labeled peptides to measure end to
end distance distributions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Taken together, the expected
results will substantially enhance the understanding of the properties of the
unfolded state of peptides and proteins. The combination of experiment and
theory will enable us (and others) to judge the validity of coil libraries for
models of unfolded peptides and proteins, as well as assist computationally
oriented researchers in constructing molecular dynamics force fields suitable
for unfolded states. Graduate and undergraduate students, as well as high school
students will be trained at the interface of chemistry, biochemistry, and
molecular biology. They will learn quantum mechanics, the theory and practice of
Raman, optical absorption and CD spectroscopy, protein biochemistry, and
different aspects of the relationship between structure and function of
proteins. Students from underrepresented groups will be involved in the project.