* 0804846
* Controlled Synthesis of Mesoporous Silicon Oxynitride Ceramics by Nitridization of Mesoporous Organosilicas
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2008,12/31/2009
* Tewodros Asefa, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 12/31/2009
* USD 140,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION. Silicon oxynitrides are ceramic materials that have
high mechanical and thermal strength and chemical stability. The synthesis of
silicon oxynitrides (SONs) with nanoscale and nanoporous structures, structures
with one?thousandths of the diameter of a human hair, produces high surface area
efficient catalysts, filtration membranes, sensors, nanoelectronics thin film
devices and dielectric materials nanoelectronics applications. In this project,
rational and facile synthetic methods involving controlled nitridization of pre-
made mesoporous metal oxides such as organosilicas will be investigated and
tunable mesoporous silicon oxynitride (SON) materials and thin films will be
developed. By synthesizing SON with nanoscale and nanoporous structures and
variable compositions and structures, it will be possible to improve their
properties such as surface areas, dielectric constants, quantum confinement and
luminescence. These enhancements will further improve their catalytic efficiency
and properties for applications in gate dielectric devices, and photonic crystal
waveguides. By understanding the kinetics and mechanisms of nitridization on
various mesoporous organosilicas, low cost synthetic methods to SONs with
tunable nanostructures and properties will ultimately result. The method can
also further be adapted to other ceramic materials such as silicon carbides and
silicon oxycarbide ceramics. The project will allow the training of
undergraduate students, including minority students, and graduate students to be
actively involved to learn solid-state ceramic nanomaterials synthesis and
understand structure-property relationships. The students? results in this
project are expected also to generate publications and be presented at national
conferences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION. Ceramics are diverse
materials with interesting mechanical, thermal, chemical, and optical properties
and possessing a wide range of potential applications. Their high strength and
thermal stability make them ideal for products subject to heavy use and wear and
tear such as high speed ball bearings and cutting tool inserts. In recent years,
research on silicon oxynitride (SON) ceramics has targeted novel applications
including catalysis, where the solid SON ceramic participates in base-catalyzed
chemical reactions. Attention has also turned to investigations of these
materials in nanoscale applications, where the size of the material is 1/1000th
of the width of a human hair. This project by Professor Asefa is exploring
special type of ceramics, those made from nanoporous silicon oxynitrides, in
applications such as catalysis, filtration membranes, sensors, and
nanoelectronics thin film devices and dielectric materials for metal-oxide-
semiconductor (MOS) integrated circuits. Current methods to synthesize
nanostructured silicon oxynitrides are not optimum - they require harsh
conditions and result in products whose structures are not as consistent and
uniform as required. In this project, rational and facile synthetic methods
involving controlled nitridization of pre-made mesoporous organosilca into
tunable mesoporous silicon oxynitride materials and thin films will be
developed. The approaches are expected to result in nanostructured and
nanoporous ceramics having variable compositions and structures, and improved
properties such as surface areas, dielectric constants, quantum confinement and
luminescence. These enhancements will further improve their efficiency for
solid-base catalysis, gate dielectric devices, and photonic crystal waveguides.
Undergraduate students, including minority students, and graduate students will
be actively involved in the proposed project and they will learn solid-state
ceramic nanomaterials synthesis and understanding structure-property
relationships nanoceramics. The students will present their research results at
the department?s undergraduate seminars and at the American Chemical Society
Regional Meetings.