* 0804199
* Exploring Dynamic Spin Correlations In Nanoscale Structures Via Microwave Transport Spectroscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Andrei Kogan, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 07/31/2012
* USD 330,000.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT**** One of the modern challenges of science is to
learn how to control and manipulate basic quantum systems in order to create
electronic devices with expanded functionalities. Achieving this goal requires
an improved understanding of how small systems, which are known to be strongly
influenced by their environment, behave when their conditions change over time.
This award supports a project to investigate time-dependent properties of an
electron confined to a very small region of space and interacting with nearby
macroscopic conductors. Such an arrangement possesses a striking array of highly
universal static properties due to a coherent collective behavior of the
confined and the delocalized electrons referred to as the Kondo effect. The
project will capitalize on extensive existing knowledge of the static properties
of Kondo-correlated electrons and answer fundamental questions concerning their
interaction with electromagnetic fields. Such knowledge will aid further
development of concepts in dynamics of simple quantum systems under practically
relevant, non-equilibrium conditions. The research will benefit the community
pursuing coherent control of elementary quantum states and complement recent
studies of correlated dynamics in bulk materials. Students involved in the
project will be trained in state-of-the-art technology, develop research and
critical problem solving and decision making skills and become prepared for
careers in academe, industry and government. The project will generate research
opportunities for enthusiastic high-school students, which will stimulate their
interest in research and invite them to pursue careers in science.

****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT**** Controllable quantum dots formed by a lateral
confinement of a two-dimensional electron gas in a semiconductor heterostructure
have been used in recent years by several groups to test universal scaling
properties and investigate non-equilibrium aspects of Kondo-correlated
electrons. The latter is possible in a quantum dot because a local electric
field near the magnetic "impurity", represented by an unpaired electron spin in
the dot, can be created by applying a small bias between the macroscopic source
and drain "leads" connected to the dot via tunnel barriers. This individual
investigator award will support a project to extend such studies to a time-
dependent regime and investigate dynamic properties of the Kondo state by
subjecting the quantum dot to an oscillatory bias and /or gate voltage. The
objective of the project is to test the predicted universality of observable
properties with respect to frequency and the Kondo temperature, with the
emphasis on the interplay between photon-mediated correlations and dissipation.
Experiments will be performed with quantum dots made on a GaAs/AlGaAs
semiconductor heterostructure in a specially constructed apparatus which permits
precision measurements of the device conductance in the presence of a microwave-
frequency field of tunable orientation, magnitude and frequency. Students
involved in the project will be trained in state-of-the-art technology, develop
research and critical problem solving and decision making skills and become
prepared for careers in academe, industry and government. The project will
generate research opportunities for enthusiastic high-school students, which
will stimulate their interest in research and invite them to pursue careers in
science.