* 0804040
* Physics of Strong Disorder and Correlation
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Patrick Lee, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2011
* USD 330,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and education on
emergent properties of highly correlated electronic systems. The main thrust of
the research undertaken here is the effort at theoretical characterization of
qualitatively new behaviors of interacting electrons (i.e. new states of matter)
as well as new regimes of parameters in which familiar states of matter behave
in new and different ways. In addition, some of the research explores
qualitatively the relation between the microscopic interactions between
electrons and the effective parameters that control the macroscopic behavior of
solids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The search for new states of matter continues an
ongoing effort by the PI in the theory of ''electronic liquid crystals.'' This
work is based on an analogy between classical liquid crystals and corresponding
phases of strongly interacting electrons. Electronic liquid crystals are quantum
states with behaviors intermediate between a Fermi liquid and a Wigner crystal.
Examples of such states have recently been observed experimentally: the
anisotropic states (quantum Hall nematics) that are seen in high mobility
quantum Hall devices and the metamagnetic nematic phase that has recently been
identified in Sr3Ru2O7. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The more microscopic issues to be
addressed involve the physics of the superconducting Tc. A number of questions
are addressed theoretically. What is it about superconductivity that causes
transition temperatures, generally, to be so low, while other orders, such as
ferromagnetism, frequently onset at much higher temperatures? Why is there, in
the cuprate high temperature superconductors, an ''optimal'' doping at which Tc
is maximal ? what is there an excess of in ''overdoped'' cuprates? Are there
optimal mesoscale structures for superconductivity, structures that enhance the
strength of the electron pairing without too strongly suppressing the superfluid
stiffness? The research also seeks to interpret the importance of evidence of
wide-spread mesoscale inhomogeneities in the cuprates ? both self-organized
(i.e. stripes) and nucleated by disorder. The research is motivated by a need to
clarify whether these observations are complicating details or essential to the
mechanism of high temperature superconductivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effort
undertaken has broader impacts with both scientific and educational
consequences. Scientifically, there is impact in extending the understanding of
the origins of high temperature superconductivity because that opens new
theoretical opportunities as well as providing better ability to design
materials with this highly desirable property. Involving students and
postdoctoral researchers in the diverse problems and theoretical techniques used
provides an exceptional training for talented young people. Past students and
postdoctoral researchers have gone on to university faculty positions and their
own careers in teaching and research and some have found successful positions in
high tech companies and a variety of other fields outside of mainstream
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports research and education on exotic properties and unexplained electronic
states of unusual materials. The broad thrust of the research undertaken here is
the theoretical characterization of qualitatively new behaviors and new states
of matter as well as investigating how familiar forms matter can be made to
behave in new and different ways. This research explores these unusual states of
matter by looking at the behavior of electrons and the microscopic level of the
atoms that make up the material and then connecting those behaviors with the
large scale properties which are seen in the material as a solid
whole.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The search for new states of matter continues an
ongoing effort by the PI in the theory of ''electronic liquid crystals.'' This
work develops theories of why some materials have electrons that are not just
quiescently distributed more or less uniformly but which instead group together
in various patterns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The issues to be addressed also
involve the physics of the superconducting materials, those which can conduct
electricity with no resistance and thus no waste of energy. The questions are
quite basic. What is it about superconductivity that causes working
temperatures, generally, to be so low? Why is there, in some high temperature
superconductors, an ''optimal'' composition at which the working temperature is
highest? Are there optimal ways of creating structures for superconductivity,
structures that enhance performance? The research is motivated by a need to
clarify which experimental observations are complicating details and which are
essential clue to discovering to the mechanism needed to explain high
temperature superconductivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effort undertaken has
broader impacts with both scientific and educational consequences.
Scientifically, there is impact in extending the understanding of the origins of
high temperature superconductivity because that opens new theoretical
opportunities as well as providing better ability to design materials with this
highly desirable property. Involving students and postdoctoral researchers in
the diverse problems and theoretical techniques used provides an exceptional
training for talented young people. Past students and postdoctoral researchers
have gone on to university faculty positions and their own careers in teaching
and research and some have found successful positions in high tech companies and
a variety of other fields outside of mainstream physics.