* 0804174
* Using Confinement to Study the Colloidal Glass Transition
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Eric Weeks, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 07/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in nanotechnology have
discovered that some materials behave differently on a very small scale. For
example, smaller objects are easier to break than larger objects; but small
pieces of plastic less than 100 nanometers thick are even easier to break than
would be expected by extrapolating from what we know about thicker pieces of
plastic. Plastics are amorphous materials, similar to window glass, and now it
is known that many glassy materials behave differently in small enough samples.
However, some become stronger and some become weaker. This individual
investigator award supports experiments to study a model system of small plastic
particles in a liquid, which behaves analogously to a glass when the particle
concentration is increased. The experiments will use a microscope to view the
motion of the particles and see how this motion changes when the sample is
confined between two closely spaced parallel glass plates. In this way, how the
system depends on the spacing between the plates will be directly observed. This
research is important for future nanotechnology applications that rely on tiny
structures built out of glassy materials such as plastic. This project provides
training and education for both undergraduate and graduate students.
Additionally, the laboratory will conduct at least one field trip each year for
groups of high school school students. These field trips give students hands-on
laboratory experiences, and the visual nature of microscopy makes it easy to get
students excited about their visit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;The glass transitions of polymer glasses and molecular
glasses are usually studied in the context of macroscopically large systems.
However, confining samples so that one or more dimensions are microscopic
typically changes the behavior of the sample, for example changing the
temperature at which the sample becomes a glass. This individual investigator
award supports a project to study a colloidal suspension confined in thin sample
chambers as a model system for glass transitions in confined geometries.
Colloidal suspensions are composed of microscopic-sized solid particles in a
liquid; this system behaves analogous to a glass if the particle concentration
is sufficiently high. Experiments will use confocal microscopy to directly
observe the motion of colloidal particles and how this motion changes in
confinement. Understanding the physical effects of confinement on materials is
increasingly important today as more and more technology is built at the scale
of nanometers. This project provides training and education for both
undergraduate and graduate students. The laboratory will conduct at least one
field trip each year for groups of high school school students. These field
trips give students hands-on laboratory experiences, and the visual nature of
the research makes it easy to get students excited about their visit.&lt;br/&gt;