* 0804726
* Use Particle-Tracking Velocimetric Observations to Guide Evidence-Based Investigations of PolymerDynamics in Presence of Chain Entanglement
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2012
* Shi-Qing Wang, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 04/30/2012
* USD 350,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research aims to achieve
three objectives: (A) carefully examining the previous results to identify
potential sources of technical error and scientific ambiguity; (B) removing
experimental difficulties to verify whether the new emerging picture would still
hold in absence of any artifacts that have caused controversies in the
literature; (C) building on the newly available understanding to further probe
the nature of disintegration of chain entanglement network due to external
deformation. Specifically, many current findings have not been proved to beyond
doubt and cannot form the new phenomenological foundation for polymer rheology
unless improved experiments are carried out. These experiments include (i)
interrogation of strain-induced chain disentanglement under circumstances where
the sample at the edge of a shear cell would not suffer fracture and (ii) flow
birefringence measurements in absence of any inclusions such as solid particles
that have been suspected by de Gennes to be the source of shear banding. Single-
molecule imaging velocimetry is proposed as an effective method to probe
velocity field in entangled systems without any foreign particles and to
directly determine whether shear inhomogeneity would arise from flow-induced
polymer migration or from non-uniform chain disentanglement. Finally, in
anticipation of potential implications for polymer processing, particle-tracking
velocimetric technique will be applied to examine effect of chain
disentanglement in pressure-driven flow and related
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each
year, more than two hundred billion pounds of plastic and rubber materials are
made into consumer products in this country. Such a huge volume typically flows
in a manner similar to pouring honey or squeezing tooth paste. How the various
polymeric materials flow under different processing conditions is a subject of
both academic and economic importance. The fruits of the proposed studies could
alter our long-held knowledge about polymer flow and transform the contents of
existing textbooks on the subject. Current scientific findings and proposed
research offer new hope that could eventually give the domestic market a cutting
edge in the global competition and innovation for more efficient production of
petroleum-based consumer goods of higher quality. Ultimately, the outcome of the
proposed work could directly impact the R&amp;D directions in the plastic and
rubber industries. The impact of this investigation is clearly going beyond the
border of the United State, as the emerging new picture begins to be discussed
in classroom and recorded for video streaming on the world wide web at
http://eres.avs.uakron.edu/eres/coursepass.aspx?cid=647. The visualization-
intensive nature of the research also makes it attractive materials for
youngsters in middle and high schools, making science intuitive, observational
and straightforward to perceive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;