* 0804568
* RUI - Anisotropy in Correlated Electronic Systems in Quantum Hall Regime
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Orion Ciftja, Prairie View A & M University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2012
* USD 138,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
theoretical research and education on anisotropic phases of strongly correlated
two-dimensional electronic systems in quantum Hall states. The PI aims to
elucidate the origin and the stabilization of various intermediate phases
purported to have liquid crystalline order. Though anisotropic electronic phases
in high mobility GaAs/AlGaAs hetero-structures were discovered experimentally
nearly ten years ago, their ultimate nature remains elusive. Experiments show
anisotropy arises only below a critical temperature of about 100 mK and is
observed only in high Landau levels. A key aspect of anisotropic electronic
phases that lacks understanding is the consistent orientation of such phases
with respect to the crystalline axes of the host GaAs crystal
lattice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI takes the view that the emergence of
magneto-transport anisotropy is an indicator that electrons have formed a novel
electronic phase with liquid crystalline order. The PI aims to investigate
outstanding fundamental issues, including: (i) the microscopic origin of
anisotropy; (ii) the nature of liquid crystalline states in high Landau levels
in perpendicular magnetic field; (iii) the physical mechanism of stabilization
of anisotropic liquid crystalline phases in high Landau levels; (iv) the role
played by an anisotropic electron-electron perturbation to orient and stabilize
various anisotropic phases; and (v) the existence of anisotropic liquid
crystalline phases in the lowest Landau level at low temperature stabilized by
the combined effect of a weak substrate-mediated anisotropic electron-electron
perturbation and a tilted magnetic field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Numerical and
quantum Monte Carlo calculations will be performed to address outstanding
questions about anisotropy in the quantum Hall regime. The research will
contribute to a better theoretical understanding of quantum phase transitions
and various novel liquid crystalline or hybrid phases in strongly correlated
electronic systems in low dimensions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate
students will be able to participate in valuable research experiences. This
award will further help to enhance research and education infrastructure for
underrepresented minority students at a minority HBCU institution. Through an
outreach activity, the PI aims to develop interest in science related areas at
the K-12 level in underprivileged local communities and local high schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports theoretical research and education with an aim to understand new states
of matter exhibited by electrons in high magnetic fields and confined to a
plane. Cleverly engineered structures made of semiconductor materials can hold
electrons in two dimensions. The PI will use advanced computer simulation and
theoretical methods to elucidate the quantum mechanical state of electrons in
these structures when placed in a high magnetic field. Unlike gases of atoms or
even electrons in a copper wire, electrons in these states behave in a
cooperative way that is choreographed by quantum mechanics. The PI seeks to
investigate intriguing states that are believed to be analogous to phases of
long molecules -- phases that have the sense of a particular direction and are
related to the ones in a liquid crystal display. The PI suggests that these
liquid crystal like states of electrons can appear under specific circumstances
not yet explored by experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New electronic states of
matter are interesting from the perspective of fundamental science, but are also
potential building blocks of future technologies for electronic devices,
sensors, computation, and more. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Undergraduate students
will be able to participate in valuable research experiences. This award will
further help to enhance research and education infrastructure for
underrepresented minority students at a minority HBCU institution. Through an
outreach activity, the PI aims to develop interest in science related areas at
the K-12 level in underprivileged local communities and local high schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;