* 0804186
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Identifying Maintenance Populations of a Multihost Pathogen:  Canine Distemper in Serengeti Carnivores
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2009,03/31/2011
* Meggan Craft, Craft, Meggan E
* Fellowship Award
* John Tsapogas
* 03/31/2011
* USD 163,000.00

0804186 Craft

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four month research fellowship by Dr. Meggan
Craft to work with Dr. Daniel Haydon at the University of Glasgow in the UK.

The majority of emerging infectious diseases infect multiple host species.
Despite this, little is known about the mechanisms that maintain a generalist
viral pathogen in a multi-host system. In response to this important deficiency,
this research addresses questions relating to the dynamics of multi-host
pathogens and emergent diseases by developing and analyzing a multi-host model
parameterized with data based on recently collected fieldwork. The objective of
this project is to use mathematical models to examine hypotheses about how a
multi-host pathogen like canine distemper virus (CDV) is maintained and persists
in multiple host communities. (In 1994 CDV killed a third of Serengeti lions,
was implicated in the local extinction of the African wild dog, continues to
kill domestic dogs, and still circulates in the ecosystem.) A spatial, age-
structured, multi-host model of disease transmission among Serengeti carnivores
will address four specific questions: Which species comprise the maintenance
community for CDV and what is the persistence time of CDV in the various non-
maintenance species?; Can we characterize the spatiotemporal pattern of
infection?; How might co-infection with another pathogen affect persistence?;
How does dog vaccination influence CDV dynamics in wildlife populations? What
control strategies in wild and domestic carnivores are feasible in this
ecosystem?

Studying the basic ecology of pathogen maintenance and circulation among
Serengeti carnivores will provide practical applications to the conservation of
carnivores and human livelihoods. The theoretical model developed in this
project will not only contribute to the understanding of disease dynamics in the
Serengeti but also provide specific management recommendations. The resultant
models and associated methods for estimating the parameters from empirical data
will provide tools that could be applied to other ecosystems. Theoretical
approaches to real-life conservation actions will make future disease programs
more effective, a much-needed strategy in an era of increasing emerging
diseases. Viable multi-host pathogen models are critical to understanding how to
manage emergent and re-emergent disease threats. Most importantly, developing
more effective disease control programs will have potential applications to
human and animal health worldwide.