* 0804352
* Native Defects and Impurities in Zinc Oxide Studied with Optical and Magnetic Resonance Techniques
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2008,05/31/2012
* Larry Halliburton, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 05/31/2012
* USD 419,061.00

Technical. This project makes use of a variety of optical and magnetic resonance
techniques to determine fundamental behavior of atomic-scale defects in two
wide-band-gap semiconducting materials, zinc oxide (ZnO) and aluminum nitride
(AlN). Five specific research areas are tar-geted, four in ZnO and one in AlN.
In ZnO, these include the trapping of hydrogen in oxygen va-cancies, the release
of hidden hydrogen, the formation of defect complexes involving Zn vacan-cies,
and the wavelength dependences of photoinduced changes in charge state. In AlN,
the pri-mary donors, acceptors, and their simpler complexes will be identified
and characterized. The proposed investigations in ZnO and AlN emphasize the use
of EPR/ENDOR techniques to iden-tify models of specific defect complexes. At the
same time, correlations with optical absorptions and emissions will be
established. Sample modifications will include high-temperature anneals and
electron irradiations. Magnetic resonance, optical, and electrical
characterization tools will be employed; magnetic resonance techniques include
electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR), electron-nuclear double resonance
(ENDOR), and solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR). Optical techniques
include photoluminescence (PL), photoluminescence excitation (PLE), Raman, and
absorption. Temperature-dependent Hall effect measurements will provide
electrical information. &lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical. The project addresses
fundamental research issues in a topical area of elec-tronic/photonic materials
science having technological relevance. This project includes graduate and
undergraduate student mentoring, visits to non-PhD institutions in the region
where the co-PIs will present talks, and the integration of wide-band-gap
semiconductor-based research exam-ples (including demonstrations) into the
materials physics courses at West Virginia University. Students will gain
valuable experience in a wide variety of advanced spectroscopic materials
characterization techniques. These students are also provided opportunities,
through project col-laborators, to work with scientists at both government labs
and other universities. Such interac-tions will ensure a practical applications-
oriented side to our fundamental studies. On a broader scale, an increased
understanding in the fundamental defect properties of these semiconductors may
have significant societal impacts: improved light emitters in the ultraviolet
and visible spec-tral regions, more efficient and cost-effective solid-state
lighting, improved gas sensors, im-proved scintillators for portable nuclear
detectors, photocatalysis of hydrogen, and emerging ar-eas--magnetic
semiconductors and spintronics.&lt;br/&gt;