* 0804765
* The A1 to L1_0 Transformation in FePt Films with Ternary Alloying Additions
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Katayun Barmak, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Taleff
* 06/30/2012
* USD 330,000.00

TECHNICAL: The objective of these studies is to improve our understanding of the
A1 to L10 transformation in FePt with ternary additions of V, Ti, Au, Ag or B,
through the measurement of thermodynamic and kinetic parameters of the
transformation (which occurs by nucleation and growth of the L10 phase in the A1
matrix). FePt is the leading candidate for the development of magnetic recording
media in hard disk drives (HDDs). Since its introduction, thin film technology
has allowed large increases in areal recording densities of HDDs by decreasing
the thickness of the magnetic recording medium and the dimensions of a recorded
bit. However, as recording densities increase, so does the approach to the
fundamental limit posed by superparamagnetism. As a result, there has been a
growing interest in FePt, CoPt and related ferromagnetic alloys with the
tetragonal, L10 crystal structure. These chemically-ordered tetragonal alloys
have the highest known Ku except for those containing rare-earth elements such
as Sm, which have poor corrosion resistance. The anisotropies for FePt and CoPt
are 20-40 times higher than today's Co-alloy based media. When deposited at room
temperature FePt (and CoPt) alloy films form the chemically-disordered face-
centered cubic (fcc, or A1) phase. The A1 phase has low magnetocrystalline
anisotropy and is consequently unsuitable for use as a recording medium. The
annealing times and temperatures needed to form the L10 phase, even for FePt
with its faster kinetics than CoPt, are incompatible with current media
manufacturing needs, and, at present, are major barriers to the implementation
of these alloys in recording systems. To move beyond a trial-and-error effort of
engineering the alloys for reduced (kinetic) ordering temperature, a deeper
fundamental understanding of the A1 to L10 transformation has become necessary.
Thus, as noted above, the objective of these studies is to improve our
understanding of the A1 to L10 transformation in FePt films with ternary
alloying additions. The particular emphasis of the work will be the impact of
the choice and quantity of alloying additions on these parameters. The
thermodynamic and kinetic parameters of the transformation (and the Curie
temperature of the A1 and L10 phases) in alloy films will be measured by
differential scanning calorimetry (DSC). In addition to DSC, x-ray and electron
diffraction studies will be used for phase identification and determination of
the long-range order parameter, transmission electron microscopy for
microstructure characterization, and magnetometry for coercivity measurements.
NON-TECHNICAL: The program will strongly support undergraduate research in
addition to graduate research; will make an extensive effort to involve students
from underrepresented groups; will support the operation and maintenance of the
specialized experimental infrastructure within the PI?s laboratories, the Dept.
of Materials Science and Eng. and the Data Storage Systems Center (DSSC) at
Carnegie Mellon; will ensure student participation at meetings of professional
societies, and in the semi-annual meetings of the DSSC; will help the
development of commercial technology, namely, L10 media for HDDs. In addition to
magnetic recording media, ferromagnetic L10 alloys are being considered for
magnetic actuators and other elements in micro/nano-electromechanical systems
(MEMS/NEMS). The formation of L10 alloys for these systems similarly involves
transformation from a deposited A1 phase. Therefore, these studies are also
expected to be of benefit in the development of these components.