* 0804874
* Conjugated Polymer Nanocomposites
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2012
* Stuart Rowan, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2012
* USD 309,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The incorporation of nano particles into polymers is a
general materials design approach that is employed in all areas of materials
science. The framework is attractive because it enables the creation of
materials with new or improved properties by mixing multiple constituents and
exploiting synergistic effects. Nanocomposites involving electrically
(semi)conducting conjugated polymers are of interest because their
(opto)electronic properties can be widely manipulated through combination of
different types of materials. Nanocomposites which comprise high-aspect ratio
conjugated polymer particles, i.e. nanofibers or rods, can offer a number of
special features, including percolation at low concentration, anisotropic
properties, and high internal surface area, which is important for photovoltaic
applications. However, few broadly applicable approaches are known that allow
the fabrication of well-individualized conjugated polymer nanofibers or rods and
nanocomposites thereof. The experimental research program supported by this
grant explores a new, broadly useful framework for the fabrication of such
materials. The approach relies on the use of cellulose nanofibers, which can be
isolated from several biological sources, as a high-aspect ratio nano-scale
scaffold. These cellulose nanofibers are decorated with several strategically
chosen (semi)conducting polymers and electroactive small molecules through
either adsorption of pre-formed polymers, reaction with small molecules, or in-
situ polymerization of macromolecules. Electrically conducting nanofibers thus
prepared are processed into nanocomposites with 'passive' carrier polymers with
the objective to create materials that display low percolation threshold, that
is, high electrical conductivity at low filler content. Semiconducting
nanofibers prepared by this framework are compounded with other conjugated
polymers with the objective to create co-continuous materials that are comprised
of two different semiconductors. Such semiconducting nanocomposites with high
internal surface areas are of interest in various applications, including
photovoltaic devices, which are explored in this study as one important example.
One method for the processing of the new materials is a template approach. This
recently developed fabrication scheme is based on the formation of a three-
dimensional network, which is assembled through the gelation of a dispersion of
originally well-individualized nanofibers. The gelled nanofiber template is then
imbibed with a polymer of choice, before the nanocomposite is dried and shaped.
One objective of this program is to demonstrate that the template approach is a
broadly applicable processing method.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Polymer nanocomposites comprising one-dimensional
(semi)conducting conjugated nanofillers are of broad interest in applications
that range from inexpensive conducting plastics to high efficiency polymer solar
cells. Unfortunately, these materials are very challenging to produce. The
experimental study supported by this grant explores a new framework for the
processing of such materials. Because of its exemplary and fundamental
character, the research is expected to provide a broad intellectual basis for
the future design, processing and application of advanced functional
nanomaterials. The interdisciplinary research approach will allow students to
experience a broad education and to acquire a sound knowledge base in the area
of polymer science and engineering. An exciting mix of fundamental science and
applied research will place them at the cutting edge of today's workforce. One
key element to integrated research and education is the formation of so-called
Project Research Teams, which include high school students, undergraduate and
graduate students, and faculty. This vehicle provides an exciting learning
environment and creates teaching and mentoring opportunities for graduate
students. All students will participate in outreach programs in collaboration
with the Cleveland Museum of Natural History and the Shaker Heights School
District. These activities will enhance the scientific and technological
education of the public and reach out to a very diverse audience in the local
community.