* 0804878
* Novel Polyisobutylene-Based Materials and Surfaces; Enzyme-Catalyzed Functionalization and ?Modular? Surface Construction
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2008,01/31/2016
* Judit Puskas, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 01/31/2016
* USD 723,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This award, co-funded by the Division of Materials
Research and the Office of International Science and Engineering, aims at the
synthesis and characterization of novel self-assembling nanostructured
thermoplastic elastomeric (TPE) biomaterials based on polyisobutylene (PIB).
Specifically, efforts to synthesize new "Entropy-driven" TPEs (ENTPE) will
continue. Under the current NSF support it was discovered that the dendritic
(arborescent or tree-like) arbPIB midblock of ENTPEs facilitates phase
separation and TPE behavior even with very short plastic and elastomeric end
blocks. These novel ENTPE materials were further reinforced with nano-size
fillers (carbon and silica) to yield strong rubbery nanocomposites (ENTPEC), and
their biocompatibility was demonstrated in vitro and in vivo in rabbits. Based
on this discovery, new ENTPEs will be synthesized with short end blocks, capable
of hydrogen bonding (e.g., polypeptides). Compounding these materials with
nanofillers will yield new ENTPEC nanocomposites. In order to control surface
chemistry and patterning for improved tissue integration, a new "modular"
approach using ElectroNanoSprayingTM is proposed, which allows the construction
of gradient surfaces with various chemistries and topologies. Spraying ENTPE
onto the surface of ENTPEC will yield well-controlled nanopatterns of the same
chemistry. Surface chemistry will be controlled by spraying low molecular weight
(MW) functionalized PIBs (PIB-F) where F is a biologically active compound
(nucleic acid base, peptide, protein, etc.) onto the surface of ENTPECs. The
PIB-Fs will be precision synthesized from PIB-OH made by living carbocationic
polymerization and functionalized using a novel enzyme-catalyzed
transesterification process that yields complete conversion under mild
conditions this also emerged from the current grant. The "modular" approach will
give unprecedented control over surface chemistry and surface patterning
independently, and will contribute to new fundamental understanding of the
effects of surface properties on the biocompatibility of polymeric materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This project
is aimed at the synthesis and characterization of novel biomaterials based on
polyisobutylene (PIB). These materials are soft and transparent like silicone
rubber, but self-assemble into a network without any chemical treatment which is
necessary to make silicone rubber. In 2004, one PIB-based material was FDA-
approved as the coating on drug-eluting coronary stents. More than a million of
those stents have been implanted into patients, saving lives. The proposed new
materials will have improved combination of properties. In addition, a new
approach to surface modification to improve biocompatibility will be tested in
this project. For this goal new polymers will be synthesized via "green polymer
chemistry" using enzymes as catalysts, and sprayed to the surface of the novel
biomaterials. This new "modular" approach will give independent control over
surface chemistry and patterning, providing unprecedented insight into the
effect of these properties on biocompatibility. The new materials may replace
silicone rubber in certain applications (for example, as the shell of breast
implants where impermeability is required). This project is interdisciplinary,
building on collaborators (Nanocopoeia Inc. Minnesota, BioMedical Research
Associates Akron, the University of Washington, Pomeranian Medical Academy of
Poland, University of Bordeaux, France). It is complementary to a recently
approved grant by German Research Foundation (DFG) as well as the grant approved
by the Polish Ministry of Science and Education, to test various properties of
the new biomaterials. The grant will support 1 partial female Post-doctoral
fellow (Nanocopoeia's NSF grant will complement this to full time), four Ph. D.
students (3 Americans - two of them females, one Hispanic), future REU (Research
Experience for Undergraduates) students, an RET (Research Experience for
Teachers), and high school students. It will also support international student
exchanges and project meetings directly, and international students indirectly.
The project will expose students to a great variety of scientific disciplines
(polymer chemistry, organic chemistry, material science, biochemistry, surface
science, polymer engineering, biomedical engineering, proteomics etc.). They
will also have a chance to carry out part of their research in Germany, Poland
and Ireland. Exposure to different cultures, organizations and work ethics will
prepare the students to work better in the global economy, making them more
attractive to potential employers. We will also embark on a new program
connecting science and art, in collaboration with the Myers School of Art at the
University of Akron to broaden the horizon for students of both
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;