* 0804887
* Vortices and the Interplay between Superconductivity and Magnetism
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2014
* Morten Eskildsen, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2014
* USD 440,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT

When a superconductor is placed in a magnetic field, it is threaded by swirling
whirlpools of electric current known as vortices or flux-lines. Besides being a
fundamental limiting factor in the practical applications of superconductors,
the vortices also provide a unique probe into the microscopic properties of the
host superconductor. While it is know that superconductivity always arises due
to the binding of electrons into so-called Cooper pairs, the way in which this
binding occurs is still essentially unknown in many classes of materials
including most notably the high-temperature oxides. The main goal of the present
project is to investigate a particular electron pairing in what is known as the
Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov (FFLO) state which was predicted theoretically
more than 40 years ago but has so far eluded direct observation. While studies
of the FFLO phase in itself are fundamental in nature, the larger framework of
interplay between magnetism and superconductivity is of relevance for the
practical applications of superconductivity. Students participating in the
project will be trained in the use of neutron scattering and thereby the project
will increase the future user base for US neutron sources such as the new
constructed spallation neutron source at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory. To
enhance broader awareness of the potential applications of superconductivity a
demonstration experiment featuring superconducting levitation will be
constructed. This will allow participants to lay down a magnetic track, and
levitate a model train containing a high-temperature superconductor cooled with
liquid nitrogen.

TECHNICAL ABSTRACT

Vortices induced in a superconductor by an applied magnetic field can serve as
microscopic probes of the detailed nature of the superconducting state in the
host material. The main focus of this project is to use vortex studies to
investigate the interplay between paramagnetism and superconductivity, both in
materials with localized magnetic moments as well as in the heavy-fermion
superconductor CeCoIn5. Of particular interest is the possible ways in which
pairing of electrons can occur, and the theoretical prediction of a non uniform
so-called Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovcninnikov (FFLO) superconducting state in
systems where the upper critical field is strongly Pauli limited. Recently there
has been mounting experimental evidence for the existence of such a FFLO phase
in CeCoIn5, but to date no structural evidence for this state has been observed
in this or any other superconductor; the detailed properties of the FFLO state
are still effectively unknown. The principal aim of this project is to provide
such direct evidence for the FFLO state in CeCoIn5 (if it exists) by small-angle
neutron scattering of the vortex lattice complemented with scanning tunnelling
spectroscopy. The project incorporates substantial participation by
undergraduate and graduate students and exposes them to research at large
international facilities. Hence the project contributes to the education and
training of a new generation of scientists with expertise in fields of high
demand. Finally, a demonstration experiment featuring high-temperature
superconducting levitation will be developed for use in outreach activities.