* 0804696
* Partial Differential Equations with random coefficients and Inverse Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Guillaume Bal, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2012
* USD 302,024.00

The project concerns the analysis of partial differential equations with
heterogeneous coefficients (for instance describing the propagation of waves or
particles in complex media modeled as random media) and the theory of inverse
problems. Many solutions to differential equations with heterogeneous
coefficients are not accessible to us because they are too expensive to obtain
even with today's computational capabilities. The derivation of macroscopic
models, which average the small-scale heterogeneities one way or another, is
then in order. In many applications, one is interested not only in the
(deterministic) ensemble average of the solution, for which many theories exist,
but also in a quantitative description of its random fluctuations, i.e., the
part that cannot be modeled in a deterministic manner. Understanding the latter
fluctuations is the first goal of the project. Once a model has been proposed,
the second question pertains to the reconstruction of the coefficients in the
equation from available measurements, typically performed at the boundary of a
domain of interest. A quantitative understanding of how these inverse problems
are affected by the random fluctuations in the solution is the second major
objective of the project. Equations with random (highly heterogeneous)
coefficients are ubiquitous in applied sciences. Applications include the
modeling of geological basins and of nuclear reactors, the manufacturing of
composite materials, the propagation of probing waves or particles as they are
used in remote sensing, medical imaging, and geophysical imaging. The project
will provide a better understanding of the quality of available measurements in
these applications and then provide answers to the following type of questions:
what is it we can learn about our medium (e.g. a human body in medical imaging,
a concentration of pollutants in atmospheric imaging) from available
measurements? What are the scales that we can understand and those that
mathematically cannot be reconstructed? How does one optimally mitigate the
influence of unavoidable noise in the data?