* 0804062
* NSF Workshop on Advanced Power Conditioning for Alternate Energy Systems. To be held on May 14-16, 2008 at The National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersbur, MD.
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2008,01/31/2009
* Saifur Rahman, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Yogesh B. Gianchandani
* 01/31/2009
* USD 70,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to organize a workshop to discuss
critical research and education challenges pertaining to the power electronics
requirements for integration of renewables into the grid. This workshop allows
leaders from government, industry, and faculty to work synergistically toward a
national research agenda. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will gather experts who have vision and
experience on the need of power conditioning technology and related education
for alternate energy systems. The discussions from industry will cover practical
aspects and technical challenges that need the support from academia. The
presentations from government will show government policy and long term visions.
The presentations from researchers will address technical challenges and
educational directions that need funding support from NSF and other government
agencies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed workshop presentations and discussions will be assembled into a
technical report that outlines the technical challenges and funding
prioritization for NSF. As a result, the educational and research activities
will be more in line with the need of industry, and the students involved in the
associated education and research will be quicker to adapt to their new jobs in
this field. The society will have more qualified engineers in the advanced power
conditioning technology for alternate energy systems. &lt;br/&gt;