* 0804197
* Nanostructured Block Copolymer/Ionic Liquid Composite Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2012
* Timothy Lodge, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Freddy Khoury
* 04/30/2012
* USD 540,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;Ionic liquids exhibit many appealing properties,
including chemical and thermal stability, vanishing vapor pressure, tunable
solvation, high ionic conductivity, and high dielectric constant, that render
them appealing as key ingredients in plastic electronics, batteries, fuel cells,
gas separation membranes, and actuators. To realize these properties in
applications, it is necessary to solidify the material, and/or to confine the
ionic liquid within a desired nanostructure. Block copolymers offer
unprecedented flexibility to direct self-assembly over lengthscales from 1100
nanometers, while simultaneously providing mechanical integrity. Five different
sub-projects will be pursued, that collectively range from very dilute solutions
to almost pure polymer, and that are aimed at a fundamental understanding of how
polymer/ionic liquid interactions can be utilized to prepare functional
materials. Specifically, this research will: (i) extend the concept of the
micelle shuttle, whereby copolymer aggregates transfer reversibly and intact
between aqueous and ionic liquid phases, to prepare systems that load, transfer,
and release cargo at prescribed temperatures, and to prepare nanoemulsions for
use in homogenous catalysis; (ii) prepare robust ion gels by tri- and multiblock
copolymer self-assembly, whereby gelation and melting occur at tunable
temperatures or under optical stimulation; (iii) optimize the use of ion gels as
gate dielectric materials in organic transistors, for plastic electronic
applications; (iv) create mechanically robust, ordered block copolymer membranes
with ionic liquid channels for high ionic conductivity and transport, both
isotropic and anisotropic; (v) create supramolecular polymers with relaxation
times tunable over a remarkably wide range via hydrogen bonding in ionic
liquids.&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is
to create a new class of functional nanostructured materials by combining ionic
liquids with block copolymers. Materials containing polymers and ionic liquids
are potentially useful across a wide spectrum of technology platforms, including
plastic electronics, actuators, sensors, batteries, fuel cells, and separation
membranes. For applications the simultaneous optimization of several properties,
such as high ionic transport, mechanical integrity, and facile processing, is
essential; this can be achieved through controlling the material structure at
the nanoscale. Ionic liquids are already in commercial practice in Europe as
green solvents for chemical transformations; block copolymer surfactants should
greatly extend the range of reagents, products, and catalysts that can be
employed. Graduate students working in this project will be broadly trained in
polymer synthesis and advanced characterization techniques, and will have the
opportunity to mentor talented undergraduates in research. High school students
from the greater Twin Cities, particularly females and underrepresented
minorities, will be exposed to polymer science as part of an "Exploring Careers"
summer camp administered with the Institute of Technology Center for Educational
Programs. Faculty and students from colleges and universities across the US will
spend time in the PI's laboratories to utilize one or more of the experimental
facilities, through the newly-forged Materials Research Facilities
Network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;