* 0804187
* Materials World Network : Heterogeneous Nucleation on Nanoporous Substrates
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Jonah Erlebacher, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* David A. Brant
* 06/30/2012
* USD 318,000.00

This a joint research and education project between investigators at Johns
Hopkins University in the US and Naomi Chayen at Imperial College in the United
Kingdom, with a goal to study the heterogeneous nucleation of crystals of
macromolecular species with diameters in the 1-10 nm range. Typical species with
this mesoscale include proteins and macromolecules, and are distinguished from
colloidal spheres (at larger scales) and molecules (at smaller scales) by a
large degree of internal configurational entropy; for this reason, they are
difficult to crystallize. The work here builds on an experimental observation
made by Chayen that the nucleation rate of macromolecules on nanoporous
substrates is greatly enhanced. The working hypothesis is that the nucleation
rate enhancement is specifically linked to the idea that the entropy of
crystallization of macromolecules is minimized on porous substrates when a
highly random porosity with void size of order the macromolecule width is used.
This idea competes with a published notion that the substrate curvature enhances
crystallization, which we don?t think is relevant for macromolecules on porous
substrates. A detailed study of the nucleation rate of macromolecules over
porous substrates as it varies with supersaturation, temperature, surface
chemistry, and pore size, is being performed using a new substrate material ?
nanoporous gold made by dealloying of silver/gold alloys. Nanoporous gold is a
random, uniform, mesoporous material whose mean pore size can be varied from
3-50 nm using only simple chemistry. Its surface is also easily chemically
modified, and all these features together make it uniquely perfect for this kind
of study. Nanoporous gold is also useful here because gold nanoparticles with
equivalent curvatures can be made, and we can compare and contrast
crystallization in solutions containing gold colloid to crystallization on
porous substrates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research effort supports an
international collaboration between the Chayen group at Imperial College,
London, specializing in protein crystallization and the Erlebacher group at
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, which specializes in the synthesis and
surface modification of nanoporous metals. By marrying these specializations, a
fundamental study of heterogeneous crystal nucleation on nanoporous substrates
will be efficiently pursued. The collaboration is structured with significant
exchange of students and junior personnel. The results of this research will
yield new understanding of the fundamentals of heterogeneous nucleation, with
general applicability to protein and colloidal crystallization. Furthermore, the
international collaboration will help to build networks in nucleation theory and
experiment, bridging the disciplines of thin film metallurgy and solution phase
crystallization, and involving undergraduates and graduate students all
stages.&lt;br/&gt;