* 0804794
* High-Sensitivity Measurements of Interacting Disordered Quantum Hall Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2008,04/30/2013
* Hong-Wen Jiang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 04/30/2013
* USD 345,000.00

Technical This individual investigator award supports a project to investigate
interacting disordered electrons in semiconductor heterostructures. High-
frequency measurements in radio and microwave frequency ranges will be developed
to address a set of questions that cannot directly be answered by more standard
transport techniques. An emphasis of the investigations will be on how
spin/charge interactions can influence the ground state properties of electrons
when two sets of Landau levels are brought into degeneracy. The study will be
facilitated by using resistively detected nuclear magnetic resonance and
microwave absorption spectroscopy techniques in a GaAs/AlGaAs quantum well with
two occupied subbands. Another focus of the research will be on the search for
broken-symmetry magnetic and spin-paring states of highly correlated electrons.
High-frequency spectroscopy studies will be done in strained Si/SiGe
heterostructures. The results anticipated from these experiments may have
applications in high-frequency electronics. The hands-on research, which will
include microwave engineering and characterizations, will give graduate and
undergraduate students excellent training in the important technical area of
microwave electronics.

Nontechnical: This individual investigator award supports an experimental
research project involving high-frequency studies of advanced semiconductor
devices. These electronic devices are very similar to those widely used in high-
speed electronics and in information processing. The main objective of the
project is to understand a set of newly-discovered electronic properties
stemming from the intricate interactions between two electrons due to a property
of electrons called electron spin. The ability to gain such understanding will
be made possible by using an array of unconventional high-frequency techniques.
The results anticipated from these experiments may have broader impacts on the
development of the next generation of semiconductor devices. For example,
devices using electron spins to perform information processing via memory and
logic functionality are gradually emerging. The capability to measure and
manipulate electron spins at high frequencies may become an important part of
the development of these new devices. The heavy hands-on research, which will
include microwave engineering and characterizations, will give graduate and
undergraduate students excellent training for microwave electronics, a
technological area that is of great economic importance to our society.