* 0804177
* Quantum States of OptoMechanical Structures
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Dirk Bouwmeester, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Siu Au Lee
* 07/31/2012
* USD 600,000.00

Quantum theory has been extremely successful in explaining many aspects of the
world around us. Despite this achievement, fundamental aspects of the quantum
theory are as mysterious as they were to the founders of the theory. Especially
remarkable is the feature that a particle somehow obtains information about
different "paths" it could have taken. This observation leads to the question of
what would happen if such quantum effects could be observed in macroscopic
objects. If the laws of quantum mechanics remain valid for large objects, one
seems to be forced to accept that cats can be alive and dead at the same time
(following Schroedinger's famous thought experiment). However, others question
whether such a drastic conclusion is justified based on the current support for
the theory. The fact is that all experiments to date that directly tested the
quantum superposition of individual objects are restricted to photons, atoms,
molecules and ensemble of electrons. Furthermore the quantum theory is faced
with problems when trying to unify it with the theory of relativity. It is not
possible either on theoretical or experimental grounds, therefore, to rule out
the possibility that quantum mechanics does not apply to large objects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Optical technology has progressed to the level that it is
conceivable to put a small mirror into a superposition of two quantum states.
The experiment will be done with a particularly tiny mirror, smaller in diameter
than a human hair but still about ten billion times more massive than any object
previously brought into a quantum superposition. This award provides support for
the mirror and cantilever fabrication as well as for designing a liquid-helium
cooled apparatus and performing supporting theoretical work. Furthermore it
provides travel support for establishing a close collaboration with
international experts on sub-millikelvin systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Testing
quantum mechanics in this unexplored regime is first of all of fundamental
importance. The optical control of micro-mechanical systems, in particular the
application of optical cooling techniques, is however also expected to be of
broad interest in metrology and could also be used for several different
experiments such as generating squeezed light and resonance enhanced Casimir
forces. This research program involves significant educational component, and
the research is excellent for teaching fundamental properties of quantum
mechanics and micro-mechanical systems and for training young researchers in
state-of-the-art technologies in a multi-disciplinary and international
environment.