* 0804407
* Silica Under Water Attack: Surfaces, Defects, and Nano-Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Hai-Ping Cheng, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2012
* USD 438,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education into understanding the physical principles underlying processes in
silica-water systems at macro- and nano-scale. The strength of silica-water
interactions ranges from van der Waals to covalent depending on local mechanical
and chemical conditions. External or internal stress also plays a vital role in
modifying the interaction. The mechanical and optical properties of silica in
aqueous environments and electronic structures at the water-silica interface are
entangled. Large-scale computer simulations based on first principles are
powerful tools for predicting materials behavior. This research develops
theoretical descriptions of (1) stability of dry quartz surfaces and solid-to-
liquid transition of water on silica surfaces, (2) surface defects and optical
properties modified by adsorbed molecules or nano-clusters and water, and (3)
silica nano-pores and channels filled with water and phenomena due to
nanoconfinement and stress. The second phase of the research consists of (1)
improving models for interfaces between quantum and classical regions, (2)
constructing a computing architecture to integrate modern computer codes for
parallel computing, and (3) implementing the quasi-particle self-consistent so-
called GW method. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effort undertaken has broader
impacts with both scientific and educational consequences. The research includes
implementing the GW method in a general public license (GPL) electronic
structure code so that it is freely available to the larger scientific
community. Educationally, students will receive training in the application of
both analytical and computational skills and the research helps develop broad
interest and skills in the frontiers of electronic structure calculations and
multiscale modeling. Aspects of the research, particularly the underlying
computational techniques, form part of the subject matter of the advanced
physics course ''Physical modeling and simulation'' developed by the PI at her
university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports theoretical research and education into understanding the physical
principles underlying processes in silica-water systems. Silica is a simple
molecule with one atom of silicon and two atoms of oxygen bound together. The
material is common in nature being recognized as sand or quartz. It is a
principal component of glass and substances such as concrete. Silica is the most
abundant mineral in the earth's crust. Similarly, water is one of most abundant
molecules on the Eath's surface. The proposal research helps understand the
complex interactions between these two common materials. Researchers will use
theoretical and computational tools to study the electronic structure of water
on silica surfaces and will be able to investigate the chemical processes that
then take place. Large-scale computer simulations based on first principles are
powerful tools used for predicting the materials behavior.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effort undertaken has broader impacts with both
scientific and educational consequences. The research includes implementing the
computational methods in a computer code that it is freely available to the
larger scientific community. Educationally, students will receive training in
the application of both analytical and computational skills and the research
helps develop broad interest and skills in the frontiers of electronic structure
calculations and multiscale modeling. Aspects of the research, particularly the
underlying computational techniques, form part of the subject matter of the
advanced physics course ''Physical modeling and simulation'' developed by the PI
at her university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;