* 0804015
* Supramolecular Nano Assemblies for Energy and Electron Transfer
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Francis D'Souza, Wichita State University
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 07/31/2011
* USD 374,867.00

With the support of the Organic Dynamics Program in the Chemistry Division,
Professor Francis D?Souza of the Chemistry Department at Wichita State
University will rationally design and study supramolecular nano-structured
donor-acceptor assemblies for efficient photoinduced electron and energy
transfer, and utilize them to develop photovoltaic devices. The proposed
multidisciplinary research activity seeks a firm understanding of the design of
porphyrin, fullerene, carbon nanotube and carbon nanocups - bearing
supramolecular architectures for efficient electron transfer in a controlled
manner. The multiple donor and acceptor entities in the proposed
molecular/supramolecular architectures are specifically selected to understand
the nature and kinetics of intra- and intermolecular interactions as a function
of molecular structure and topology. The proposed research is expected to
contribute significantly to the present understanding of self-assembly
processes, creating long-lived charge separated states by means of
supramolecular methods, electron transfer in functionalized carbon nanotubes and
nano structures, and the role of noncovalent interactions on the mechanistic and
kinetic aspects of photoinduced electron transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research by Professor D?Souza of Wichita State University describes a program of
highly integrated research, education, and outreach in supramolecular
nanoscience, relevant to harvesting solar energy. These nanohybrids will impact
diverse applications in materials chemistry especially for building devices for
light energy harvesting. Development of novel energy sources other than those
based on fossil fuels or nuclear energy is a research topic that is of
considerable scientific and societal importance. Research, teaching, mentoring,
and leadership skills will be strengthened through innovative methods.
Communication skills will be developed by domestic and international
collaborations, and augmented by disseminating research findings through
presentations at conferences and universities, and publications in peer-reviewed
journals. Technical and problem-solving skills to help future members of the
nation?s workforce gain employment in high technology areas will be improved by
exposing personnel (including women and minorities) to a wide range of
scientific techniques inherent to the multidisciplinary nature of the proposed
research.&lt;br/&gt;