* 0804810
* Hydrogen-Dislocation Interactions at Low Temperature in Deformed Pd:  Spatial and Vibrational Characterization  Using Neutron Scattering and Advanced Computational Techniques
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2008,05/31/2012
* Dallas Trinkle, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Taleff
* 05/31/2012
* USD 419,724.00

TECHNICAL: This project focuses on studying of hydrogen-dislocation trapping
interaction at low temperature in deformed Pd using neutron scattering and
advanced computational techniques. This project is a follow up of a recent SGER
grant to PI (DMR-0634336) from the Metals program. This trapping interaction has
been studied in the past by several groups, but never at low temperature (to
about 4K), nor with a combination of inelastic neutron scattering (INS), small-
angle neutron scattering (SANS), and density functional theory (DFT). The
research effort will be based on recent INS and DFT work by the PIs. This work
demonstrates 1) that hydrogen trapped at dislocations undergoes a bulk-like
phase transformation during cooling from 295 K to 4 K, with a vibrational
density of states (DOS) that may be a signature of local distortion and 2) that
DFT can be used to relax an edge dislocation in Pd with flexible boundary
conditions. This initial work provides a foundation for further experimental
study of the behavior of hydrogen in the distorted environment of dislocations.
The experimental characterization will include the measurements of the
vibrational DOS with INS and quantification of the radial extent of the trapped
hydrogen with SANS. The experimental parameter space will include temperature,
hydrogen concentration, and control of the dislocation substructure. The
computational component of the work will yield the hydrogen binding energy at
different sites within and near the dislocation core and the vibrational DOS for
trapped hydrogen. Of particular interest are perturbations of the measured
vibrational DOS with the distorted dislocation environment. Although these
perturbations are likely due to lattice distortion, the INS and SANS
measurements alone cannot conclusively identify their origin. A direct, first-
principles calculation of the trapped hydrogen vibrational DOS in a relaxed
lattice is necessary. NON-TECHNICAL: The education merit of the research is
related to the combined application of neutron scattering techniques and
advanced computational methods to study these trapping interactions. The PIs
have the expertise required to perform the work, and the preliminary INS and DFT
work provides a reasonable basis for further investigation. It is anticipated
that the research will promote an improved understanding of the behavior of
hydrogen in distorted lattice environments. The work will have an impact beyond
a detailed study of hydrogen trapping at dislocations in Pd. Two graduate
students will be educated and trained in two research protocols, neutron
scattering and advanced computational techniques that are at the forefront of
scientific inquiry. The breadth of DFT in materials research is extensive, as
are the recent investments in neutron scattering infrastructure at NIST, ORNL,
and LANL. Graduate students trained in the use of these protocols will be well
positioned for productive scientific careers.