* 0804916
* Bipolar Doping in Wide-Band-Gap Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Douglas Keszler, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2012
* USD 272,634.00

This award to Oregon State University by the Solid State Materials Chemistry
program in the Division of Materials Research is to support a collaborative
project aimed at the synthesis and study of new wide band gap compound
semiconductors that can be selectively doped either n- or p-type. Such bipolar
materials are of fundamental interest in setting the foundation for a variety of
new technologies including broad-spectrum solar cells, highly efficient
polycrystalline inorganic light-emitting devices (ILEDs), complementary printed
electronic circuits, and photocatalytic production of hydrogen from water. The
fundamental scientific question is whether the valence and conduction band
positions can be optimized to allow one material to be a host to either n- or p-
doped carriers without excessive compensation. The basic premise is to seek
materials that&lt;br/&gt;have two (or more) cations that are known to be
reliable hosts of each of the conductivity types&lt;br/&gt;and combine them in a
single material. This designed materials approach to realizing such bipolar
behavior is expected to discover new p- and n-type semiconductors that will be
useful in applications from solar cells to transparent electronics. As part of
the project, the investigators will explore bulk powder materials and selected
thin film systems using a range of experiments that probe structural,
electrical, and optical properties of the materials and their defects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of this project, students will be trained in
gaining experience in a broad range of synthesis and characterization techniques
covering a wide spectrum of new wide band gap compound semiconductors from
powders to thin films. In addition, this work will involve close collaboration
between faculty, graduate students and undergraduate students in Chemistry and
Physics departments. As a research extensive university, Oregon State University
expects all students to participate in cutting edge research in order to
contribute to the knowledge base, which in turn is to provide the basis for
Ph.D. and undergraduate senior thesis dissertations. Students will learn the
techniques of solid state chemistry and physics, and understand the scientific
process by engaging in collaborative research, rigorous scrutiny of their work
by peers and mentors, delivering accomplished presentations, and receiving
mentorship and being mentors as appropriate. An outreach component of the
proposed collaboration is the integration with a regional undergraduate summer
research program sponsored by industry.&lt;br/&gt;