* 0804438
* Ultrathin Polymer Films:  Viscoelasticity, Physical Aging and Failure
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2008,12/31/2012
* Gregory McKenna, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 12/31/2012
* USD 485,250.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;The behavior of ultrathin polymer films below the
glass temperature is not well understood despite its importance in micro- and
nano-scale engineering of polymeric structures. Research is to be performed to
understand the physical aging response of ultrathin polymer films as a function
of temperature and of film thickness for several different polymeric materials.
The approach includes making measurements using a novel bubble inflation method
of measurement developed in the labs of Texas Tech University (TTU) to perform
equi-biaxial and nonequibiaxial deformation geometries. These will be the first
physical aging measurements on freely standing ultrathin polymer films. In
addition, the work adapts a unique dewetting method in order to perform physical
aging experiments below but near to the glass transition for polystyrene films.
These dewetting experiments provide completely different film constraint than do
the nanobubbles and comparison of the results between the two methods provides a
strong challenge to both techniques that are nominally similar, but in the
literature have given different and, to-date, unreconciled results. The work
also directly probes the dynamics of confined polymers and addresses
unreconciled mesoscale vs. nanoscale aging responses that have been reported in
the literature. Finally, material failure at the nanometer size scale has been
little investigated and the TTU bubble inflation technique will be exploited to
examine the rupture behavior of ultrathin polymer
films.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Polymers are widely
used in micro-, now becoming nano-, electronics applications. Because it is
observed that polymer material properties change when feature sizes are smaller
than 100 nm, this makes design and prediction of the polymer behavior at the
nanoscale difficult for the electronics developer and designer. Similar effects
occur in nanocomposites and other futuristic applications of polymers at the
nanoscale. The present work is designed to put two different methods of
measurement of nanoscale properties into direct confrontation in order to
reconcile differences of nanoscale properties that have been reported in the
literature. One method is the TTU nanobubble inflation test developed by the
principal investigator in Lubbock, TX and the other is a nanofilm dewetting
method developed by researchers at the E.S.P.C.I. in Paris, FR. The outcome of
the work will provide highly important insights into the reasons for
similarities and differences in reported material behaviors at the nanometer
size scale. In addition to the technical work the research is to be carried out
by graduate students in the Chemical Engineering Laboratories at TTU and will
provide opportunities for two students to be trained and to achieve the bulk the
research education to obtain their Ph.D. degrees. Finally, the results of the
research will be widely disseminated through journal publication and
presentations by the PI and students at national meetings.&lt;br/&gt;