* 0804167
* Mixed-Valent Transition Metal Oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2008,12/31/2015
* Mas Subramanian, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 12/31/2015
* USD 778,362.00

This exploratory research program is directed towards the identification,
synthesis, and characterization of mixed-valent transition metal oxides with
charge ordering which results in coupling between electrical and magnetic
properties. In this project, the emphasis is on the discovery of new classes of
compounds where charge ordering can lead to ferroelectricity and magnetic order.
The materials discovered in the program will have major impact in magnetic
storage and sensing systems that are needed in next generation high-speed
computers. Both graduate and undergraduate students will participate in this
program and will acquire education and training in cutting-edge research
techniques used in the materials synthesis, crystal structure analysis and
electrical characterization using state-of-the-art research tools. Students will
report research progress locally as well as give presentations of finished work
at scientific meetings at national and international levels.
&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;One area of intense research in solid state chemistry
is the discovery of new compounds that can simultaneously exhibit various
properties leading to multifunctional miniature electronic devices. A striking
example is the coexistence of ferromagnetism and ferroelectricity in a single
material platform that will revolutionize high speed computer industry by
enabling devices that can read and write data simultaneously and is the subject
of this program. Our exploratory research focuses on the identification,
synthesis, and characterization of new and known oxide based materials
containing transition elements with an ordered arrangement of electronic charges
giving rise to strong coupling between electrical and magnetic properties. This
program provides training for both undergraduate and graduate students in
synthetic materials chemistry, crystal structure analysis and electronic
properties. It will also provide these students with the intellectual challenge
of understanding the complex behavior of newly synthesized materials and help
forge links between chemistry, physics and material science. Connections to high
school students will be extended via presentations and by making available
hands-on research experiences in PI laboratories. Students participating in this
research program will have an experience that will prepare them well for the
modern industrial environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;