* 0804043
* Glasses with Fictive Temperature-Independent Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2013
* Minoru Tomozawa, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2013
* USD 488,225.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: In general, properties of a glass vary depending upon
how fast it was cooled from its melt. There are two different types of glasses:
normal glass and anomalous glass and they exhibit the opposite cooling rate
dependences of properties. Thus, between these two types of glasses with
opposite trends, there should be some special glasses whose properties do not
change with cooling rate. These glasses are expected to be useful in many
applications. For example, a flat panel display screen made of such glasses
would not change its volume during the heat-treatment and electrodes can be
placed at precise positions, leading to clearer images on the screen. When a
glass is scratched with a hard object, a portion of the glass appears to change
its structure and properties, which can lead to easy cracking. The special glass
to be investigated in this research appears not to change its properties during
scratching and is consequently less likely to crack. One graduate student and
two undergraduate students will be trained in this program. At least one of the
three students will be female.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: Glass
prepared under different cooling rates is defined in terms of its fictive
temperature, i.e., the temperature at which the liquid freezes into the glassy
state. Glasses with fictive temperature-independent properties are expected to
exhibit unique characteristics useful in practical application such as non-
compaction during liquid crystal display glass processing. Diamond indentation
is often used to characterize mechanical properties of glasses, but what is
happening during indentation is not clear. It appears that fictive temperature
of a glass increases during indentation and the fictive temperature dependence
of glass properties plays an important role in mechanical behavior under
indentation. Thus, this study of the proposed glasses is expected to lead to the
development of glasses with unique properties and clarify what is occurring
during indentation in glasses and other brittle materials.