* 0804243
* Spin-Diffusion in Magnetic Multilayer Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Tim Mewes, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 07/31/2012
* USD 272,250.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;Electrons have two properties that make
them the prime elements in many electronic devices. These properties are their
electrical charge and what is known as electron spin, the fact that they
individually produce a magnetic field. It is when all or most of the electron
spins are aligned or anti-aligned in an electrically conducting material, a
metal, that properties of that material known as ferromagnetism or anti-
ferromagnetism exists. This project will investigate how long the spins take to
become ordered or disordered from a magnetic state while diffusing through
layers of different types of metals. The studies will determine the rate at
which the magnetic state relaxes or diffuses through the sample layers. These
properties of the material are of high importance to "spintronics". Spintronics
is the name of a new type of device operating on the properties of the electron
spin and charge rather than just on the charge as is currently used in
semiconductor electronics. This project seamlessly integrates educational
activities into the research program at all levels of education. In addition
outreach efforts to faculty members from historically black colleges and
universities (HBCUs) through an existing workshop during the summer months will
continue. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;**** TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;The
magnetization relaxation in magnetic multilayer structures is of crucial
importance for their application in spintronic devices including read-heads,
magnetic random access memories and spin-torque oscillators. A better
understanding of the relaxation mechanisms will enable further optimization of
the magnetic multilayer structures for spintronic applications. This work will
combine the techniques of vector-network analyzer ferromagnetic resonance (VNA-
FMR) and shorted waveguide ferromagnetic resonance to obtain information about
the magnetization dynamics and the magnetization relaxation in magnetic
multilayer structures over a wide frequency range. The three main thrusts of the
proposed work are the investigation of the influence of doping on the spin-
diffusion in thin copper films, the determination of the interfacial spin-flip
probability at metal/metal interfaces and the investigation of spin-diffusion in
metallic antiferromagnets. This project seamlessly integrates educational
activities into the research program at all levels of education. In addition
outreach efforts to faculty members from historically black colleges and
universities (HBCUs) through an existing workshop during the summer months will
continue.