* 0804301
* Isotope Assisted Site Specific Molecular Structural Determination of Abeta Peptides
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2015
* Prasad Polavarapu, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2015
* USD 375,000.00

In this award, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division, Professor Polavarapu and his students from Vanderbilt
University will investigate the molecular structure of Abeta peptides. The
conversion of water soluble alpha helical structure into aggregate forming beta
sheet structure for full length Abeta peptide [amyloid peptide, Abeta(1-42)] is
thought to be responsible for the onset of amyloid disease. To understand this
process, the source of initiation of this process needs to be known.
Specifically, it is not understood if this structural transition is initiated at
a particular amino acid site, or at a certain segment in the Abeta peptide. The
purpose of this proposal is to deduce site-specific molecular structural
information of Abeta peptide with the use of selected C-13 isotope labels for
the amide C=O groups and chiroptical spectroscopy. The main chiroptical
spectroscopic method in this project is the newly developed vibrational circular
dichroism (VCD) spectroscopy. Accompanying electronic circular dichroism (ECD)
spectral studies will also be undertaken in order to supplement the structural
information obtained from VCD studies. Vibrational absorption (VA) spectra,
which are automatically measured along with VCD spectra, will be used to gain
additional structural information. To accomplish the stated goals, isotope
labeled short length Abeta peptides will be synthesized and investigated.
Simultaneous quantum chemical investigations of vibrational properties will also
be undertaken for the isotope labeled short length Abeta peptides to aid in the
interpretation of experimental spectra. These combined experimental and quantum
chemical investigations on isotope labeled short length peptides are hoped to
provide site-specific molecular structural information for Abeta
peptide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Polavarapu will involve students in
research and plans outreach activities to a nearby minority serving institution,
Tennessee State University. Students from this university will participate in
summer research activities, and are invited to attend weekly summer lectures on
chiroptical spectroscopy. Also in the summers, week-long workshops on this
technique will be held, targeting a mixed audience from chemical industry and
academic laboratories.