* 0804020
* Nanostructural Evolution and Magnetic Response in the Oxidation of FeCo Nanomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2016
* David Laughlin, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 06/30/2016
* USD 804,000.00

TECHNICAL: PI?s plan to conduct research on synthesis, structure, properties and
performance relationships in magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs) having promise for
applications in RF absorption, medicine, RF heating and ferrogels with unique
magnetomechanical response. The intellectual merit of the work lies in: (1)
furthering understanding of nanostructural evolution, oxidation products and
rates of FeCo/ferrite nanocomposite materials and (2) the relationship of
nanostructure (including surface and interface crystallography, metal and oxide
volume fractions, thermodynamics of small particles and composition) with high
frequency switching of MNPs, ferrofluids and composites. Research objectives are
to develop fundamental understanding of magnetic metal/oxide core shell
structures in terms of: (a) understanding the sequence of oxide formation and
epitaxial relationships with polyhedral facetted magnetic FeCo nanoparticles;
(b) modeling chemical partitioning occurring in oxidation and it?s role in
developing surface and interfacial anisotropy in MNPs; (c) microstructural
observations and magnetic properties measurements to determine anisotropy
mechanisms which control Neel relaxation processes and (d) the role of Neel
relaxation in the RF field activated heating of 2-phase FeCo/ferrite MNPs. This
work couples with collaborations with the Pittsburgh Hillman Cancer Research
Center to develop RF heating of nanoparticles for thermoablative cancer therapy
and the Pittsburgh McGowan Tissue Engineering Center to develop magnetic tagging
of tissue scaffolds and ferrogel magnetomechanical response for the same. NON-
TECHNICAL: The potential for broad impact lies in the materials having promise
in RF heating of fluids, polymers and epoxies. The work will further
understanding of nanostructural development and control of magnetothermal
response in these applications. Efficient point source heating of nanoparticles
can be exploited for thermoablative cancer therapies and to promote attachment
to tissue scaffolds if adherent, biocompatible oxide shells can be engineered
and functionalized with appropriate surfactants to stabilize aqueous ferrofluids
and antibodies to promote cell or tissue attachment. Work will be disseminated
in publications and presentations at the MMM and materials conferences (MRS
and/or TMS). Interactions and collaborations will also aid broad dissemination.
We will interact with K. Hono of NRIM for field ion microscopy and Monica
Sorescu of Duquesne Univ. for Mossbauer spectroscopy. Research will couple to
educational initiatives. The PI?s have offered (2007) an undergraduate (UG)
course ?Structure, Properties and Performance Relationships in Magnetic
Materials? following a decade teaching the graduate course ?Applied Magnetism
and Magnetic Materials? in the CMU Materials Science and Engineering (MSE) Dept.
The PI?s have developed Powerpoint modules (2007) and distributed 350 pages of
chapters through the CMU Blackboard system. These will be extended with the aim
of publishing an UG Magnetic Nanomaterials text. The PI?s will continue a long
history of sponsoring UG research projects (with many women and minority
students), during this project.