* 0804183
* Robustness in Biological Networks
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2013
* Chao Tang, University of California-San Francisco
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2013
* USD 360,000.00

The Division of Materials Research and the Physics Division contribute funds to
this award. This award supports theoretical research at the interface between
physics and the biological sciences. The PI will use the tools of statistical
physics to investigate biological networks. The research may have impact on our
broader understanding of networks more generally.

Behind the enormous diversity and complexity of the biological world lie
?universal? principles at and across various scales and levels of organization.
These principles help us to simplify and demystify the complexity that is
otherwise difficult to comprehend. Functional robustness as a prerequisite of
biological systems may place fundamental constraints on the underlying design of
the biological networks. The proposed project explores this possibility by using
concepts and tools in statistical mechanics and focusing on a set of specific
biological systems. The PI will explore whether and how a network?s topology is
dictated by the requirement of robustness for a given function, which part of
the topology is ?universal? and which part is variable, and whether sense can be
made of the design of the biological networks in this context. A significant
part of the proposed research is to construct coarse-grained models and to
analyze network ensembles. Insights from modeling at proper coarse-grained
levels play a unique role in our understanding of the complex biological
systems.

A deeper understanding about the function-topology relationship in biological
circuits may have impact on the emerging field of synthetic biology. The general
approach developed here may also be applicable to other network systems, such as
ecological and social networks.

This research project offers a valuable interdisciplinary educational
experience. It will be integrated into the PI?s on-going effort in the
curriculum development and training for a new generation of scientists with
skills that cross disciplinary boundaries. The project can be naturally divided
into small pieces suitable for students of different backgrounds and academic
stages. It will involve lab rotation students, under-represented students, as
well as international collaboration and student exchange.

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY: The Division of Materials Research and the Physics
Division contribute funds to this award. This award supports theoretical
research at the interface between physics and the biological sciences. The PI
will use the tools of statistical physics to investigate biological networks.
Biological systems exhibit the property of robustness ? they are remarkably
resistant to particular stress from the environment. The PI aims to gain insight
how imposing the property of robustness constrains networks. Is there a
fundamental principle that helps us to cut through the complexity of, say, a
cellular network and better understand its structure and interconnections? Could
the same principle help us to better understand complex networks of entangled
large molecules ? polymer systems, or the power grid? This research may have
impact on our understanding of networks more generally.

This research project offers a valuable interdisciplinary educational
experience. It will be integrated into the PI?s on-going effort in the
curriculum development and training for a new generation of scientists with
skills that cross disciplinary boundaries. The project can be naturally divided
into small pieces suitable for students of different backgrounds and academic
stages. It will involve lab rotation students, under-represented students, as
well as international collaboration and student exchange.