* 0804093
* Collaborative Proposal: Novel Semiparametric Two-part Models: New Theories and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Xiao-Hua Zhou, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 09/30/2012
* USD 104,507.00

The long term goal of this study is to develop novel semiparametric analysis
tools for biological, economical, demographical, and medical studies. In this
study, the investigators propose novel semiparametric two-part models for
analysis of (1) case I and (2) case k interval censored data with a cured
subgroup, and (3) left censored data. Compared with existing ones, the proposed
models have greater flexibility by allowing for semiparametric transformation
functions and partially linear covariate effects. This study is the first to
systematically investigate semiparametric two-part cure rate models with
interval censored data, and two-part partially linear transformation models with
left censored data. The investigators rigorously establish asymptotic properties
of the proposed estimates using advanced empirical process techniques, and
demonstrate a systematic framework for future semiparametric analysis of such
data. Intensive numerical studies are employed to demonstrate superiority of
proposed methods and provide guidelines for practical data
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study has the following
scientific merits. (1) From a modeling point of view, it enriches semiparametric
methodologies in general. The proposed models differ significantly from existing
parametric or semiparametric alternatives, and are valuable additions to the
family of semiparametric models. (2) From a methodology point of view, the
investigators establish a general framework of penalized estimation and
resampling-based inference for semiparametric models using advanced empirical
process techniques. This framework is useful for many other studies. (3) From a
statistical practice point of view, the proposed study provides powerful tools
for analyzing ongoing studies and has a direct impact. (4) In addition,
extensive numerical studies show that the proposed methods are more efficient,
more flexible, and less sensitive to model mis-specification. In large scale
studies, variables can have complex, nonlinear associations, and observations
may be extremely expensive to collect.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed models, along with
rigorous analysis techniques, provide more efficient usage of such data, reveal
more subtle structures, and benefit the whole scientific society in the long
run. The proposed study has the following beneficial, educational and social
impacts. (1) It fosters more intensive collaborations among investigators from
different institutes and background.&lt;br/&gt;(2) It promotes teaching,
training and learning at Yale University and University of Washington. (3) The
investigators attend statistical and scientific meetings and present their
research, which may promote interdisciplinary research among other
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;