* 0804111
* Liquid Crystal Interface Control and Phenomena
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2012
* Charles Rosenblatt, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 06/30/2012
* USD 283,286.00

This award to Case Western Reserve University by the Solid State Materials
Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research is to enhance our
understanding about the nature of interaction between surfaces and liquid
crystal, especially in the realm of controlled polar tilt. The main goal of the
project includes novel approaches to alignment using ink-jet technology, to
quasiperiodic dielectric lasers based on liquid crystals, and to surface
chirality-induced polarization phenomena. Advances in these areas are expected
to transform our conceptions about, and methodology toward, liquid crystal
orientation control and applications. Additionally, the proposed work seeks to
achieve significantly improved control and much deeper understandings of
anchoring well beyond the harmonic approximation and of reverse tilt domains and
associated topological defects. In this light, the proposed work has several
objectives interconnected by the common theme of surface manipulation. As part
of this project, two different aligning polyimides will be used to control
pretilt angle of the liquid crystal on length scales as small as a few
micrometers. These studies are expected to develop a novel electrically-
switchable, polarization-independent blazed grating. The proposed studies with
quasiperiodic dielectric structures via surface orientation control are expected
to serve as photonic band gap devices, and may be used as highly tunable
mirrorless lasers.

The scientific broad impact of the proposal could be very strong in
understanding the basic science behind the interactions of liquid crystals with
alignment layers and the basic soft condensed matter physics about these
alignments and interactions. The properties of new gratings that are planned
would have interesting applications as lasing media and new devices such as
laser beam steering and adaptive optics. The proposed teaching, training and
outreach activities of students from High School to Postdoctoral levels would
have a significant impact in developing a strong pool of future scientists. As
part of this research project, new graduate and undergraduate courses such as
?Optics of Complex Fluids? and ?The Physics of Liquid Crystals? will be further
developed and expanded, and will be incorporated in to Case Western University
curriculum.