* 0804209
* Materials Discovery by Crystal Growth:  A Synthetic Strategy to Prepare Complex Oxides from High Temperature Solutions
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Hans-Conrad zur Loye, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 08/31/2011
* USD 277,603.00

This renewal award by the Solid State Materials Chemistry program in the
Division of Materials Research to University of South Carolina addresses the
discovery and the crystal growth of new materials by utilizing hydroxide fluxes
as a synthetic strategy in preparing new complex oxides in single crystal form.
Many important physical properties that enable the functioning of new electronic
devices, data storage materials, battery components and superconductors are
found in oxide materials containing transition metal elements. This is a
versatile group of chemical compounds that can be selectively modified to
exhibit desirable physical properties that will lay the groundwork for new
devices and applications of the future. With this award, Professor zur Loye will
be developing advanced methods for synthesizing new oxides to determine the
atomic structure of these materials, to investigate their electronic and
magnetic properties, and to enable their utilization in a variety of
applications. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposal focuses on the discovery of
new materials and the training of the next generation researcher in the US.
These two goals will be accomplished by using crystal growth in hydroxide fluxes
as a synthetic strategy to prepare complex oxides, to discover new materials,
and to provide a valuable educational experience for students from undergraduate
to graduate and postdoctorate. The scientific goals focus on expanding and
improving the approach of single crystal growth as a means of exploring phase
space for materials discovery, while the teaching goals will assure the
education of a wide range of individuals, including those from underrepresented
groups, in the area of solid state and materials
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;