* 0804452
* The Effect of Strain on the Phase Separation and Magnetoelectric Coupling in Manganites
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Amlan Biswas, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 07/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT

Multiferroics are compounds which can be simultaneously magnetized (are
ferromagnetic) and electrically charged (are ferroelectric). Such compounds hold
promise for applications in devices and lead to unprecedented data-storage
capacity. However, the underlying mechanism which leads to such unique
properties is poorly understood and needs to be resolved before practical
devices can be fabricated. This individual investigator award supports the study
of a family of multiferroic manganese oxide compounds known as manganites. The
properties of manganites are intimately linked to their crystal structure. The
theme of this project is to quantify the role played by crystal structure in
multiferroic manganites and suggest methods to design materials better suited
for device applications. High quality manganite thin films will be grown using
laser ablation. These thin films' response to strain (change in the crystal
structure) will be studied by measuring the change in their electrical
resistance and magnetism. The microscopic effect of strain will be studied using
techniques such as a microscope capable of mapping the local magnetism of the
material. Since the research and training program includes both sample
preparation and measurement, this award will help train undergraduate and
graduate students in various aspects of condensed matter physics research and
give them a broad based experience, which will enhance their future career
options in the industry or academe.

TECHNICAL ABSTRACT

Perovskite manganese oxides (manganites) display unique properties such as
micrometer scale phase separation and multiferroism, which are intimately linked
to their crystal structure. Hence, the electrical and magnetic properties of
manganites are sensitive to strain. This individual investigator award supports
an experimental program to directly measure the effect of strain on the
properties of manganites and by comparing the results to the predictions of
theoretical models, determine the origin of phase separation and multiferroism
in manganites. The experimental results are also expected to reveal methods of
enhancing the magnetoelectric coupling in multiferroic manganites and
controlling the nanoscale properties of phase separated manganites. High quality
manganite thin films will be grown using pulsed laser deposition. The thin films
will then be subjected to direct external stress using a three point beam-
bending apparatus to induce uniaxial strain in the material. Using a
complementary suite of local and bulk measurement techniques such as
magnetotransport, magnetization, scanning probe microscopy, and neutron
reflectometry, the phase diagram of the thin films will be mapped as a function
of strain, magnetic field, electric field, and temperature. Since the research
and training program includes both sample preparation and measurement,
undergraduate and graduate students will be able to learn about a wide variety
of materials and experimental techniques, which will prepare them for academic
and industrial careers.