* 0804255
* Models for Atmospheric Organic Nitrate-Forming Reactions
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2012
* John Barker, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 05/31/2012
* USD 550,216.00

The goal of this work is to determine the fundamental dynamics of key organic
nitrate-forming reactions and develop predictive models of this chemistry. It is
hypothesized that the master equation (ME) approach for this class of reactions
suffers from a failure of Rice-Ramsperger-Kassel-Marcus (RRKM) theory because of
slow intramolecular vibrational energy redistribution (IVR). Quasi-classical
trajectory (QCT) calculations will be used to assess the importance of slow IVR
in the reaction system consisting of peroxy radicals (RO2) with nitric oxide
(NO) to form alkoxy radicals (RO) or alkyl nitrates (RONO2). When feasible,
analytical potential energy surfaces will be constructed; direct dynamics with a
parameterized semiempirical quantum theory like NDDO-SRP (neglect of diatomic
differential overlap - specific reaction parameters) will also be used to
calculate the potential and its gradients. Both approaches will be evaluated
using high level electronic structure calculations. Temperature and pressure-
dependent yields of nitrates from nitrate radical (NO3) + alkene reactions of
primary and secondary alkenes as a function of carbon chain length will also be
calculated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results will enable other researchers to
develop accurate atmospheric chemistry models to predict atmospheric nitrate
yields as a function of temperature, pressure, and the identity of the RO2
radical or alkene. All parameterizations, ME source codes, and models will be
made freely available on the internet. Insights into non-RRKM kinetics will be
applicable to the study of other non-equilibrium systems, such as in combustion.
Students and postdoctoral research associates will learn about chemical kinetics
theory, QCT dynamics, and quantum chemistry methods in the context of
atmospheric chemistry.