* 0804433
* Towards Dispersion Management and Coherent Plasmon Optics in Nanostructured Metallodielectric Composites
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Miriam Deutsch, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 06/30/2012
* USD 440,660.00

Technical: This project aims for greater understanding, development, and optical
characterization of new metallodielectric nano-composite materials. Dispersion
of the dielectric permittivity, as arising from composition, structure and
symmetry is a primary issue of concern, because it enables control, creation and
detection of optical information, since new dispersive phenomena are now known
to arise in micro and nanostructured materials. The approach addresses such
dispersive response in selection of nanostructured metallodielectric composite
materials, referred to as metamaterials, and study of linear optical response of
metallodielectric composites in the context of three fundamentally distinct
dispersion management protocols: (i) Starting with nanostructured composites,
effective material permittivities will be measured, delineating their dependence
on symmetry, scale and order. (ii) At the meso-scale, plasmon mode-coupling in
quasi two-dimensional metallodielectric photonic crystals will be studied in the
context of a coherently-induced transparency. (iii) At the material level,
coupling of the metallodielectric structures to a resonant gain medium will
allow active control over metamaterial dispersion. The integrated results of
this study are expected to result in a more comprehensive and fundamental
understanding of dispersion management in both active and passive metamaterials.
Since the project addresses fundamental questions of light-matter interactions
in nanoscale plasmonic systems, results and knowledge gained will be relevant to
understanding signal manipulation in sub-diffraction volumes in the presence of
strong dispersion. Such understanding is expected to have impact in fields such
as light harvesting, nanoscale signal routing and storage, high-resolution
imaging systems and active plasmonic devices. Non-technical: The project
addresses basic research issues in a topical area of electronic/photonic
materials science with high technological relevance. Current development of
photonic devices capable of manipulating optical information may substantially
impact advancement of present and future optical technologies. The proposed
research is interdisciplinary in nature, offering collaborative opportunities
for all participating students. A goal is to make known the many fascinating
aspects of materials science by exposing university students of all levels to
research and multi-disciplinary scientific work. At the undergraduate level the
aim is to expand avenues for learning by offering a variety of course and
research opportunities. At the graduate level the project addresses involvement
and development of existing educational and internship programs, both in
materials science and optics.