* 0804402
* Detection and Application of Embedded Degrees of Freedom in Nanoassembled Quantum Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Hari Manoharan, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 08/31/2011
* USD 330,000.00

Technical&lt;br/&gt;This project will apply atomic and molecular manipulation to
the nanoscale assembly of novel quantum materials?materials whose structural and
electronic properties are dominated by quantum mechanics and give rise to either
novel behavior or promising technologies. The primary experimental apparatus for
these investigations is a custom-built low-temperature scanning tunneling
microscope capable of controlling matter at atomic length scales, operating at
Stanford University. Model nanoscale materials will be assembled to target three
quantum degrees of freedom that are playing increasingly vital roles in modern
science and technology: the vibronic degree of freedom, quantum mechanical phase
of electrons, and spin/pseudospin. For these studies, several operating modes of
the apparatus will be exploited to perform studies within an environment
comprised of ultra-high vacuum, low temperature of 4 K or below, and a high
magnetic field up to 9 T. Controlled atom and molecule manipulation and atom-by-
atom assembly of complex nanostructures are capabilities existing now only at
the frontiers of science and technology. The students involved in this proposed
research and education plan will receive a unique and cross-discipline training
in emerging fields now universally identified as critical to society and the
understanding of nature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical&lt;br/&gt;It is now
possible to manipulate single atoms and molecules and piece together new
materials truly ?from the bottom up.? This project will apply atom and molecule
manipulation to assemble novel quantum materials?materials whose structural and
electronic properties are dominated by quantum mechanics and give rise to either
novel behavior or promising technologies. The primary experimental apparatus for
these investigations is a unique and custom-built scanning tunneling microscope
operating at Stanford University. Model nanoscale materials will be assembled to
target three quantum degrees of freedom that are playing increasingly vital
roles in modern science and technology: the vibronic degree of freedom (the
?shaking? of single chemical bonds), quantum mechanical phase of electrons (akin
to the phase of traveling waves), and spin/pseudospin (the built-in magnetism of
materials). Controlled atom and molecule manipulation and atom-by-atom assembly
of complex nanostructures are capabilities existing now only at the frontiers of
science and technology. The students involved in this proposed research and
education plan will receive a unique and cross-discipline training in emerging
fields now universally identified as critical to society and the understanding
of nature.&lt;br/&gt;