* 0804232
* Switching Dynamics of Electric Field Domains in Semiconductor Superlattices
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2012
* Stephen Teitsworth, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 06/30/2012
* USD 315,000.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on aspects of
electronic transport in semiconductor superlattices - structures that are
composed of many alternating layers of different semiconductor materials, with
each layer having a width of only a few nanometers. The flow of electrical
current in these structures is highly nonlinear and this leads to complex
switching behavior in the current response to changes in applied voltage. A
major objective of the project is to understand how this switching dynamics
depends on a number of experimental parameters that can be systematically
varied. New measurement techniques and data analysis methods will be utilized in
this project and will be applicable to a range of other physical systems that
operate far from their respective equilibrium states. This research will
contribute to the understanding of physical processes that are important for
emerging technological development. It will provide new, fundamental insight
into the nonlinear electrical properties of superlattices with potential impact
for a range of nanoscale electronic structures and optoelectronic devices, such
as state-of-the-art lasers and sensitive light detectors. Graduate and
undergraduate training is central to this project; students will become skilled
in cutting edge measurement and computer simulation techniques preparing them
for productive careers in industry or academic research. Experimental samples
for this project will be fabricated in collaboration with researchers in
Germany, and this will provide valuable educational opportunities for graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;This project
addresses fundamental aspects of nonlinear electronic transport in semiconductor
superlattices through the investigation of GaAs/AlAs samples that possess
electric field domains and associated current bistability. For such systems, the
transient response to changes in applied voltage leads to current switching
dynamics that may be purely stochastic or may involve a combination of complex
deterministic and stochastic mechanisms. The project investigates the dependence
of switching dynamics on the conductivity of contact layers, the form of applied
voltage pulses, the cross sectional dimensions of samples, and the level of
external photoexcitation. Novel measurement and data analysis methods will
elucidate the important role played by metastable states in current switching.
Metastable states strongly influence dynamics for a wide range of non-
equilibrium systems, and superlattices offer an ideal system for such studies
due to their excellent structural characterization and capability for precise
electrical measurement. This research will also provide fundamental insight on
the interplay of quantum tunneling and space-charge dynamics, with potential
impact for nanoscale electronic structures and optoelectronic devices. Graduate
and undergraduate students will be trained in state-of-the-art measurement and
simulation techniques providing them with strong preparation for careers in
industry or academic research. Experimental samples for this project will be
fabricated in collaboration with researchers in Germany; this will provide
valuable educational opportunities for graduate students.