* 0804376
* Doping Dependent Transition from Paramagnetism to Ferromagnetism in Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* John DiTusa, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 07/31/2012
* USD 472,000.00

Non-technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to accelerate the
technological revolution that has placed high speed computation and information
storage at our fingertips almost anywhere on Earth, new ideas are essential. One
pathway for progress in semiconductor device design, known as spintronics, seeks
to make use of the magnetic degrees of freedom to the same extent that charge
degrees of freedom are used in present day silicon technologies. As scientists
have sought to control or manipulate the electron spin, the intrinsic magnetic
property of electrons, they have recognized the utility of materials that are
both magnetic and semiconducting. However, of the small number of such systems
presently known, none completely meet requirements such as compatibility with
silicon, room temperature magnetism, and the possibility of coupling to
electrical and optical signals that are necessary for spintronics technologies.
As is true of many nascent technologies, fundamental explorations of material
and physical properties can lead to breakthroughs. This project investigates a
range of magnetic and semiconducting materials to explore the mechanisms for
magnetism which includes the interaction of electronic and magnetic degrees of
freedom and to document the ramifications of these interactions on the physical
properties of these systems. Students on many levels, as well as high school
teachers, will be exploring magnetic, electric, optical, and thermodynamic
properties of these magnetic semiconductors in crystalline, thin film, and
nanowire form. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although magnetic semiconductors have received
enormous attention because of their potential use in spintronics devices, from a
fundamental viewpoint they remain poorly explored. In particular, it has been
very difficult to separate the often overwhelming defect related issues from the
more interesting essential behaviors. This project will investigate a set of
magnetic and semiconducting silicides and sulfides where careful
characterization has demonstrated that secondary phases and defect related
issues are not relevant. This control over materials properties allows access to
a unique regime, that near the transition(s) from paramagnetic insulator to
magnetic metal in a semiconductor by way of chemical substitution in crystals,
thin films, and nanowires. Students on many levels, as well as high school
teachers will be exploring these materials searching for novel transport,
magnetic, thermodynamic, and optical properties that may, perhaps, be exploited
in future technologies.