* 0804005
* Structural and Functional Characterization of Cyanoglobin
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/2007,02/28/2009
* Juliette Lecomte, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Michele McGuirl
* 02/28/2009
* USD 132,629.00

The hemoglobin superfamily of proteins has representatives in all kingdoms of
organisms. In vertebrates, hemoglobin and its close relative myoglobin are
responsible for the transport and storage of molecular oxygen. The relationship
between three-dimensional structure and function in these two highly specialized
proteins has been explored extensively and is well understood. In invertebrates,
hemoglobins exhibit a broader range of physiological roles reflecting essential
aspects of globin fold evolution, oxygen utilization, and heme reactivity. For
these proteins, however, the connection between structure and function is
incompletely defined and it is not yet possible to anticipate chemical
properties on the basis of the amino acid sequences. This lack of knowledge
limits the usefulness of genome sequencing data and the interpretation of
evolutionary relationships. The goal of the project is to investigate primitive
hemoglobins from the non-nitrogen fixing cyanobacteria Synechocystis sp. PCC
6803 and Synechococcus sp. PCC 7002. Both are hexacoordinate hemoglobins
utilizing two histidines to ligate the iron ion, and both undergo a facile post-
translational attachment of the heme group apparently unique to them.
Biophysical methods (NMR spectroscopy in vitro and in vivo, optical
spectroscopy) and biochemical methods (site-directed mutagenesis, genetic
manipulations, phenotypic characterization) will be applied to investigate the
role of Synechococcus hemoglobin in vivo; determine the three-dimensional
structure of Synechocystis and Synechococcus proteins in solution before and
after they have undergone the heme modification; and analyze the molecular
determinants of heme coordination and reactivity. Comparison will be made to
other invertebrate hemoglobins to develop an atomic level understanding of
chemical and biochemical properties.

The research component of the project provides training opportunities for
graduate and undergraduate students and, through a collaboration focused on
cyanobacterial physiology and biochemistry, establishes a mechanism for
multidisciplinary interactions between the Chemistry department and the
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology department. The project also contains three
specific educational components that will enhance further its broader impact.
The first is the development of three-dimensional visualization modules for an
advanced undergraduate biological chemistry course and the inclusion in this
course of research-related hemoglobin topics. This is designed to bring the
material to life and encourage chemistry students to pursue careers with a life
sciences slant. The second is the development of a short course in communication
skills aimed at graduate students. The emphasis will be placed on how to convey
sophisticated scientific concepts and issues to a general audience. The third is
to continue the organization and increase the frequency of inter-departmental
structural biology seminars, for which the speakers are advanced students. These
activities are expected to prepare undergraduate, graduate, and post-doctoral
students for professional careers in academia, industry, and government.