* 0804820
* Contact Geometry, Contact Homology and Open Book Decompositions
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2014
* John Etnyre, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2014
* USD 423,346.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0804820 Principal Investigator: John B. Etnyre

The focus of this proposal is to better understand the intriguing nature of
contact structures in all (odd) dimensions, with special attention given to
dimension three and to apply contact geometric techniques to questions in
topology. The first main theme of the proposed research is open book
decompositions. The connection of contact geometry and these specially fibered
links have provided a fount of information concerning contact structures and
low-dimensional topology. As part of this proposal this fundamental connection
will be exploited to define and study new invariants of contact structures and
special knots in them - specifically, Legendrian and transversal knots. From
prior work it is clear these invariants have subtle connections to the famed
tight vs. overtwisted dichotomy in dimension three and properties of symplectic
fillings of contact structures, which in turn are crucial to applications to
topology. Some of the major outcomes expected from this part of the project are
various classification results for Legendrian and transversal knots in tight and
overtwisted contact structures and a better understanding of the fundamental
process of contact surgery. The project will also study the connection between
contact structures and open books in high dimensions with the goal of
illuminating existence questions in high dimensions and trying to generalize the
notion of overtwistedness here as well. Similar to the connection with open
books, contact structures are also related to foliations. This connection has
been instrumental in applications of contact geometry to low-dimensional
topology. Many of the outstanding questions concerning this connection will be
explored. A second main theme of the proposal is the development and analysis of
Legendrian contact homology in higher dimensions. There is a great deal of
beautiful analytic and algebraic structure in this theory, much of which is yet
to be discovered. Moreover, through the elegant conormal construction one can
then use this to define invariants of manifolds and of their embeddings in
Euclidean space. These invariants appear to be extremely powerful and will be
thoroughly investigated.

Contact structures on manifolds are very natural objects, born over two
centuries ago, as a natural language for geometric optics, thermodynamics and
classical mechanics. Everyday, one encounters contact structures when parallel
parking a car, skating, or watching the prismatic play of light in a glass of
water. Contact structures have been studied by many mathematicians and seem to
touch on diverse areas of mathematics and physics, but only recently have they
moved into the foreground of mathematics. This is due to the many remarkable
breakthroughs in contact topology, resulting in a rich and beautiful theory with
many far reaching applications to areas such as three and four dimensional
topology (that is the structure of space and space- time), string theory and
large N dualities in modern physics, and fluid dynamics. The Principal
Investigator will study the relation between contact geometry and various
topological objects (such as open book decompositions and foliations). In
addition he will develop analytic and algebraic tools for studying contact
structures in high dimensions. As a whole it is expected that at the conclusion
of this project we will have a much better understanding of contact structures
in all dimensions and see many more surprising implications for low- dimensional
manifolds.