* 0804283
* Small-Amplitude AFM Studies of Nanoconfined Water
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Peter Hoffmann, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 08/31/2013
* USD 365,000.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;Although water is the most ubiquitous
liquid in the environment, its properties are still not well understood. In the
context of nanotechnology, the behavior of nanoscale water is a subject of great
controversy and great importance. Nanoscale water plays an important role in
biology, where it determines the shape of the macromolecules in our cells, and
in nanotechnology, where engineers are developing new devices that can analyze
ever smaller water samples for medical diagnoses. This award supports a project
to study the mechanical properties of water confined between two surfaces that
are only 1-20 water molecules apart. When water is confined to such tight
places, it behaves quite differently from bulk water. So far, experiments by
different research groups have yielded contradictory results. A novel Atomic
Force Microscopy (AFM), developed at Wayne State University, will be used to
conduct careful measurements under varied conditions, such as changes in ion
concentration or different confining surfaces in an attempt to elucidate the
properties of water confined to nanoscale spaces. This project is integrated
with training opportunities through a new graduate interdisciplinary Materials
Science program and undergraduate Biomedical Physics program. Students who will
be involved in this research will be trained in instrument development and
state-of-the-art nanoscience research. The results of this research will be
communicated through ongoing outreach efforts, which have so far reached
hundreds of middle and high school students, teachers and
parents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;The
properties of water, as the primary solvent of biological systems, are not fully
understood, especially in situations where water is confined to nanoscale
spaces. When water is confined to only a few molecular layers, continuum models
break down, and oscillatory force profiles are observed. However, experiments to
measure the mechanical properties of nanoconfined water have yielded
contradictory results. This project will use novel Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM)
Techniques, developed at Wayne State University, to study the mechanics and
dynamics of nanoconfined water layers. The home-built AFM systems use ultra-
small amplitudes of order 0.03 nm to perform linear measurements of the
viscoelastic properties of confined water layers. This project will study how
the dynamics of water change under various conditions, including changes in
dissolved ion concentrations, applied shear, compression speeds, chemistry of
confining surfaces, and external DC and RF electromagnetic fields. The latter is
intended to elucidate the role of polarity and hydrogen bonding in nanoconfined
water on its viscoelastic characteristics. This research is integrated with new
educational programs at Wayne State, including a new interdisciplinary Materials
Science graduate program and a new undergraduate Biomedical Physics program.
Through these programs and this research projects graduate and undergraduate
students will be trained in state-of-the-art instrumentation and nanoscience
research.