* 0804578
* Lidar and Modeling Studies of Constituent Fluxes by Dissipating Gravity Waves in the Mesopause Region
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2008,11/30/2010
* Chester Gardner, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Robinson
* 11/30/2010
* USD 183,581.00

This project is an investigation of the dynamical transport by dissipating
gravity waves and their impact on the vertical constituent structure in the
mesopause region, using lidar observations and chemical models. To quantify the
effects of dynamical transport, the University of Leeds chemical models of
mesospheric Na and other minor constituents will be modified to include the
vertical dynamical transport estimated from Na wind/temperature lidar
measurements. The simulations of these modified models will then be compared
with the extensive sodium lidar measurements that were conducted throughout the
year at the Starfire Optical Range in New Mexico (SOR, Na, temperature, and flux
observations) and Maui Space Surveillance System, in Hawaii (MSSS, Na,
temperature, and flux observations). This work will be done in collaboration
with Professor John M. C. Plane and his group at the University of Leeds. The
objectives are to obtain quantitative estimates of vertical dynamical fluxes of
various constituents, and compare their effects on the vertical distribution and
chemistry of these constituents. The key scientific goals of this research are:
1) to verify the theoretical relationship between the vertical heat and
constituent fluxes by analyzing the seasonal variations of the measured heat and
Na fluxes at SOR and MSSS; 2) to upgrade the University of Leeds chemical models
of mesospheric constituents to include the significant affects of GW transport
by employing the relationships between heat and constituent fluxes; 3) to
quantify the relative influence of GW flux on the seasonal variations of the
structure of the mesospheric Na layer by comparing model predictions with
observations; 4) to estimate the seasonal variations of the eddy diffusion
coefficient profile between 80 and 105 km by tuning the Na model to reproduce
the lidar observations at SOR and MSSS; 5) to assess the influence of GW
transport on the structure of other important mesospheric constituents such as
odd O and odd H. The project includes the participation of a post-doctoral
researcher and a graduate student, who will gain experience in research on
middle atmospheric dynamics and chemistry, engineering techniques in remote
sensing, and signal processing.