* 0804134
* U.S.-Brazil Collaboration:  Investigation of Subsurface Contaminant Mass Flows
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Kirk Hatfield, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 08/31/2011
* USD 19,800.00

Hatfield&lt;br/&gt;0804134&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This US-Brazil collaboration
includes US scientists Kirk Hatfield, Michael Annable and Clayton Clark form the
University of Florida, Department of Civil Engineering. Brazilian counterparts
include scientists Joana Luz, Olivar Lima and Eduardo Savio. The proposed
collaboration will bring an exchange of knowledge to solve groundwater
contamination which is a growing problem in Salvador,
Brazil.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative research project focuses on
developing a new methodology for quantifying subsurface contaminant mass flows
and associated estimation uncertainties. Research will be conducted in Brazil
through a collaborative effort based on annual mutual planning visits, where the
US team will assist in the expansion of preliminary flux meter related
experiments already conducted at the Bahia Federal University. Two US students
will be involved in laboratory and field work in Brazil for a semester each year
and two US faculty members will also travel to Brazil for two weeks each year.
The US team will test new laboratory methods with Brazilian colleagues at the
Universidade Federal da Bahia (UFBA). There is complementary expertise of the
participating investigators on both sides, which include the familiarity with
tropical contaminant and hydrogeological conditions as well as the geophysical
expertise of the Brazilian team and the detailed knolwedge about the fluxmeter
methodology and development of the US team. This award is being jointly
supported by the Division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation in
the Engineering Directorate and the Office of International Science and
Engineering (OISE).