* 0804583
* Exciton Dissociation Dynamics at Organic-Organic and Organic-Inorganic Semiconductor Heterojunctions
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2008,07/31/2009
* Xiaoyang Zhu, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 07/31/2009
* USD 233,364.00

Technical: This project aims to investigate fundamental mechanisms governing
exciton dissociation at organic-organic or organic-inorganic hybrid
semiconductor interfaces. &lt;br/&gt;These include energetic driving force,
electronic coupling strength, and nuclear reorganization energy in interfacial
electron transfer, the potential roles of geminate pair formation, and charge-
recombination as competing dynamic channels. Femtosecond time-resolved two-
photon photoemission spectroscopy (TR-2PPE) will be used to probe exciton
dissociation dynamics at well-ordered organic-organic or organic-inorganic
interfaces. The use of single crystal substrates and highly ordered crystalline
thin films minimizes heterogeneity problems in nanostructured materials;
examples of model systems include oligothiophene and pentacene on single crystal
C60 and ZnO surfaces. A TR-2PPE experiment will allow one to directly follow the
electron in time, energy, and momentum spaces as it is excited in the form of an
exciton in the donor material, as it is en route to the acceptor, as it forms a
geminate pair across the donor/acceptor interface, and as it relaxes in the
acceptor. The long-term objective is to establish fundamental principles and
design rules for exciton dissociation and charge separation at organic
heterojunctions for solar cells.&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical: The project addresses
basic research issues in a topical area of materials science with high
technological relevance, and is expected to fill an important knowledge gap in
the development of organic solar cells. Developing solar energy technologies
that are economically competitive is one of the most important scientific and
technological challenges in this century. From an educational perspective, the
project will provide an inspiring opportunity for participating students to work
on scientifically challenging and socially responsible research. The PI has
established a track record and will continue not only in educating graduate
students, but also in motivating and involving undergraduates and high school
students in research. The PI will also develop a freshman seminar course which
focuses on solar energy and the environment challenges.