* 0804559
* Spin Echoes and Coherent Nonlinear Optics in Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Hailin Wang, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 07/31/2012
* USD 345,000.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT**** Electrons are characterized by their spin as well
as charge properties. An electron can generate and interact with a magnetic
field through its spin. By taking advantage of spin properties of electrons, one
can develop quantum computers that can solve certain problems much faster than
any of current classical computers. This individual investigator project studies
how electron spins interact with the surrounding nuclear spins in a
semiconductor. Experimental studies will be based on the use of laser pulses
with durations of order picoseconds. Since interactions between electron and
nuclear spins can prevent the proper function of electron spins in a quantum
computer, a primary objective of this project is to decouple or isolate electron
spins from the surrounding nuclear spins with the use of ultrafast laser pulses.
Research conducted in this program will provide excellent training for graduate
and undergraduate students in semiconductor physics, nanotechnology, and
information science and technology, preparing them for careers in academe,
industry, or government. The project receives support from the Divisions of
Materials Research and Physics.

**** TECHNICAL ABSTRACT**** This individual investigator project seeks to
advance our ability to control fundamental decoherence processes of electron
spins in semiconductors. The project will study optical spin echoes and coherent
nonlinear optical processes of localized electrons and two-dimensional electron
gas in semiconductors. Donor bound electrons in high purity n-type GaAs and
electron gas in modulation doped CdTe quantum wells will be used as model
systems of localized electrons and two-dimensional electron gas, respectively.
Spin decoherence arising from the coupling of an electron spin to the
surrounding nuclear spin bath will be investigated with optical spin echoes and
with a particular emphasis on the understanding of non-Markovian spin
decoherence processes. Restoration of spin coherence lost due to the coupling to
the nuclear spin bath will be explored with dynamical decoupling techniques. The
issue of how many-body Coulomb interactions fundamentally modify coherent
optical processes in a two-dimensional electron gas will be addressed with both
two-pulse and three-pulse differential absorption techniques. Research conducted
in this program provides training for graduate and undergraduate students in
semiconductor physics, nanotechnology, and quantum information. The project
receives support from the Divisions of Materials Research and Physics.