* 0804432
* Magnetotransport in Perovskite Films and Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2008,02/28/2013
* Christopher Leighton, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 02/28/2013
* USD 365,000.00

Technical:&lt;br/&gt;The recent advances that enable nm-level control over the
deposition of oxide heterostructures have brought the perovskites to the verge
of a revolution. The extraordinary functionality of these materials provides
outstanding opportunities for elucidation of new physics, the goal of the
current project. The work involves the study of magnetotransport phenomena such
as interfacial magnetic phase separation, charge and spin transport in novel
high-mobility metals, and high electrostatically-induced charge densities at
oxide interfaces. Emphasis is placed on understanding the structure, chemistry,
magnetism, and transport at ferromagnetic oxide / non-ferromagnetic oxide
interfaces. These studies will greatly enhance the current understanding of
perovskite heterostructures, opening up new areas of application in oxide
electronics, and advancing our basic understanding of complex oxide interfaces.
The broader impacts include the societal benefits associated with development of
technological applications, effective outreach to the public, and education and
training of students and post-docs. These education and outreach activities
revolve around the young scientists performing the research work, effectively
integrating research, education, and outreach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-
Technical:&lt;br/&gt;Oxygen is an element that is familiar to us in our daily
lives. Perhaps less familiar are the chemical compounds formed by reacting
metallic elements with oxygen to form solid oxides. These oxides are some of the
most useful materials of current scientific interest, with applications from
simple ceramics, to high-tech devices such as computer processors and hard disk
drives. The perovskites are a form of oxides that have proven to be a fertile
area for condensed matter physics, yielding such breakthroughs as
superconductivity at high temperatures, and giant sensitivity to magnetic
fields. The current project aims to exploit the remarkable magnetic and
electronic properties of these materials in carefully designed nanoscale
structures. These artificial structures produce physical phenomena that are not
possible in naturally occurring materials, providing potential for new
electronics applications, as well as advancing our understanding of the
fundamental physics of magnetism. In addition to scientific research the project
also involves education and training of students, as well as outreach to the
public. These activities center on the involvement of the young researchers
performing the bulk of the work, effectively integrating research and education
in a single project.&lt;br/&gt;