* 0804828
* The Geometrical Basis of Crystal Chemistry
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Michael O'Keeffe, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 07/31/2012
* USD 185,000.00

This award by the Solid State Materials Chemistry program in the Division of
Materials to Arizona State University is to study theoretical crystal chemistry.
This award is a renewal of an earlier one work in developing geometrical basis
of crystal chemistry and advances made in understanding the 3-periodic net that
underlie crystal structures. The principle goal of this award is the development
of a new subdiscipline in chemistry concerned with the taxonomy, geometry and
topology of periodic structures, which are important to conventional, and liquid
crystals, mesoporous materials etc. Special attention will be devoted to making
these results available in a practically usable manner to facilitate the design
and subsequent synthesis of materials for which there are pressing needs (e.g.
for separations, and for the storage of light gases such as methane and
hydrogen). The main components of this award will be: i) Extension of work on
enumeration and identification of 3-periodic nets to include nets with vertices
of different coordination, and nets with long links, and they included
topological analysis of these structures and determination of their natural
tilings and their dual structures; ii) Enumeration and study of dual tilings and
catenated nets, including systematic study of polycatenated nets; iii)
Development and elaboration of the Reticular Crystal Chemistry Structure
resource which contains information relative to design and analysis of
crystalline materials; and iv) Application of tiling theory to description of
complex crystal structures, especially the currently enigmatic intermetallic
phases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Elaboration and enhancement of the data base,
Reticular Chemistry Structure Resources, is expected to be a significant open
source for many researchers in the design of syntheses, and this data base could
be used to develop a library of possible topologies for given combinations of
secondary building units of two- and three-periodic nets and polyhedra. The
Barrett Honors College program at Arizona State University is expected to
continue to support the undergraduate research activities carried out under this
project. In addition, the project is expected to continue to support a diverse
group of students and scientists consisting of females and African-American,
Hispanic-American and other groups.&lt;br/&gt;