* 0804615
* Control of Kinetic Processes in Irradiated Alloys through Compositional Patterning
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2013
* Robert Averback, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 06/30/2013
* USD 561,000.00

TECHNICAL: The advanced energy systems push operating environments to more
severe and aggressive extremes, including high temperature, high radiation dose,
and high mechanical stresses. A new generation of materials is required to meet
these challenges since current materials, which were designed using knowledge
developed as long as 50 years ago, will not operate safely, reliably, and
economically under these conditions. This program explores a fundamentally new
approach for the design of materials that would permanently resist radiation.
PIs plan a new approach whereby alloy microstructures are designed to include a
high density of point-defect traps that are dynamically stable under
irradiation. This goal is achieved by taking advantage of PIs? past work on
nanoscale compositional patterning induced by irradiation, and learning how to
use these compositional heterogeneities as effective traps for point defects. By
design, the nanostructured materials would thus be radiation-insensitive. PIs
plan to apply this approach to selected Cu-base and Fe-base model alloys, as
well as to similar alloys strengthened by nanoscale oxide dispersion. In the
latter case, nanocomposite oxide-metal thin films are grown by combining cluster
beam deposition with magnetron sputtering. The thin films are characterized
before and after ion irradiation with a combination of techniques, including
XRD, TEM, and atom probe tomography. A particular emphasis is put on the latter
since it achieves sub-nanometric chemical resolution in three dimensions, and
thus makes it possible to fully characterize nanostructured compositional
patterns. The point-defect trapping efficiency of these nanostructures is
assessed by radiation-enhanced diffusion and swelling measurements. A
computational effort would identify the conditions for compositional patterns to
remain dynamically stable even as the microstructure is slowly drifting. To
achieve this goal, in collaboration with Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory,
PIs will implement a new parallel kinetic Monte Carlo algorithm that speeds up
simulations by several orders of magnitude, thus making it possible to follow
the complex evolution of the microstructure in the simulations. NON-TECHNICAL:
The research has broad scientific impact for the development of alloy design
strategies for new materials that are critical to advanced energy production
systems. Besides publishing widely the results from this research, PIs plan to
organize, in the US, a summer school on Materials under Irradiation. The
objective is to educate the next generation of scientists and engineers required
to maintain or even expand the share of nuclear energy in the US energy
production portfolio. In addition, the two graduate students working on this
project will be trained on the most advanced instruments of materials
characterization. PIs will hire undergraduate assistants, in particular women
and underrepresented minorities. The present work will be integrated into the
PIs teaching activities, exposing undergraduate students to the potentials and
the challenges offered by nanostructured materials. PIs will also expand
?Materials Mobile? high-school visit program so as to reach a much larger
student population.