* 0804155
* I/UCRC Proposal For University Site At Virginia Tech: Center For High-Performance Reconfigurable Computing (CHREC)
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2008,12/31/2014
* Peter Athanas, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 12/31/2014
* USD 618,190.00

This award establishes Virginia Polytechnic Institute as a research site of the
Industry/University Collaborative Research Center (IUCRC) for High-Performance
Reconfigurable Computing. Other sites of this collaborative research center
include the University of Florida (2007), George Washington University (2007),
and Brigham Young University (2008). Reconfigurable computing (RC) technology
can be divided into two areas of use: High Performance Computing (HPC) and High
Performance Embedded Computing (HPEC). RC technology is used in the field of HPC
to accelerate demanding computations that would otherwise be performed in
software on a large-scale computing system. RC technology is used in HPEC to
create high-performance embedded computing solutions in areas such as signal and
image processing, real-time vision, cryptography, and network processing. The
mission of this center is to investigate, develop, and evaluate new concepts,
methods, infrastructure, and tools in reconfigurable HPC and HPEC, from
building-block devices to infrastructure to applications, and advance these
technologies through research and education for the benefit of center members,
students, and the discipline at large. The research BYU will address; 1) Novel
Core Architectures and Related Components for Aerospace &amp; Defense
Applications, 2) Application Mapping of HPC Codes to High-Performance
Reconfigurable Computing Systems, 3) Profiling, Analysis, &amp; Performance
Optimization for Reconfigurable Computing Applications, 4) Middleware,
Interfaces, &amp; other Infrastructure for High-Performance Reconfigurable
Computers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center for High-Performance Reconfigurable
Computing should significantly enhance the U.S. effort to maintain a strong
leadership position within their area of information technology. It may also
serve to bring industry and users together to define common standards. Industry
members, researchers and students will gain from the interactions throughout the
life of the research center. Advances in RC affect virtually all disciplines of
science and engineering which require high-performance computing, be it
mainframe-oriented or embedded. RC technology promises to produce computing
systems combining the flexibility of software-programmable computations with the
computational power of custom hardware. &lt;br/&gt;