* 0804370
* RUI: Chain Conformation and Collapse in Polymer Systems: Mapping a Many-Body onto a Few-Body Problem
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Mark Taylor, Hiram College
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 09/30/2012
* USD 108,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and education in
theoretical polymer physics. The research focus addresses the problem of
explicit solvent effects on polymer chain conformation. Because the complex
structure of a polymer, whether synthetic or biological, depends on the fluid in
which it exists, it is necessary to either include the details (e.g atoms in a
host liquid) or employ an effective medium approximation adequate to predict
polymer chain conformation. The research carried out in this effort replaces the
complex environment by suitably accurate (and more complicated) effective
interaction. The approach feeds into the general field of multiscale modeling,
especially in polymeric systems. The domain of validity of the approach and the
accuracy of its extensions are primary interests of the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The center piece research effort develops a
detailed theoretical understanding of the coupling between polymer conformation
and solvent properties. A simple, yet realistic continuum based interaction-site
model is used in which both polymer and solvent are built from "simple-liquid"
monomers. The approach maps the many-body chain-in-solvent problem onto a few-
body single-chain problem via the introduction of a set of site-site solvation
potentials. This approach fully incorporates the local solvent structure into
the solvation potentials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research evolves from recent
work by the PI that (i) establishes the validity of a pair-wise decomposition of
the exact many-body solvation potential for a short chain in a simple-liquid
solvent and (ii) successfully applies short chain solvation potential results to
long-chain systems. These initial results indicated the potential application to
a broad range of systems. The research of this award focuses on the extends the
approach to a larger class of interaction potentials and thus more realistic
systems, including asymmetric systems in which the polymer and solvent are built
from different interaction sites and to systems with molecular (and polymeric)
solvents. The effects of solvent on chain conformation and collapse, as well as
multi-body correlations, are studied in each of these
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activities undertaken have broad impact beyond
the specific research problems. This research represents an important step
towards the goal of developing a complete theory of polymeric liquids based on
the rigorous techniques of liquid state physics. The approach provides a
straightforward way to account for solvent effects in polymer systems without
having to perform computationally expensive full-solvent simulations. The
results of this research are disseminated both through publication in scientific
journals and through presentation at local, regional, and national meetings. The
research program has been designed to allow for maximum student participation by
dovetailing into the physics curriculum at the PI's college. Computation and
simulation methods taught in the core physics courses establish a direct link
between classroom learning and this research program and provide students with
the tools needed to make meaningful contributions to this work. The
undergraduate students who participate in this research benefit by learning
state of the art computer simulation techniques and have opportunities to
present at scientific meetings. This research continues a track record of
mentoring undergraduates as researchers and successfully fostering their
advancement to graduate study in science and engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
research and education in theoretical polymer physics. The research focus
addresses the problem of predicting the shape of long polymers when dissolved in
different solvents. Because the complex structure of a polymer, whether
synthetic or biological, depends on the fluid in which it exists, it is
necessary to either include the details (e.g thousands of atoms in a host
liquid) or employ an approximation to accurately predict polymer chain
conformation. The research carried out in this effort replaces the complex
environment of the host liquid by suitably accurate (and more complicated) set
of rules for how the atoms of polymer interact with each other. The domain of
validity of the approach and the accuracy of its extensions are primary
interests of the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The center piece research effort
develops a detailed theoretical understanding of the coupling between polymer
shape and solvent properties. A simple, yet realistic model is used in which
both polymer and solvent are built from "simple-liquid" pseudo-atoms. The
approach maps the complex polymer-in-solvent problem onto a simpler polymer-only
problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activities undertaken have broad impact beyond
the specific research problems. This topic is of broad importance since the
overall properties of dissolved polymers, including polymer solubility, solution
viscosity, and functionality, are intimately linked to the underlying
microscopic configuration of the individual polymer molecules. The results of
this research are disseminated both through publication in scientific journals
and through presentation at local, regional, and national meetings. The research
program has been designed to allow for maximum student participation by
dovetailing into the physics curriculum at the PI's college. Computation and
simulation methods taught in the core physics courses establish a direct link
between classroom learning and this research program and provide students with
the tools needed to make meaningful contributions to this work. The
undergraduate students who participate in this research benefit by learning
state-of-the-art computer simulation techniques and have opportunities to
present papers at scientific meetings. This research continues a track record of
mentoring undergraduates as researchers and successfully fostering their
advancement to graduate study in science and engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;