* 0804488
* Quantum Noise and Backaction in Semi- and Superconducting Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2008,04/30/2011
* Alexander Rimberg, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 04/30/2011
* USD 355,000.00

*****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT***** Quantum mechanics demands that the act of
measuring the position of a particle such as an electron will influence the
particle by changing its velocity. The famous statement that such a measurement
acts back on the object being measured is known as Heisenberg's Uncertainly
Principle. One often speaks of a measurement as having some "backaction" on the
object being measured. This single-investigator award supports research that
will directly investigate these fundamental issues. Recent technological
advances in the PI's laboratory have led to ultrasensitive charge detectors for
which the noisy forces that cause to backaction can be directly observed. These
detectors will be used to observe the position of a single electron confined to
a nanometer-sized region in semiconductor known as a quantum dot. The backaction
forces that influence the electron position will independently be monitored.
Measurements like these will allow a direct investigation of the physical
processes underlying the Uncertainty Principle. Results from this research will
also have implications for measurement of bits in quantum computers, which are
expected to be able to solve problems classical computers cannot. Students
involved in this project will receive training in a broad array of advanced
fabrication and measurement techniques, leaving them well-prepared for a career
in academia, industry or government.

*****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT***** There is a deep relationship between Heisenberg's
Uncertainty Principle and noise in a quantum system. Since a detector
necessarily influences a system it is measuring, the quantum mechanical noise
produced by a system should be directly influenced by the noisy force (the
backaction) exerted on it by a detector. This single-investigator award supports
research that will directly investigate these fundamental issues. Recent
technological advances in the PI's laboratory have led to ultrasensitive charge
detectors for which the intrinsic noise that leads to backaction can be
observed. By using these detectors to monitor the position of a single electron
in a semiconductor device, this research will take a direct look at the physical
processes underlying the Uncertainty Principle. Results from this work will also
have implications for the field of quantum computation, in which a central
problem is the measurement of the state of a quantum bit. Students involved in
this project will receive training in a broad array of advanced fabrication and
measurement techniques, leaving them well-prepared for a career in academia,
industry or government.