* 0804279
* Many-Body Quantum Dynamics and Quantum Disorder Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2013
* Horng-Tzer Yau, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2013
* USD 600,000.00

The first project, quantum disordered systems and random matrices, aims to
explore the connections between the random matrix and random Schrodinger
equations. The fundamental questions in these subjects are the Wigner-Dyson
universality for the eigenvalue gap distribution and the extended state
conjecture for the random Schrodinger equations. Since the extended state
conjecture is out of the reach of the current technique, we propose to estimate
the mean square displacement for the random Schrodinger equations in long time
scaling limits in two cases: 1. The random potential is time dependent and has a
short time memory. 2. The random potential is given by a phonon field in
equilibrium. Inspired by the same extended state conjecture, we propose to study
the localization/delocalization property of eigenvectors of random matrices.
Finally, as the first step toward the Wigner-Dyson universality, we propose to
estimate the difference between the density of eigenvalues of random matrices in
microscopic windows and the Wigner semicircle law. The second project, dynamics
of Bose gas, concerns the derivation of the the phenomenological Gross-
Pitaevskii equation from the many-body Schrodinger equations. We also propose to
estimate precisely the errors between the Gross-Pitaevskii equation and the
many-body Schrodinger equation. The third project, regularity of axisymmetric
incompressible Navier-Stokes equations, aims to prove the regularity of the INS
for the axisymmetric flow under certain mild assumptions.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This first project of this proposal is aimed to establish the
conducting properties of semiconductors and other disordered systems. The
mathematical model for these systems in the simplest form is given by matrices
with random entries. Our first project is designed to provide rigorous proof
that conduction does occur in the random matrix models. The second project aim
to establish the Gross-Pitaevskii equation---the fundamental equation governing
the dynamics of the Bose-Einstein condensate (a recent discovered material but
was theorized by Bose and Einstein almost a century ago). This project aims to
lay rigorous foundation for the description of the dynamics of these systems.
The third project concerns regularity of the incompressible Navier-Stokes
equations for axisymmetric flow. This project will not only lead to deeper
understanding of the INS equations in general, but the axisymmetric flow is
important for modeling atmospheric events such as hurricanes and tornados. Most
problems covered in this proposal were studied in their own traditionally fields
such as random matrix, mathematical physics, condense matter physics or partial
differential equations. This proposal aims to establish connections between
these subjects and to train students and postdoctors with interdiscipline
technique and broad scientific perspectives. It will also lead to collaborations
of researchers in these diverse disciplines.