* 0804908
* Growth and Interface Physics of Epitaxial Graphene
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Phillip First, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 06/30/2012
* USD 452,982.00

Technical. This project focuses on the growth and investigates the interface
physics of epitaxial graphene (EG)?thin graphitic carbon films with one or a few
sheets of sp2-bonded carbon at-oms, grown on silicon carbide substrates. Using
surface science methods (including characteriza-tion via low-temperature
scanning tunneling microscopy and related techniques), new growth methods for EG
on SiC will be developed, and the physics of several types interfaces will be
studied. These interfaces are relevant for nanometer-scale devices, and they
encompass funda-mental materials science. For example: EG-SiC interface; the
substrate profoundly affects the 2D electron system by doping the graphene, by
potentially changing the graphene sublattice symme-try, and by the formation of
interface states. Similar considerations hold for successive graphene sheets,
resulting in layer-dependent electronic properties. Metal-EG contacts; this
contact mates a 3D Fermi surface to a 2D Fermi surface, with unique wave vector
matching (or mismatching) across the interface. The work function difference and
voltage bias across the interface create a 2D 'puddle' of screening charge under
the metal contact. EG pn junctions; transitions from hole-doping to electron-
doping occur in gated transport devices. Simple wave-vector matching across such
a unique 1D interface brings analogies to 'negative index materials' or
particle-antiparticle processes. The effect of electron correlations near such
an interface is unknown. pn junction in-terfaces also will be present near the
perimeter of high-work-function metal contacts (or islands) that locally hole-
dope the EG (which is naturally electron-doped on SiC). Other forms of local-
ized doping, such as chemical modification of edges, are also expected to create
pn junctions in EG devices. EG-NPEG Schottky barriers; extended EG sheets are
semi-metals, whereas nano-patterned EG (NPEG) ribbons exhibit a confinement band
gap. The physics of the transition from semi-metal to semiconductor is similar
to that of Schottky barrier formation at a metal-semiconductor interface, but
the transition region is atomically continuous. The unique 2DES formed by the
pi-bands in EG is directly accessible to electron spectroscopies. The approach
util-izes surface science microscopies/spectroscopies, Raman spectroscopy, and
conventional magnetotransport to probe the basic physics of these interfaces.
Non-Technical. The project addresses fundamental research issues in a topical
area of elec-tronic/photonic materials science and condensed matter physics
having technological relevance. Basic understanding gained is expected to lead
to improved device performance, and to allow de-sign of new electronic
components. The project integrates research and education providing graduate and
undergraduate students with laboratory experience and training while conducting
forefront research. Recruitment of underrepresented groups into the physical
sciences will be ac-tively pursued. The project ties research to education at
all levels (K-12, undergraduate, graduate, continuing-ed), through participation
in programs designed by education professionals: Middle/High school teachers
experience research in the principal investigator's laboratory for 7
weeks/summer through the Georgia Industrial Fellowships for Teachers (GIFT)
program.