* 0804892
* Silicon Carbide Nanocone and Heterostructure Formations Catalyzed by the Release of Carbon-Encapsulated Metal Nanoparticles
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2008,12/31/2013
* Judith Yang, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 12/31/2013
* USD 400,940.00

Technical: This project is to study growth mechanism of nanostructures that are
grown using encapsulation and controlled release of metal catalyst. The
controlled catalyst release allows the exposed size/area of the catalyst be
tailored, which leads to growth of unusual nanostructures, such as nanocones
made of silicon carbide. The goal of the research project is to gain new
mechanistic knowledge of all stages of the metal-catalyzed nano- and hetero-
structure formation including the migration of the metal nanoparticle from the
carbon shell and agglomeration behavior, the formation of the SiC at the
metal/nanocone interface, and the nucleation and initial growth of the
heterostructures. The primary research tool is transmission electron microscopy
(TEM) and both in-situ and ex-situ TEM experiments will be carried out.
Electrical and property measurements will be used to establish the synthesis-
structure-property relationships. The potential outcome of the project will be a
predictive tool for the manufacturing of specific nanowires with a precise
distribution and geometry, as well as branched structures, and how processing
conditions, such as temperature, size, and type of catalyst material, will alter
the nanowire morphology, structure, and properties.&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical: The
project addresses fundamental research issues in a topical area of importance to
materials science. It aims for a quantitative and mechanistic understanding of
the catalytic reaction governing one-dimensional nanostructure formations. Such
knowledge is necessary for the design-based production of nanodevices with
specific architectures and properties. The project constitutes an effective
integration of research and education through training of postdoctoral,
graduate, and undergraduate students in nanoscience and nanotechnology. The in-
situ TEM nanocharacterization represents a unique opportunity for the students.
The research program will also contribute to a new suite of graduate-level
courses in nanotechnology, particularly nanofabrication and
nanocharacterization. Undergraduate education will be enhanced via undergraduate
summer research and senior projects.