* 0804915
* Structure and Performance of High Mobility Amorphous Indium-Oxide-Based Materials for Transparent Thin Film Transistors
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2013
* David Paine, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 04/30/2013
* USD 344,484.00

Technical: This project seeks to advance fundamental understanding of defect
doping and interface structure of an emerging class of high-mobility
semiconducting metal oxide materials, such as indium zinc oxide. Thin film
transistors (TFTs) based on amorphous metal oxides offer the promise of
transparent electronics along with significant performance and processing
advantages over the amorphous Si and organic alternatives. The rate of
development of oxide-based transparent TFT device technology has accelerated
while critical/limiting underlying fundamental materials issues concerning
native defect doping and the nano-scale structure of amorphous metal oxide
semiconductors and their oxide/dielectric interfaces remain poorly understood.
At present, the oxide-electronics literature is silent on critically important
questions concerning carrier mobility and generation in the low carrier
concentration regime and little is reported on the stability of oxide-channel
TFT devices with respect to, for example, threshold voltage shift and channel
conductivity. In this project, a gate-down test-TFT device will be used to
analyze field effect transport behavior as a function of the processing and
chemistry of channel and gate materials. Microstructural characterization tools
such high resolution transmission electron microscopy will be used for interface
morphology evaluation, while electron scattering and radial distribution
function analysis along with fluctuation microscopy will provide insight into
the near- and medium-range structure of the amorphous phase. Electronic
characterization such as field effect transport and Hall measurements will be
used to provide insight into the effect of processing on point-defect-scale
features. Insights into the structure and formation of native donor defects will
be examined using a novel defect volume measurement approach that relates film
stress to measurable carrier density changes. Non-technical: The project
addresses basic research issues in a topical area of materials science with high
technological relevance, and is expected to provide scientific understanding of
a class of semiconducting oxide materials, which could find applications for low
cost, large-area electronics for displays, sensors, smart windows, and
photovoltaics. The project provides training of both graduate and undergraduate
students in research in an interdisciplinary. Strong connections between the PI
and local industry will further enhance the value of the professional training
experience for the students. The project also includes educational outreach
activities to local schools, such as Science Day for middle school students and
hands-on grade-appropriate demonstration of transparent thin film transistors.