* 0804631
* Image Contrast in Atomic Resolution STEM
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2008,05/31/2012
* Susanne Stemmer, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 05/31/2012
* USD 360,000.00

Technical: This project aims to gain a quantitative understanding of the
chemical contrast in atomic resolution scanning transmission electron microscopy
(STEM) with the ultimate objective of achieving a comprehensive knowledge of
defects and interfaces in solids. High-angle annular dark-field (HAADF or
Z-contrast) imaging in STEM has been recognized as a technique that provides
atomic structure images with chemical sensitivity. A quantitative understanding
of the atomic number contrast in these images would allow for analysis of
impurity or dopant atoms near interfaces and defects with atomic-level spatial
resolution. Despite the significant progress that has been made over the last
decade in the theory of STEM Z-contrast imaging a significant mismatch exists
between predictions of image contrast made by theory and that of experimental
images. While this discrepancy does not affect the interpretation of images of
perfect crystals, it precludes a quantitative, atomic-scale chemical analysis of
defects and interfaces. In this project, the physical origins of the
disagreement between theory and experiments will be investigated in a systematic
series of experiments designed to distinguish between contributions from
instrumental, environmental and sample effects and those related to the
scattering physics of high-energy electrons. In particular, the influence of
temperature (phonon scattering), sample thickness, acceleration voltage,
convergence angle, inelastic scattering, sample surface layers, point defects,
and atom displacements on the image contrast will be examined. The experimental
findings will be compared with simulation results, in collaboration with
scientists at the University of Melbourne. Non-technical: The project addresses
basic research issues in a topical area of materials science with high
technological relevance, and is expected to provide new scientific knowledge of
structure and chemistry at the atomic scale, which is critical for advances in
modern materials science and nanotechnology. The project will contribute to the
interdisciplinary and international training of graduate students. Through
collaboration with theorists in Australia, the students supported by the program
will learn about the latest developments in theory, bridge the gap between
applied and fundamental materials research, learn a broad range of scientific
methods, and become trained in international collaboration. The project also
offers two- to three-month-long, self-contained internships for undergraduate
students. Results obtained in this project will be used to develop teaching
modules for a web-based Electron Microscopy Database (EMdb) on the topic of
quantitatively analyzing chemical contrast in atomic resolution imaging.