* 0804715
* RUI:  EuO Thin Films as a Laboratory for Exploring Metal-Insulator Transitions and Colossal Magnetoresistance
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2013
* Melissa Eblen-Zayas, Carleton College
* Standard Grant
* Guebre X. Tessema
* 06/30/2013
* USD 144,590.00

Non-technical abstract: In correlated electron materials, a phenomenon known as
phase inhomogeneity is thought to be critical for explaining many interesting
properties of these materials. This work will explore two physical phenomena
that have been exhibited in correlated electron materials known as manganites: a
metal-insulator transition associated with magnetic ordering and colossal
magnetoresistance. This project will employ the binary compound Eu-rich EuO as a
simplified system for studying the metal-insulator transition and colossal
magnetoresistance. This project will fully characterize the metal-insulator
transition in the EuO system, as well as searching for evidence of phase
inhomogeneity in Eu-rich EuO. Exploration of the similarities of the Eu-rich EuO
system to other correlated electron systems can enhance understanding of the
mechanisms that are responsible for the properties of these materials.
Understanding the nature of electronic, magnetic, and structural interactions
that give rise to interesting phenomena, like the metal-insulator transition or
colossal magnetoresistance, in the long run may provide insights as to how to
take advantage of these materials for applications such as sensors or electronic
devices. Additionally, this work will help meet the growing demand for a
technical workforce by training undergraduates in experimental techniques,
including sample growth and physical properties measurements.

Technical abstract: Phase inhomogeneity has emerged as a significant paradigm
for describing a wide range of correlated electron materials, including the
colossal magnetoresistive manganites. Like the manganites, Eu-rich EuO exhibits
colossal magnetoresistance and ferromagnetic ordering at low temperatures with
an accompanying insulator-metal transition. However, Eu-rich EuO provides a
simplified laboratory for exploring the metal-insulator transition and colossal
magnetoresistance because of its reduced structural complexity as compared to
the manganites. This single investigator award will support an experimental
study of Eu-rich EuO thin films with the objective of characterizing the
transport and magnetotransport properties in light of the theoretical Kondo-
lattice model that has been developed to describe the metal-insulator transition
and colossal magnetoresistance of the EuO system. To explore the metal-insulator
transition, the resistivity of the Eu-rich EuO films will be modulated both by
controlling the oxygen deficiency of the samples and by controlling the carrier
density via the electric field effect. Additionally, the supported work will
look for indirect signatures of phase inhomogeneity in the magnetization and
transport behavior of the Eu-rich EuO thin films, providing additional insight
into role of phase inhomogeneity in determining material properties. This
project will also train undergraduates in experimental techniques, including
sample growth and transport and magnetization measurements, thereby helping to
develop future physicists.