* 0804213
* RUI: Polymer Nanocomposite Surface Modification and Characterization for Microfluidic Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2008,04/30/2010
* Brian Augustine, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 04/30/2010
* USD 55,000.00

Hybrid polymer-inorganic materials represent an important development in the
polymer materials field due to the ability to tailor the physical properties of
these materials with varying chemical composition and percentage of the
inorganic component. This Research at Undergraduate Institutions (RUI)
transition grant will address two main areas of intellectual merit. The primary
area is a fundamental study of the physico-chemical properties of surface
modified polyhedral oligomeric silsequioxane (POSS)-copolymer materials when
exposed to plasma and chemical environments. These materials will be studied as
they offer the possibility of controlling or changing the surface properties of
coatings applied to polymer microfluidic ("lab-on-a-chip") devices. Materials
properties will be studied using a combination of surface analysis techniques
including x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), atomic and lateral force
microscopy (AFM/LFM), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), variable angle
spectroscopic ellipsometry (VASE), infrared spectroscopy and contact angle
measurements. Work with undergraduates will be centered for a ten week summer
program on completing AFM and XPS studies commenced with NSF-RUI #0405345. The
second major summer project is to further develop a rapid prototyping technique
using photopolymerization of poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) microchips being
developed in our lab. This novel technique allows for the in-situ fabrication of
buried layer structures, copolymerization to produce POSS based substrates and
multi-layer 3D device architectures for microfluidic applications. Device
designs and specifications tested in this project will be developed in
collaboration with Dr. James Landers' microfluidics group at the University of
Virginia in the Department of Chemistry. Device testing will include
electroosmotic flow (EOF) of POSS-treated devices and extrinsic Fabry-Perot
interferometry (EFPI) measurements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses
the technologically important field of biomedical devices and more specifically
"lab-on-a-chip" microfluidic devices. The development of improved surface and
coating materials is critical for the commercialization of these devices with
applications including forensics and point-of-care medical diagnostics. In
addition to the technical objectives of this project, a final objective is the
scientific training of undergraduate research students in a highly
interdisciplinary research environment. This project will involve the training
of three undergraduate researchers in the materials science issues of structure-
property relationships of polymers and surfaces. These students will be exposed
to surface analytical techniques, vacuum science, microfabrication, polymer
materials characterization and processing, and microfluidic technology and
science. The participants in this program will also interact with graduate
students and post-doctoral researchers in the Lander's lab at UVa through direct
laboratory collaboration in order to better appreciate research at a major
research institution. These activities help serve to broadly impact the pipeline
of future scientists from undergraduates to the graduate level.&lt;br/&gt;