* 0804575
* New Developments of Nonlinear Dependent Models, with Applications in Genetics, Finance and the Environment
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2012
* Zhengjun Zhang, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2012
* USD 180,000.00

High-dimensional and complex data are now collected routinely in the fields of
environment, financial markets, and signal and image processing. A major
challenge is to find methods to analyze the structure of such data sets, to fit
models with desired dependence properties, and to identify and validate
patterns. A major goal of the proposal is to make significant methodological and
theoretical contributions to the important and challenging low-sample and high-
dimension statistical inference problems such as dimension reduction in bio-
informatics, and extreme dependence problems arising from environmental, and
financial markets. The proposal consists of four important steps. First, the
proposal pursues a series of developments of new measures for nonlinear
dependencies. The investigator studies the limiting distributions of dependence
measures (quotient correlation coefficients) and analyzes asymptotic powers when
the dependence structures are specified. In DNA microarray data analysis, the
quotient correlation is used to select the best feature subset of genes, and
then the selected subset is used to predict classes for all sample data. Second,
a tail dependent measure (a tail quotient correlation coefficient) with varying
threshold is introduced. This measure is related to the study of statistics of
multivariate extremes, and is used to assess asymptotic (in)dependencies in
environmental variables. Third, the proposal includes the development of
statistical estimation methods for asymptotically (in)dependent multivariate
maxima and moving maxima processes. This allows one to efficiently study
clustered spatial-temporal extreme observations. Fourth, the proposal studies
GARCH(r,s) models with m-dependent residuals.

The intellectual merit of the proposal in a first instance stems from an
efficient dimension reduction approach using the quotient correlation concept.
In DNA microarray data analysis, in which there are thousands of variables
(genes) in gene expression profiles, and class prediction is an important
problem. It is important to identify subsets of genes to work with, due to the
high dimensional feature and small sample size of the data under investigation.
The ultimate goal is to select the smallest subset of genes which contribute
toward the classifications and predictions. Among existing gene selection
methods, it is hard to find one which always performs better than the rest when
applying them to different data sets. The proposal specifically aims at finding
a solution for this. Beyond methodological merits and specific applications, the
proposal also has a considerable broad impact. Throughout applications in
diverse fields (like above), extreme risks play an important scientific,
societal, as well as (possibly) political role. The dissemination of new
statistical tools leading to a better understanding of the occurrence of joint
extremes is of great importance. This can be well achieved at the level of new
graduate courses, publications in journals aimed at a broad audience and in
discussion with scientists from other fields. To name just one potential example
where the proposal has great impact, let us consider financial risk management.
Due to the establishment of new regulatory-rules for banking solvency (so-called
Basel II proposal), banks have to come up (in their analysis of credit risk, for
instance) with stress testing procedures which can immediately be formulated in
terms of extremal co-movements. Similarly, in multi-line insurance, underwriters
have to take care of joint large losses in many different lines of business. It
is exactly for these kinds of applications that the proposal yields new tools.