* 0804648
* Summer Program in Solid State Chemistry for Undergraduate Students and College Faculty
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2008,12/31/2011
* David Johnson, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 12/31/2011
* USD 510,000.00



The Summer Program in Solid-State Chemistry for Undergraduate Students and
College Faculty aims to increase the number and caliber of young chemists
pursuing this field. The program begins with a one-week tutorial, held at the
University of Oregon where student and faculty participants are immersed in the
concepts and applications of solid state chemistry through a series of morning
lectures and afternoon hands-on laboratories led by top scientists in the field.
The tutorial includes two days focused on sophisticated chemical instrumentation
to include microprobe and surface analysis techniques using equipment housed in
the Center for Advanced Materials Characterization in Oregon. After the
tutorials, the participants disperse to their assigned host laboratories across
the country for an eight to nine week research session. At each host laboratory,
the individual participant will become an active part of the research team,
working on a project assigned by the host. This is also time the faculty
participants can use to work on curricula to include at their home institutions.
Participants return to Oregon after their research for a final symposium where
they share their successes, frustrations and overall experiences with peers
through presentations, a poster session and group discussions.

%%%

The Summer Program in Solid State Chemistry for Undergraduate Students and
College Faculty has played a vital role in increasing the knowledge, membership
and diversity of the solid-state chemistry community nationwide for the last two
decades. The program begins with a one-week tutorial, held at the University of
Oregon where student and faculty participants are immersed in the concepts and
applications of solid-state chemistry. This is accomplished through a series of
lectures and hands-on laboratory sessions using state of the art x-ray
diffraction, transmission electron microscopy, electron microprobe analysis,
scanning electron microscopy and surface analysis techniques led by top
scientists in the field. After the tutorial, the participants disperse to their
assigned host laboratories across the country for an eight to nine week research
session where they become an active part of the host's research team, working on
a project assigned by the host. This research experience gives students
perspective both on the nature of graduate level research and the importance of
solid-state chemistry to current science and technology. The intensive research
experience is a critical factor that influences many undergraduates, including
those from underrepresented populations, to continue their education by going to
graduate school.

