* 0804744
* Novel Nanostructures for High-Energy Nanocomposite Permanent Magnets
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2008,05/31/2012
* Jeffrey Shield, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Taleff
* 05/31/2012
* USD 264,319.00

TECHNICAL: Magnetic interactions between hard and soft magnetic phases in
nanostructured two-phase composites result in permanent magnet materials with
significantly enhanced magnetic properties. The properties dramatically increase
with increasing soft magnetic phase fraction. However, in granular materials the
soft magnetic phase fraction is limited to about 15 percent by the development
of soft magnetic grain/soft magnetic grain neighbors. However, the development
of novel nanostructures via eutectic phase transformations offers the potential
to increase the volume fraction of the soft magnetic phase to 20-30 percent. The
objective of this project is to develop microstructural selection maps for
ternary Sm-Co-T alloys in the vicinity of the binary Sm-Co eutectic at 8 atomic
percent Sm. With this information, alloys can be designed with high Co content
with eutectic structures that avoid formation of primary Co. The microstructural
selection maps will be determined for both conventionally processed alloys and
after rapid solidification. Rapid solidification processing effectively refines
the scale of the soft magnetic phase to the nanostructural level necessary for
effective exchange interactions between the hard and soft magnetic phases. The
magnetic properties of the nanocomposite permanent magnets will be determined
from hysteresis loops as a function of temperature in order to understand the
behavior of nanocomposite permanent magnets as a function of temperature. DC
demagnetization and isothermal remanence magnetization measurements will provide
additional insight into the magnetic behavior, especially the reversal processes
and interphase magnetic interactions. The magnetic behavior of the
nanocomposites will be closely tied to the nanostructures by characterizing
structures using x-ray diffraction and scanning and transmission electron
microscopy. Three-dimensional atom probe tomography and three-dimensional field
ion microscopy will also be used to characterize the nanostructures; this will
be accomplished in collaboration with Dr. Frederic Danoix of the University of
Rouen in France. NON-TECHNICAL: Rare earth permanent magnets are integral to
technological advancements. As a result, continued development of improved
permanent magnets directly benefit society by providing advanced electronic
devices, new medical imaging capabilities, and countless other applications,
some known and some not yet imagined. Additionally, the research will provide
fundamental understanding of solidification of ternary alloys at and near
eutectic compositions. This project will also educate and train the next
generation of scientists and industry leaders, primarily through the integration
of teaching and research by involving undergraduate and graduate students in
research. Collaborative research with researchers at the University of Rouen is
planned, with graduate students involved with short-term visits to the
University of Rouen to conduct the research experiments. Collaborations with
researchers at National Laboratories and use of national user facilities will
also expand the experiences of students involved in this project. The PI has
also developed a course in nanomaterials, and discoveries made in this project
will be incorporated into it.