* 0804822
* Stochastic Control Problems and Numerical Methods
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Harold Kushner, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 07/31/2012
* USD 192,000.00

The Markov chain approximation numerical methods are the ones of current choice
for continuous time stochastic control problems. This project will develop
analogous algorithms for nonlinear stochastic systems subject to delays.
Computations and simulations show that appropriate controls that take the delays
into account can improve performance considerably. Yet little is currently
available concerning algorithms or convergence proofs for nonlinear problems.
Due to the delays in the dynamics, the original model problem is infinite-
dimensional, and the memory requirements of the numerical algorithms are a
serious concern and cause major technical challenges for both the structure of
the algorithms and the proofs of convergence. One must be careful since the
delay equations can be very sensitive to model perturbations. Approximations to
the original models are being developed to simplify the memory problems for the
numerical algorithms, and convergence proofs are being developed. The methods of
proof are purely probabilistic, being based on weak convergence techniques,
hence are very flexible and general. Furthermore the numerical algorithms can be
represented as control problems for Markov chain models, which gives the
procedure intuitive meaning. Communications systems are of interest for a long
time period, hence the popularity of the ergodic (or average cost per unit time)
cost criterion. There is little relevant ergodic theory for the delay case and
the problem of effective numerical approximations is almost completely open,
from both the analytical and algorithmic perspectives. Extensions to singular
and impulsive controls and neutral equations will be carried out.

Nonlinear controlled stochastic dynamical models subject to delays are
ubiquitous. They occur in models of internet control (and elsewhere in
communications, control, biology, financial economics, etc.) where the control
signals are subject to communications delays. Indeed, the effects of
communications delays are major concerns in the design of internet protocols for
efficient and stable usage. The Principal Investigator?s methods for numerically
solving stochastic control problems are widely used (in control systems,
economics, financial models) for continuous time problems without delays. This
work will extend the range of the methods to general nonlinear stochastic
systems with delays. Little is known about such problems at present. The
algorithms and analytical methods to be developed will enable much more
effective control of such systems and demonstrate the usefulness on concrete
problems of current importance.