* 0804231
* NSF Minority Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for FY2008
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Paula Welander, Welander                Paula          V
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 06/30/2011
* USD 189,000.00

This action funds an NSF Minority Postdoctoral Fellowship for FY 2008. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan in a host laboratory for the
Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden participation in biology. The title
of the research and training plan for this fellowship to Paula V. Welander is
"Elucidating the biosynthesis and physiological function of hopanoid lipids in
phototrophic bacteria" and is under the sponsorship of Professor Dianne K.
Newman at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

The atmosphere of the ancient Earth was composed primarily of carbon dioxide,
some nitrogen, and essentially no oxygen. It is thought that, through oxygenic
photosynthesis, cyanobacteria (also known as blue-green algae)were responsible
for the oxygenation of the Earth's atmosphere. Modern cyanobacteria are
significant producers of 2-methylhopanoids, which are lipids similar in
structure to sterols such as cholesterol. Because cyanobacteria are the only
microbes capable of oxygenic photosynthesis, 2-methylhopanoid fossils discovered
in ancient rocks and sediments have been used as "biomarkers" for both
cyanobacteria and oxygenic photosynthesis itself. However, significant
2-methylhopanoid production has been recently discovered in another bacterium,
Rhodopseudomonas palustris, which also uses photosynthesis for growth, but does
not produce oxygen in the process. The main objective of the research plan is to
understand why bacteria produce 2-methylhopanoids and determine if these
molecules are appropriate markers for oxygenic photosynthesis. This research is
is identifying the genes required to produce 2-methylhopanoids in R. palustris
and then create gene deletion mutants that are no longer able to produce
2-methylhopanoids. These mutants are being used to demonstrate how the lack of
2-methylhopanoids affects the growth, physiology and structure of this organism.
This research provides an excellent opportunity for interdisciplinary training
in molecular geobiology with extensive training in bacterial metabolism. The
broader impacts include increasing the participation of an underrepresented
group at the postdoctoral level. The Fellow is serving as a role model and
mentoring students through outreach programs in biology.