* 0804609
* Collaborative Research:  Polysaccharide Derivatives for Enhanced Drug Delivery
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Lynne Taylor, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Srinivasarao
* 08/31/2013
* USD 195,000.00

Lead ID: DMR/BMAT(7623) 0804609 Lead PI: Taylor, Lynne ORG: Purdue Non-Lead ID:
DMR/BMAT(7623) 0804501 Non-Lead PI: Edgar, Kevin ORG: Virginia Tech

Title: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Polysaccharide Derivatives for Enhanced Drug
Delivery

INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The PIs propose synthesis, mechanistic study, and screening
test development for the design of novel cellulosic biomaterials to ensure
effective and safe delivery of water-insoluble drugs. The research promises to
create fundamental understanding of amorphous matrices, leading to effective new
amorphous matrix systems for delivery of highly active, poorly bioavailable
drugs. It will thus address a key impediment to productive drug development. The
proposal has the following specific objectives: (1) Elucidate key requirements
for polymeric stabilization of the amorphous form of model drugs in both the
solid and solution phases by mechanistic studies. (2) Create screening methods
to rapidly evaluate novel cellulose derivatives. (3) Synthesize two novel
families of cellulose derivatives designed for drug miscibility, slow release,
and pH-triggered release, as well as safety. (4) Design second generation
cellulose derivatives based on screening results and solubility testing of key
drugs with solubility and bioavailability issues. The team at Virginia Tech will
synthesize novel long chain ester derivatives of carboxymethyl cellulose, and
novel adipate esters of cellulose, varying the degree of substitution of
carboxymethyl and other substituents to provide a range of hydrophobicity and
release rates. The team at Purdue will carry out polarized light optical
microscopy of spin coated polymer/model drug films that will provide mechanistic
understanding and ultimately a screening method for new polymer delivery
systems. They will screen solution stabilization by visible and UV spectroscopy
of drug in polymer solution, using 1H NMR spectroscopy of the solutions to
provide mechanistic understanding. Mechanistic understanding of how amorphous
drugs are stabilized in the solid state, and especially in solution, by
polymeric matrices, and creation of novel stabilization screening methods will
provide valuable new tools of general use in the field. Furthermore, the
research will generate biomaterials forming the basis of new drug delivery
systems for rescue of failed pipeline drugs, enhancing efficacy of marketed
drugs, and enabling conversions of injectable formulations to oral for enhanced
compliance.

BROADER IMPACTS: Many important drugs, including several anticancer and
antifungal agents, suffer from poor bioavailability due to the low aqueous
solubility of their crystalline forms. One strategy for addressing this problem
is to produce the drug in an amorphous modification, given the generally
improved solubility of the amorphous material. This proposal develops a general
approach to using cellulose derivatives to suppress drug crystallinity and
enhance bioavailabilty. It will develop a systematic approach to understanding
the mechanisms underlying this enhancement. The work could have very substantial
impact inasmuch as effective delivery of many drugs represents a major
impediment to their efficient implementation. The project provides an attractive
multidisciplinary platform for the training of students, who will be associated
not only with synthesis and characterization of materials but with developing
drug formulations with practical utility. Minority undergraduate research
participation will be encouraged at Purdue through the existing Pharmacy
Multicultural Program, which provides 50% cost sharing for the student stipend.
Past experience suggests that 3-5 students will be involved each year during the
summers as well as the academic year.





