* 0804188
* Opportunities for Nanostructured Polymeric Materials for Device Fabrication: A Multidisciplinary Workshop,  Amherst, MA
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2008,06/30/2008
* Kenneth Carter, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2008
* USD 3,000.00

Intellectual Merit. The goal of the project is the workshop, "Opportunities for
Nanostructured Polymeric Materials for Device Fabrication". The workshop is
concerned with the exciting area of nanostructured polymers that have
increasingly important implications in enabling advanced device fabrication. New
polymeric materials and devices fabricated from these new materials are
demonstrating potential for dramatic improvements in areas such as polymers for
advanced lithography, low dielectric insulators, block copolymer self assembly
for hierarchical patterning, opto-electronics, photonic bandgap phenomena,
energy conversion and biotechnology. For example, the demand for improved
information technology - broadly encompassing computing, storage, information
display and collection - is increasing at an explosive rate and creation and use
of this technology is rapidly becoming a dominant component of the world
economy. Similarly, advanced nanostructured polymers are key components in
energy conversion and storage devices. One critical aspect underlying new
advancements is new materials, devices and understanding of the underlying
physics of device operation. The importance of the subject matter of this
workshop is evident by the number of high impact publications in the area, with
high impact general science articles covering advanced nanostructured polymers
for emerging needs. The workshop will provide a forum for the exchange of
expertise between these important areas of research, and that through such
exchange, directions for future developments and entirely new directions will be
generated. Broader Impact. Society, in general, has realized the importance of
advanced polymeric materials and the impact that developments in the field will
have in ensuring US competitiveness and world-wide quality of life issues. It is
important for researchers in this area to share their results and determine
future issues for the development of new materials and devices. The workshop
organizers have successfully recruited 15 world-class experts in the field to
give lectures on their latest work. There will also be a contributed poster
session to allow for other attendees, including students and younger scientists,
to present their latest results. An important goal of this workshop is to
provide an opportunity for students and younger scientist to engage in
scientific discussions with some of the top experts in this field. The
organizers are committed to ensuring that we attracting and engage a diverse set
of attendees with a significant number of women and underrepresented minorities
represented.