* 0804792
* Functional Block Copolymers as Guides for NanoparticleAssembly: Preparation of Cobalt Nanoparticles from Alkyne-Functional Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2008,09/30/2009
* Robert Grubbs, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 09/30/2009
* USD 200,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Controlling the organization of metallic nanoparticles in
three-dimensional space is an important goal for the development of nanometer-
scale materials for applications including energy storage, light harvesting,
catalysis, and memory storage. One potential route to this goal involves the
exploitation of the tendency for block copolymers to undergo micro-phase
separation in which each polymer block occupies well-defined spatial regions in
the bulk material. Development of such hybrid materials requires an
understanding of the synthesis and behavior of specific functional block
copolymers. Ongoing efforts to control ordering and structure of cobalt
nanoparticles through controlled synthesis of alkyne-functional polymers will be
continued through this grant. The fundamental questions to be addressed by this
research relate to understanding how control over structure of alkyne-functional
block copolymers can provide control over size and shape of cobalt (and other)
nanoparticles. Understanding these relationships will guide subsequent efforts
to prepare polymer-inorganic hybrids containing multiple types of nanoparticles.
These issues will be approached through the construction of libraries of
selected alkyne-functional block copolymers followed by an examination of their
phase behavior as a function of polymer size, composition, and cobalt loading.
The effects of these variables on the magnetic properties of the resulting
materials and on the nature of the polymer-cobalt interface will subsequently be
examined. The physical crosslinks that the alkyne-functional polymers in these
systems form under mild conditions will be exploited to control the degree of
nanoparticle surface functionalization. This research will further the
understanding of how metallic nanoparticles can be incorporated into larger
assemblies with the aid of multi-block copolymers and will facilitate future
application of these materials.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: This project aims to increase the understanding of how
specifically-designed organic polymer molecules can be used to control how
nanometer-sized metal particles come together to form larger materials that show
useful magnetic, electronic, and optical properties. Such designed materials
have great potential in a range of applications including solar cells,
batteries, catalysts, and memory storage devices. Researchers at the
undergraduate, graduate, and post-doctoral levels will be involved in this
research and will participate in the communication of their research to the
general public at scientific meetings at the local, regional, and national
levels, including the New England Polymer Chemistry Workshop, an informal series
of regional meetings designed to give graduate students the opportunity to
present their research. The PI will also work through the Summer Enrichment at
Dartmouth (SEAD) program to inform students from under-resourced urban and rural
high schools about opportunities in scientific research at the college and
graduate levels.