* 0804865
* RUI: Classical and Quantum Ratchets in Josephson Arrays
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Kenneth Segall, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 06/30/2012
* USD 175,000.00

*****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT*****&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Noise and randomness in
nature are not always undesirable. In recent years it has been learned that many
physical systems have the capability to use noise and randomness to their
advantage. Such a system is called a ratchet, indicating a system that only
moves in one direction regardless of which direction it is pushed. An everyday
example of a ratchet is a windmill, where regardless of which way the wind
blows, net positive energy is produced. Ratchets can be realized in many
different chemical, biological, optical and electronic systems. The open
questions that exist relate to how much net motion is produced for different
amounts and different types of noise. Scientists seek out different systems to
try to quantify the answers to these questions. In this research, the ratchet
effect is being studied in a superconducting circuit. Lithographic techniques,
similar to ones used in the computer industry, can be used to fabricate tiny
microscopic circuits made of superconducting metals. When these circuits are
cooled to ultra-low temperatures, small bits of magnetic field called ?fluxons?
can be trapped inside them. If the circuit layout has been designed correctly,
these fluxons will be able to move in only one direction, thus exhibiting
ratchet behavior. Studying the ratchet effect in a superconducting circuit is
advantageous because many different circuit architectures can be engineered,
each one operating slightly differently from the next. By measuring many such
circuits, one can work toward more general ideas about how ratchets work. The
broader impact of this research includes the training of undergraduate physics
majors, who will be involved with much of the proposed studies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;*****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT*****&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
individual investigator award supports an experimental study of the Ratchet
Effect in arrays of superconducting Josephson junctions. The Ratchet Effect
characterizes physical systems in which random noise and fluctuations can cause
motion in a preferred direction. A physical system where the Ratchet Effect can
be realized is an array of superconducting Josephson junctions, where applied
electrical current can shuttle quanta of magnetic flux called fluxons. The
motion of these fluxons can be ascertained by so-called switching current
measurements, where the current-voltage characteristics are measured multiple
times under the same conditions. Of particular interest are the different modes
of transport for fluxons to ?depin? and move through the array. At low
temperatures, the fluxon is expected to depin via quantum tunneling, although
that has yet to be observed. At moderate temperatures the fluxon depins via
thermal activation, characterized by Kramers? law type of behavior. At higher
temperatures the fluxon can retrap again after being thermally activated, and
move through in a series of depinning and retrapping events; this is known as
fluxon diffusion. Our main objective is to observe these three domains and
identify the ?crossover? regions in temperature. The broader impact of this work
includes the training of undergraduate physics majors, who will perform much of
the proposed research.