* 0804378
* Hydrogen at Ultra-High Pressure
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2013
* Isaac Silvera, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2013
* USD 455,000.00

Technical&lt;br/&gt;This individual investigator award will support studies of
hydrogen at ultra high pressures and temperatures. Earlier attempts to study
hydrogen in the high-pressure high-temperature regime were thwarted by diffusion
of hydrogen in the pressure cell materials and loss of sample or embrittlement
and failure of cell materials. By utilizing pulsed laser heating this problem
has been overcome since the time that the sample is hot and can diffuse is
limited to the short time of the pulse. The emphasis will be on studies along
and above the melting line of hydrogen. Hydrogen was predicted to have a peak in
its melting line and this peak was recently experimentally demonstrated to occur
below a megabar. The melting line studies will be extended to higher pressures.
At lower pressures hydrogen melts from a molecular solid to a molecular liquid.
With increasing temperature above the melting line hydrogen will dissociate and
become monatomic with metallic conductivity. With increasing pressure beyond the
peak the melting temperature may descend to zero Kelvin and one may observe
melting directly from the molecular to the atomic phase. The atomic metallic
liquid is expected to demonstrate two-component superconductivity (electrons and
protons) as well as superfluidity Metallic hydrogen is predicted to be
metastable due to a potential barrier. This barrier between the two phases may
be responsible for inhibiting the transition from solid molecular to atomic
metallic at low temperature. At high temperature thermal energy may allow the
molecular phase to overcome the barrier and make the transition to metallic
hydrogen. The broader impact of this research is the development of new methods
to study materials under extreme conditions enriching the scientific community.
This program involves young researchers at all levels-high school,
undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral, as they develop to become the
scientists of the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-
technical&lt;br/&gt;Over 70 years ago Wigner and Huntington predicted that at
high pressure hydrogen will transform from a molecular solid to an atomic
metallic solid, later predicted to be a possible room temperature superconductor
(no resistance to the flow of electricity) that is metastable, i.e., will remain
in the metallic phase when pressure is released. Because of its extreme quantum
nature, theory is challenged to make accurate predictions of hydrogen's
properties and needs experimental guidance. Hydrogen has been pressurized to
more than 10 times the predicted transition pressure and remains molecular
insulating. Recent theory predicted a peak in the melting line and with pressure
increasing beyond the peak the melting temperature could descend to zero Kelvin.
Hydrogen would be an atomic metallic liquid with superconductivity of both the
electrons and protons. Earlier attempts to study hydrogen in the extreme
pressure-temperature regime were frustrated due to the proclivity for hydrogen
to diffuse out of the high pressure apparatus or into the materials comprising
the apparatus at high temperature. Using a newly developed method of pulsed
laser heating, hydrogen can now be studied in this regime. The predicted peak in
the melting line has been observed and this research program will extend studies
to higher pressures in search of the metallic state. On a broader level, new
techniques for high pressure and high-temperature/low-temperature are developed
for the scientific community; if metallic hydrogen can be produced and is
metastable it will be a high energy density material as well as the most
powerful rocket propellant available to man. Students and postdoctoral fellows
on all levels, the next generation of scientists, are involved in the
developments and research.