* 0804385
* Acceptor Doping and Hole Transport in ZnO Films and Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2008,02/28/2013
* David Norton, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 02/28/2013
* USD 414,032.00

Technical. This project aims for greater understanding and control of p-type
doping of ZnO. The project addresses phosphorus doping in epitaxial films on
single crystal ZnO, phosphorus doping in non-polar ZnO films, co-doping ZnO with
phosphorus and hydrogen, surface passivation, and formation and properties of
ZnO pn homo- and heterojunctions. Characterization techniques, including
temperature dependent Hall measurements, capacitance-voltage measurements, and
low temperature photoluminescence, will be used to elucidate the behavior of
phosphorus dopants in these materials. The overall objective of this project is
to understand the synthesis and properties of ZnO-related pn homojunctions and
heterojunctions in an effort to realize efficient p-type doping, minority
carrier injection, and ultraviolet electroluminescence. Expected technological
impacts include solid state lighting, thin film electronics and sensors.
Understanding the doping of (Zn,Mg)O thin films will also be useful in the
development of transparent conducting oxides, widely used as electrode materials
in photovoltaic solar cells and light emitting displays. As wide band gap
semiconductors, transparent conducting oxides are also attractive as active
materials in transparent electric and optoelectronic technologies. Wide gap
semiconducting oxides are attractive for transparent transistor development as
they can be synthesized as thin films at lower temperatures that are compatible
with various substrates, including glass. For chemical or biological sensors,
the ability to fabricate pn junctions with ZnO-based materials opens the
possibility of using the improved sensitivity of a high electron mobility
transistor for sensor applications. Non-Technical. The project addresses
fundamental research issues in a topical area of electronic/photonic materials
science and condensed matter physics having technological relevance. Basic
understanding gained is expected to lead to improved device performance, and to
allow design of new components. The project integrates research and education
providing students with hands-on laboratory experience and training while
conducting forefront research. Educational impacts include UF graduate and
undergraduate students, as well as opportunities for outreach to local high
school students. In order to address the need to educate engineering graduate
students about the relative role of specific technologies to energy consumption,
the project?s activities will also include providing a tutorial on Energy
Consumption and Technologies to be delivered as part of the Graduate Student
Seminar Series in Materials Science. In order to enhance the exposure of
undergraduate students to wide bandgap semiconducting oxide research, the
project will incorporate undergraduates through an existing Senior Research
Thesis program. The research activities will involve a Ph.D graduate student.
For both graduate and undergraduates involvement, persons from underrepresented
groups (women, minorities) will be particularly encouraged to participate.