* 0804567
* Preparation of the Quantum Ground of a Mechanical Resonator
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2008,10/31/2010
* Keith Schwab, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 10/31/2010
* USD 360,000.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental theory which describes
the behavior of the microscopic world of atoms, electrons, and photons is called
quantum mechanics. Quantum mechanics has shown itself to be correct in
laboratory experiments and tests, with no known exceptions. In spite of this,
there are conceptual problems with applying quantum mechanics to larger objects
and length scales. For instance, quantum mechanics says that the energy of
vibrating mechanical system should quantized, with only discreet values of the
energy possible. Furthermore, the theory requires that position measurements
will necessarily perturb the motion of the mechanical structure, called the
Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle. Both of these predictions are far outside our
normal experience of classical reality. This project will pursue experiments to
probe these subtle and bizarre effects in small mechanical structures formed by
billions of atoms. This will be accomplished by employing the most advance tools
of experimental science: nanofabrication, ultra-low temperature physics, and
quantum computing electronic devices. This project will support the education of
a PhD student in these advanced technologies, which has historically shown
itself to be excellent training for many scientific careers from academia to our
most advanced technology industries. This project will either succeed to show
quantum mechanics is true at bizarrely large length scales, or we will fail and
possibly find new features to quantum mechanics which are not yet known. Both
possibilities would change our understanding of quantum mechanics and our view
of the physical world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;This project will pursue experiments to probe quantum
measurement limits in mechanical structures. The techniques are in hand to
produce and measure the quantum ground state of a small, radio frequency
mechanical structure formed by 10 billion atoms. This will be accomplished using
a nanomechanical structure coupled to a very low loss, superconducting microwave
resonator. Furthermore, using these techniques, it appears possible to produce
detection with avoids the backaction required by the Heisenberg Uncertainty
Principle (HUP) for continuous measurement, and to produce squeezed states,
where the uncertainties periodically dip below the HUP. By careful study of the
decay of these squeezed states, it is expected to be able to provide a
quantitative test of environmental decoherence mechanisms for a somewhat
macroscopic body. These experiments are now only very recently possible due to
the latest advances in nano-electro-mechanical devices, superconducting
electronics technology. This project will support the education of a PhD student
in these advanced technologies, which has historically shown itself to be
excellent training for many scientific careers from academia to our most
advanced technology industries. These experiments are expected to be of general
interest to the scientific community and to provide ultra-sensitive readout
techniques especially for the community pursing sensitive detection at the nano-
scale.&lt;br/&gt;