* 0804651
* Development of the H4RG-15; A low cost, high performance 4096x4096 pixel array for infrared astronomy and the building block for very large IR mosaic focal planes
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2018
* Richard Blank, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 09/30/2018
* USD 7,230,611.00

Bigger is definitely better when it comes to astronomical telescopes. A bigger
mirror is important for two reasons: it gathers more light which means that
fainter objects can be studied in a reasonable amount of time, and it also
provides higher angular resolution so that finer details can be studied. There
are quite a number of six to ten meter class telescopes in the world today and
astronomers now have their collective eyes on even bigger telescopes called ELTs
(Extremely Large Telescopes). There are three collaborations in North America
and Europe looking to build telescopes from 24 to 42 meters in diameter (about
half the size of a football field).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bigger telescopes are
expensive and so are the instruments that go on them to take pictures and
analyze the light. These instruments must be bigger to be able to cover the
larger high resolution images that are delivered to the telescope focus. A new
development is underway at the University of Hawaii Institute for Astronomy in
collaboration with Teledyne Scientific and Imaging, LLC that will produce a
large detector array for infrared light. At 16 million pixels the new detector
will be the largest infrared array ever made and will come at a lower price per
pixel. To make cameras that are even bigger, these new detectors will be built
so that they can be placed side-by-side to form what is called a mosaic camera.
This work is funded by NSF's Division of Astronomical Sciences through its
Advanced Technologies and Instrumentation program.