* 0804230
* SoD-TEAM: Design for Adaptivity and Reliable Operation of Software Intensive Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2007,02/28/2010
* Sherif Abdelwahed, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 02/28/2010
* USD 120,936.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Directorate for Computer and Information Science
and Engineering (CISE)&lt;br/&gt;Division Computer and Network Systems
(CNS)&lt;br/&gt;Science of Design (SoD) Program&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
Number: 0613971&lt;br/&gt;P/I: Sherif Abdelwahed&lt;br/&gt;PI's Department:
Electrical Engineering - Computer Science&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Vanderbilt
University&lt;br/&gt;Award: $ 199,866&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: "SoD-TEAM:
Design for Adaptivity and Reliable Operation of Software Intensive
Systems"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses design techniques for
Software-Intensive Systems (SIS). The scientific contribution of the project is
the conversion of a significant segment of the design process of software-
intensive systems, typically handled manually in an ad-hoc manner, into a
systematic semi-automated process based on mathematical models and control-
theoretic techniques. The model-based techniques and tools will simplify the
development of a large class of distributed real-time and embedded software-
intensive system, which will enable a major improvement in the ability to design
and implement complex systems that will operate in uncertain environments in a
cost-effective manner. The science and technology developed by this project will
inform designers about how to build more effective and reliable systems. Along
with the new design methodology proposed, the PIs will develop a set of tools
that facilitate the design, analysis, and verification tasks, making it easier
to design and analyze systems, while offering a higher degree of confidence in
assured operations. In addition to the basic research component of the project,
there is an educational component that will contribute to the development of
practitioners in the field. Students at this institution are introduced to
systematic methods for embedded system design and implementation using modeling,
analysis, and verification tools developed by the R&amp;D community. To provide
students with more hands on experiences, project-related graduate-level courses
will be developed that address issues in software-intensive system design and
implementation on realistic test beds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Program
Manager: Anita J. La Salle&lt;br/&gt;Date: July 11, 2006&lt;br/&gt;