* 0804479
* Synthesis, Structure and Properties of III-V Ferromagnetic Semiconductor Thin Films
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Bruce Wessels, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 06/30/2012
* USD 446,007.00

Technical: The development of ferromagnetic, group III-V semiconductors has
provided the potential for a class of multifunctional materials that exhibit
magnetic, magneto-optical, and semiconducting properties. These materials offer
the potential for manipulating both spin and charge. Their utilization, however,
has been impeded due to their low transition (Curie) temperatures. Recently
there have been reports of ferromagnetic semiconductors with Curie temperatures
in excess of 300 K. There is growing evidence that disorder plays an essential
role in stabilizing ferromagnetism in certain ferromagnetic semiconductors. The
question arises as to the detailed mechanism for stabilizing the high
temperature ferromagnetic phase and the nature of the magnetic species. In this
project, narrow bandgap indium based III-V ferromagnetic semiconductor thin
films will be developed, including InMnAs and InMnSb and their solid solutions.
Of specific interest is what role transition metal atomic clusters play in
stabilizing high temperature ferromagnetism in these semiconductors and the
nature of the short range order. Furthermore the role of free carrier
concentration on the ferromagnetic phase stability will be examined. During the
project, epitaxial thin alloy films will be synthesized by metalorganic vapor
phase epitaxy (MOVPE). Semiconductor alloys with different manganese
concentrations will be prepared to determine the role disorder plays in
stabilizing ferromagnetism. Recent models based on spinodal decomposition
forming ferromagnetic clusters will be tested. Experimental characterization
techniques to be used include temperature and field dependent magnetization
measurements, Hall effect, and magnetoresistance. The magneto-optical Kerr
effect (MOKE) and its spectral dependence over the mid infrared to visible
region will be used to determine the nature and magnitude of the exchange
interaction in the alloys. X-ray absorption spectroscopy and x-ray magnetic
circular dichroism (XMCD) at the Advanced Photon Source will be used to
determine the magnetic properties of the elements comprising the alloys.
Extended x-ray fine structure analysis (EXAFS), analytical electron microscopy,
and an electrode atom probe with atomic scale resolution will be used to
determine cluster size and distribution. Comparisons will be made between
cluster sizes determined by structural and magnetic measurements.&lt;br/&gt;Non-
technical: The project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of
materials science with high technological relevance, and is expected to provide
scientific understanding of ferromagnetic semiconductor materials with potential
applications for spin based devices such as spin valves, magnetic random access
memories, and quantum computation. The project provides training of graduate and
undergraduate students in an interdisciplinary topic, consisting of
semiconductor physics and magnetism. The project also includes educational
outreach activities to local schools and collaboration with national
laboratories, which provide enhanced learning opportunities to students.