* 0804413
* Spin Ordering and Transport in Correlated Electronic and Atomic Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Joel Moore, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2012
* USD 285,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: This award supports theoretical research and education on
spin ordering and transport in correlated electronic and atomic systems. The PI
will investigate problems in the collective spin physics of correlated electron
materials and Bose-Einstein condensates of atoms with nonzero spin.

The research is divided into three subfields: spin transport phenomena related
to the new class of materials called ''topological insulators''; quantum effects
on the phase ordering and coherent dynamics of spinor Bose condensates;
applications of quantum information ideas to improved characterization and
simulation of frustrated magnets. In each of these subfields, the research
builds on the PI?s work performed under prior NSF support. The key elements in
the first research area are to understand how correlation physics is modified in
a topological insulator and to describe three dimensional topological insulators
in greater depth. In the second area, the PI studies effects of topological
defects and dipolar interactions on the quantum theory of Bose condensates with
spin, as these are believed to be essential for the interpretation of
experiments. In the third area, the research tests specific proposals for DMRG-
like algorithms in dimension greater than one on frustrated magnetic models of
current experimental interest.

The work has broader impact beyond the specific research investigations
including education and relevance to emerging device technologies. The work on
spin transport in solids is currently of great interest in the applied
semiconductor community, and devices using the quantum nature of electron spin
are in development. The research is relevant to ideas of future use of spinor
Bose condensates as ultrasensitive magnetic field detectors with spatial
resolution finer than in the best existing devices with applications beyond MRI
devices. Scientifically, improved algorithms to find ground states of local
Hamiltonians are important in many areas of physics. This award has educational
befits, the first being support of graduate students who will use the research
as the basis for the Ph.D. Dissertation. The work influences the efforts of the
PI in course development and undergraduate student research supervision within
the university. With this award, the PI will continue development of on line
educational materials with Lawrence Hall of Science as the major component of
the outreach program, in conjunction with annual public lectures or panels for
high school students.

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY: This award supports research and education on the recently
discovered phenomena of electrical signals that are not associated with moving
electrical charges, but rather associated with the seeming intrinsic rotation or
spin that electron possess and the way groups of electrons transfer spin
spatially. The phenomena are not unrelated to magnetism which also is connected
to the intrinsic electron spin. The phenomena have been observed, but the
theoretical explanation is less clear and the research seeks to clarify physical
mechanisms and thereby add to the ability to control and utilize the phenomenon
in device technology. Eventually, this may be the basis of electronic logic
devices that are orders of magnitude faster and more efficient that the current
transistor technology based on charge movement and charge accumulation.

The work has broader impact beyond the specific research investigations
including education and relevance to emerging device technologies. The work on
spin transport in solids is currently of great interest in the applied
semiconductor community, and devices using the quantum nature of electron spin
are in development. The research is relevant to ideas of future use of spinor
Bose condensates as ultrasensitive magnetic field detectors with spatial
resolution finer than in the best existing devices with applications beyond MRI
devices. Scientifically, improved algorithms are important in many areas of
physics. This award has educational befits, the first being support of graduate
students who will use the research as the basis for the Ph.D. Dissertation. The
work influences the efforts of the PI in course development and undergraduate
student research supervision within the university. With this award, the PI will
continue development of on line educational materials with Lawrence Hall of
Science as the major component of the outreach program, in conjunction with
annual public lectures or panels for high school students.

