* 0804049
* Janus Nanoparticles by Interfacial Engineering
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2013
* Shaowei Chen, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 06/30/2013
* USD 305,324.00

This award to University of California Santa Clare by the Solid State Materials
Chemistry program in the Division of Material Research is study the development
of an effective protocol based on interfacial engineering for the preparation of
nanometer-sized Janus particles, and examination of these functional
nanomaterials as unique building blocks for the fabrication of more complicated
architectures and assemblies. Specifically, hydrophobic alkanethiolate-protected
gold nanoparticles will be used as the initial illustrating examples. By taking
advantage of the impeded interfacial mobility of the particles at the air-water
interface upon mechanical compression (the Langmuir method), the surface
exchange reactions with hydrophilic thiol derivatives that are injected into the
aqueous subphase will be confined to only one side of the particle surface, and
hence the formation of amphiphilic nanoparticles. A wide array of analytical
tools will then be employed to carefully examine the structures of the resulting
particles and their organized ensembles, including contact angle measurements,
scanning probe microscopy (e.g., AFM and STM), and spectroscopies (UV-visible,
FTIR, NMR, dynamic light scattering, etc). Further manipulation of the Janus
nanoparticles will focus on deliberate variation of the chemical structure of
ligands and the metal cores. Overall, the capability of engineering the
structure and properties of nanoscale building blocks for controlled assembly
represents a critical first step towards device fabrication and integration. In
this project, student researchers will benefit from the interdisciplinary nature
of the work by learning the state of the art of nanoparticle synthesis,
characterization, and assembly. Furthermore, some of the activities will also be
closely integrated with several outreach programs targeting minority, women, and
disadvantaged undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project Prof.
Shaowei Chen and his students at the University of California Santa Cruz, will
develop an effective approach to the preparation of nanometer-sized particle
materials that exhibit hydrophobic characters on one face and hydrophilic on the
other. These particles are analogous to the dual-face Roman god, Janus, and
hence Janus nanoparticles. The motivation is that by segregating the hydrophobic
ligands from the hydrophilic ones on the particle surface, the particles may
behave like the surfactant molecules of detergents, leading to directional
assembly of the particles into organized structures. Gold nanoparticles
stabilized by a monolayer of alkanethiolates will be used as the starting
materials. Experimentally, a monolayer of the particles will be first formed on
the water surface; and by mechanical compression (the Langmuir method) the
mobility of the particles will be impeded because of intercalation of the
organic protecting ligands from neighboring particles. Injection of a
hydrophilic ligand into the water phase will then initiate ligand exchange
reactions that are limited only to the bottom half of the particles, and hence
the production of Janus nanoparticles. Further work will be extended to other
nanoparticle materials. The resulting particles will then be used for controlled
assembly into organized structures with unique functional characteristics.
Student researchers will benefit from the interdisciplinary nature of the work
by learning the state of the art of nanoparticle synthesis, characterization,
and assembly. The research activities will also be integrated with various
outreach programs targeting minority, women, and disadvantaged undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;