* 0804113
* Mechanism and Dynamics of Protein Interactions with Polymer Brushes
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Deborah Leckband, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* David A. Brant
* 09/30/2012
* USD 338,060.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0804113 PI: Leckband, Deborah ORG: Illinois-
Urbana/Champaign&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Mechanism and Dynamics of Protein
Interactions with Polymer Brushes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The
proposal aims to identify engineering design rules for controlling protein and
cell interactions with biomaterials. A central and persistent problem
confronting biomaterials design is the uncontrolled adsorption of proteins to
material surfaces. There is currently no general consensus on how to design a
protein-resistant coating. A major gap in current knowledge is the limited
understanding of the basic mechanisms of protein adsorption to polymer
interfaces in aqueous media. Absent this information, it is difficult to define
engineering approaches to control specific behavior. This research plan will
address this knowledge gap by using a combination of synthetic chemistry and
complementary experimental approaches that probe the mechanisms by which
proteins interact with grafted polymers. In Objective 1, polymer gradients will
be used as high throughput screening platforms to identify polymer brush
properties that support protein adsorption. In Objective 2, a combination of
fluorescence techniques will quantify the diffusivity of adsorbed proteins as a
function of the brush parameters. In Objective 3, neutron reflectivity
measurements with deuterated proteins will determine where adsorbed proteins
localize relative to the polymer brush. Finally, Objective 4 will quantify the
magnitude and range of attractive and repulsive forces between proteins and
polymers that are responsible for protein adsorption behavior. The work will
help to develop an understanding of the interactions of proteins with polymer
brushes and could advance the design and preparation of surfaces resistant to
protein adsorption and biofouling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: Success
of this project will shed new and useful light on the mechanisms by which
polymer brush coatings may protect surfaces from unwanted protein adsorption.
With respect to broadening participation, the project will continue the PI's on-
going efforts to involve students from underrepresented groups in science and
engineering in the research endeavor. These efforts will include inclusion of
females and underrepresented minorities in graduate level research and
participation in the Summer Research Opportunity Program that provides
opportunities for minority undergraduate students to participate in
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;