* 0804779
* Magnetic Nanoparticle Interactions: From Magnetostatics to Exchange
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Sara Majetich, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Taleff
* 06/30/2012
* USD 300,000.00

TECHNICAL: Surfactant-coated nanoparticles have tremendous advantages due to
their monodispersity and ability to form ordered arrays. Nanoscale magnetic
measurements have demonstrated that uniformity in the particle size and spacing
affects the collective dynamical response and the length scale of magnetic
order. The surfactant controls the particle size distribution and provides
mobility needed for self-assembly, but it also limits the range of interesting
magnetic nanostructures that can be prepared. The typical 2-4 nm separation
between cores means that interparticle coupling is almost purely magnetostatic.
The surfactant provides at best a temporary, semi-permeable barrier to oxidation
of materials such as iron and cobalt. Assemblies have the mechanical consistency
of wax, making them unsuitable for most device applications. The surfactant
makes it difficult to achieve good electrical contact, and varying amounts of
surface coverage causes particle-to-particle differences in the apparent
tunneling barriers. The project explores processing methods to prepare
monodisperse metallic nanopillars in ordered arrays. The pillars will be made by
reactive ion etching (RIE) a nanoparticle mask. In the simpler form the mask
will be nonmagnetic and the magnetic particles will be created by sputter
deposition on top of the dense pillar array. Direct patterning of magnetic
multilayers with high density methanol-based plasma RIE will also be
investigated to determine the minimum feature size and the effect of this dry
etching process on magnetic response. The research focuses on systems where
magnetic imaging and neutron reflectivity techniques will reveal temperature and
field-dependent magnetic correlation lengths, which provides a deeper
understanding of magnetic nanoparticle interactions. Manganese phosphide has a
first order ferromagnetic to paramagnetic transition, so that the strength of
magnetostatic interactions between MnP nanoparticles should change sharply with
temperature. Ferromagnetic Co nanoparticles coupled to an antiferromagnetic (AF)
IrMn layer may show differences in collective correlations due to exchange bias
effects, depending on the AF domain size. Model soft nanocrystalline materials,
with Fe pillars in a FeBSi matrix, will also be used to test the degree of
exchange coupling between the nanoparticles in the array, which should change
abruptly at the Curie temperature of the matrix, enabling quantitative
comparison of exchange and magnetostatic contributions to the composite
material. Finally the RIE of magnetic materials will be used to prepare some
multilayer nanopillars where the small feature size leads to novel quantum
confinement and spin accumulation effects. The intellectual merit of this
project is in the development of a versatile, scalable process to prepare
uniform magnetic nanoparticles and nanoparticle arrays in an inorganic matrix.
The nanoscale characterization tools will reveal new features concerning the
development of long-range magnetic order, and will clarify the interpretation of
macroscopic measurements. NON-TECHNICAL: The work will have broad impact in
numerous ways. It will form the thesis project for a graduate student and
undergraduate research projects for several students. Hands-on demonstrations
and laboratory experiments related to the magnetic phase transition in MnP will
be developed for middle school students, and undergraduate physics laboratories.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly supported by DMR?s Metals program
and Condensed Matter Physics program.&lt;br/&gt;