* 0804784
* Phase Transition Kinetics and Dynamics of Block Copolymers in Selective Solvents
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2008,04/30/2012
* Rama Bansil, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 04/30/2012
* USD 351,650.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Block copolymers in selective solvents
exhibit simultaneous change in the shape of self-assembled nanoscale domains
along with a change in the symmetry of the ordered phases. While there are many
studies of the equilibrium phase diagrams and thermodynamics of solvent mediated
interactions in block copolymer systems, the dynamics and kinetics of
transformations are less well understood. In particular, not much is known about
the pressure dependence of transformation kinetics. The primary goal of the
research proposed here is (i) to examine the pressure dependence of phase
transition mechanisms and the kinetics of order-disorder and order-order phase
transitions in block copolymers in selective solvents, using time-resolved
synchrotron based small angle x-ray scattering, and (ii) the internal dynamics
of the block copolymer chains in the nanoscale domains using X-ray Intensity
Fluctuation Spectroscopy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The x-ray scattering studies
will be complemented by other experimental techniques, including small angle
neutron scattering, atomic force microscopy, dynamic light scattering and
rheology. Pressure jump measurements are particularly suitable for examining the
early stages of the transformation processes. To obtain detailed insight into
the underlying physical mechanisms, Molecular Dynamics simulations and models
for analyzing the scattering data will be developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-
TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solutions and gels made up of block
copolymers that inseparably combine two or more chemically distinct polymers
have broad range of applications from consumer products to novel materials for
pharamaceutical and other applications. The research proposed here has potential
applications in the use of block copolymer materials at high ambient pressure,
such as those involved in oil drilling. Pressure can also be used as a means to
control fabrication processes in the manufacture of block copolymer based
products.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will provide interdisciplinary,
hands-on training to graduate and undergraduate students, and thus contribute to
the development of future scientists. The students will also learn to use state-
of-the art synchrotron based x-ray instrumentation at National Laboratories.
Special emphasis will be made to incorporate best practices to recruit, train
and mentor women students at all levels by interacting closely with Women in
Science and Engineering (WISE) group at Boston University. The senior faculty
will present the work to a broader audience, and participate in outreach
programs designed to attract and mentor high school and college students to
pursue science and engineering careers. An international collaboration with
researchers in Czech Republic is an integral part of this program. This
collaboration provides opportunities to US students and senior researchers to
benefit from the expertise that is being developed in Europe, particularly in
the area of synchrotron- based soft matter and polymer
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;