* 0804934
* Statistical Mechanics and Related Probability Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2008,12/31/2012
* Kenneth Alexander, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 12/31/2012
* USD 220,000.00

Probability models from statistical mechanics are a framework for studying how
small-scale randomness produces global-scale phenomena, such as phase
transitions, which are essentially nonrandom. Alexander proposes to investigate
the following aspects of the subject. (1) Pinning and depinning of lattice
polymers and interfaces due to potentials existing in lower-dimensional
subspaces of the lattice. Particular emphasis will be placed on the disordered
case, in which the potential varies randomly with location. Competition between
a potential in a subspace and random potentials in the bulk will also be
considered. (2) Layering transitions in the three-dimensional Ising model
without an external field, caused solely by the attraction of an interface to a
wall in competition with entropic repulsion. (3) Convergence to equilibrium, in
systems modeling the phase separation that occurs in the freezing of solutions.
(4) Moving interfaces, e.g. between phases of the Ising model, which may "hang
up" at locations where a weakened interaction reduces the energetic cost of the
interface, resulting in an energy barier which must be crossed.(5) Eigenvalues
of the covariance matrix of the two-dimensional Potts model and their relation
to decay rates of certain probabilities in the FK model. (6) Potts models in
which the external field(s) and the boundary condition are opposed to each
other.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research can help provide a
theoretical underpinning for applied work in areas such as polymers, adhesion,
and superconductivity. The work may lead to predictions which can be tested by
experimentalists, leading to new practical discoveries. Introducing a
mathematician's perspective to theoretical problems that have previously been
considered principally by physicists may in general alter the physicists'
perspective,leading to further advances. US-French scientiÞc partnership is
enhanced by Alexander's collaboration with Francois Dunlop and Salvador Miracle-
Sole. This work is part of an ongoing effort by mathematicians and physicists to
understand various systems in the natural world in which nonrandom global-scale
phenomena reþect aspects of small-scale randomness. Examples include (i)
magnetic properties of materials; (ii) waves traveling through irregular
materials, such as seismic waves through the earth's crust; (iii) impurities in
semiconductors;(iv) denaturation of DNA; and (v) percolation of liquid through a
porous material, such as water or oil through underground rock. It has long been
understood that many qualitative aspects of the relation between small-scall
randomness and macroscopic properties,including critical phenomena, do not
depend too closely on the particular system being studied. One can therefore
gain insight into real-world phenomena by studying abstract systems not intended
to model specifically magnets, or porous rock, or any other particular part of
the physical world. The systems need only exhibit parallel features, such as
clustering and critical phenomena. Some of the systems which Alexander will
investigate-percolation, Ising and Potts models, and other spin systems-are
examples of such abstract systems. Other systems which Alexander will
investigate are somewhat more closely based on specific physical systems, such
as polymers, DNA molecules, and solutions.