* 0804610
* A New Experimental/Computational Approach for Predicting Phase Evolution and Defect Thermodynamics:  Application to Concentrated Multicomponent Ni-Based Superalloys
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2008,11/30/2012
* David Seidman, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Taleff
* 11/30/2012
* USD 617,364.00

TECHNICAL: PIs will study temporal evolution of microstructures in concentrated
Ni-based superalloys, which are used in the aviation, electric generation,
chemical, and gas and oil industries. Their microstructures consist of coherent
ordered gamma?(g?)-precipitates in a disordered FCC gamma(g)-matrix. There are
significant unanswered questions concerning the early stage nucleation of the
coherent g?-phase and phase separation from the g-matrix. Additionally, the
temporal evolution of the crystallography and morphology of the g?-precipitates
will be studied at all relevant length scales (micron to subnanoscale) using
scanning electron, electron transmission, and high-resolution electron
microscopies. In parallel with the experimental research, PIs will perform
lattice kinetic Monte Carlo (LKMC) simulation, based on a vacancy diffusion
mechanism, to simulate the temporal evolution of the microstructures at the same
length scale as the LEAP tomograph reconstructions, where the kinetic parameters
are experimental and/or calculated from first-principles density functional
theory (DFT). PIs will study the kinetic pathways for nucleation in Ni-Al-Cr
alloys whose mean compositions are close to the solvus line and therefore they
may follow classical nucleation theory (CNT). Additionally, PIs will study two
Ni-Al-Cr alloys with similar volume fractions of the g?-phase whose mean
compositions are farther from the solvus line and hence less likely to obey CNT.
All the experimental results are to be compared to LKMC simulation and diffusion
theory. To analyze the data, a new theory of nucleation in concentrated multi-
component alloys is developed that takes full advantage of a normal mode
analysis to reformulate the theory of coherent phase separation that
incorporates the complete details of solid-state diffusion. Additionally, PIs
are exploring ways to rephrase CNT based on a diffusion equation. Finally, to
make a link between the microstructure and the high-temperature mechanical
properties of Ni-based superalloys PIs will calculate the Helmholtz free energy
of anti-phase boundaries (APBs), sigma-APB. PIs present a new approach, the
residence weight algorithm, which combines density functional calculations and
Monte Carlo simulations, to calculate the APB free energy. PI?s atomic scale
approach to studying the temporal evolution of microstructures is significantly
different from existing methods in that PIs combine atomic-scale
experimentation, simulation, and diffusion theory. The combined
experimental/computational approach will allow an atomistic description that
spans the subnanometer to mesoscopic length scales with unprecedented fidelity.
NON-TECHNICAL: Through the Northwestern University Center for Atom-Probe
Tomography (NUCAPT) PIs are educating undergraduate work-study, senior-thesis,
research-experiences for undergraduate students (REU), and research experiences
for teachers (RET) to perform atom-probe tomography using a LEAP tomograph.
These programs have and will involve men, women and legal minority groups,
Hispanic, and African-American. NUCAPT also provides APT services to other
universities, national laboratories, and industrial firms. Additionally, PIs
will develop a summer workshop on ?Linking Atomic-Scale Experiments and
Computations,? to be held during the summer of the 2nd year of the grant at
Northwestern. This course will be geared toward graduate students interested in
atomic-scale and multiscale computation, and atomic-scale experimentation, as
well as young faculty members and industrial participants. PIs are planning for
ca. 50 participants and intend to charge a modest registration fee to cover
costs.