* 0804032
* Hybridization Effects, Bonding Anisotropy and Magnetism in Uranium Intermetallics
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2008,09/30/2011
* Heinrich Nakotte, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 09/30/2011
* USD 344,996.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;Many uranium compounds are known to
exhibit unusual magnetic properties, and the reason for that is still heavily
disputed within the scientific community. This project attempts to shed some
light onto the underlying mechanisms, and this investigator will utilize a
combination of neutron-diffraction and high-magnetic-field studies. Neutron
diffraction has been the technique of choice when it comes to testing structural
and magnetic properties of a material at a microscopic level, and studies in
high magnetic fields measure the macroscopic response. This project is intended
to provide important insight into the correlations between magnetism and atomic
configuration in such compounds. It is widely accepted that both the cohesive
and the magnetic properties of uranium compounds are strongly influenced by
interactions of electrons belonging to uranium atoms with the electrons of
neighboring atoms. The community has phrased the term ?hybridization? in order
to describe such interactions, but it has not been adequately included into
existing theories. The results of this project are intended to pinpoint exactly
that mechanism. &lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to the development of a
strong Materials Science program, a fast-growing field with many rewarding
career opportunities. The program at NMSU is expected to increase scientific
capacity in the predominantly hispanic communities in Southern New Mexico and
Western Texas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;There is little doubt that hybridization effects between
the uranium 5f states and the electronic states of the ligands play a prominent
role for the development of magnetic moments and long-range magnetic order in
uranium intermetallics. Even so, to date, there is no fully satisfactory
theoretical model of the magnetism in these materials. This single investigator
proposes a systematic in-depth study of the role of hybridization for the
evolution of magnetic order and its anisotropy in uranium intermetallics. A
vigorous study on families of isostructural uranium compounds with different
stoichiometries will be performed. The properties of these compounds will be
tuned to critical values by chemical substitutions and/or modifying external
variables, such as magnetic fields or external hydrostatic pressure. Using a
combination of neutron-diffraction and high-magnetic-field techniques, the
structural and magnetic parameters of the individual compounds will be
determined. Particular emphasis is put onto testing the correlation between
magnetism and interatomic distances, which is believed to be intimately related
to the strength of different hybridization effects. The research will provide
hands-on training for students to become qualified users at neutron-scattering
and high-magnetic-field facilities. &lt;br/&gt;