* 0804244
* Spin Transport and Dynamics in Ferromagnet-Semiconductor Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Paul Crowell, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 07/31/2012
* USD 335,000.00

Technical&lt;br/&gt;This project will address the fundamental physics of spin
transport and dynamics in hybrid ferrromagnet-semiconductor heterostructures.
Devices in which large non-equilibrium spin populations are generated by spin
injection will be fabricated, and the effects of spin polarization gradients on
both charge and spin transport will be investigated. Mechanisms for spin
transport will be probed by exploiting new spin-sensitive electrical detection
techniques. Of particular interest are spin-orbit and hyperfine effects, which
provide both new means for controlling electron spins as well as potential
sources of spin relaxation. The project consists of three components. First, new
devices will be developed allowing for the generation of polarization gradients
on sub-micron length scales. Second, electrical measurements sensitive to spin
dynamics will be used to investigate the coupling of spin and charge transport
near the metal-insulator transition in GaAs and InxGa1-xAs. Finally, dynamic
coupling between spins in the semiconductor and the ferromagnet will be
investigated on nanosecond time scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-
technical&lt;br/&gt;Magnetic materials such as iron, cobalt or nickel represent
a cornerstone of data storage technologies, and they are also a critical
component in sensors for a wide range of applications from cars to cardiac
defibrillators. This project will explore the fundamental science of a new class
of systems in which magnetic materials such as iron are combined with
semiconductors. Graduate and undergraduate students will be trained in the
nanofabrication and measurement techniques required to fabricate and study
devices based on these materials. Recent research has shown that electrons can
be transferred from ferromagnetic metals into semiconductors while preserving
magnetic information in the form of their spin, which is analogous to a small
magnet attached to the electron. This project will determine how magnetic
information can be transported inside semiconductors and then read out
electronically. New electronic devices combining very small magnets with thin
layers of semiconductor will be developed. New frontiers in the development of
extremely small (less than one micron) and fast (less than one billionth of a
second) devices will be addressed. The output of this research will be useful in
applications where storage and processing capabilities need to be combined in a
single circuit element. &lt;br/&gt;