* 0804759
* North American Meeting of Researchers in Statistics and Probability, Summer 2008, Boulder, CO
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2008,02/28/2009
* Rebecka Jornsten, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Yazhen Wang
* 02/28/2009
* USD 21,300.00

The investigator and her colleagues are organizing and hosting a conference
aimed specifically at new researchers in statistics and probability. The
conference constitutes a unique venue and opportunity for junior researchers to
interact with their peers in an informal setting. During the conference, the
participants will present their research ideas in a series of talks and poster
sessions. The investigator and her colleagues have invited several senior
researchers to the conference. The senior participants will host panel session
where the junior researchers can learn about funding opportunities, how to
mentor students, and how to publish their research in professional journals. The
primary goals of the conferences are professional education of new researchers
and to help create a network among these junior researchers, both vital parts of
professional growth. Women, minorities, and the disabled are explicitly
encouraged to attend. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator plans to organize
and host the Eleventh Meeting of New Researchers in Statistics and Probability.
The primary objective is to provide a venue for interaction among new
researchers. The proposed conference will take place July 29 - August 2, 2008 at
the University of Colorado, Boulder, and the National Center for Atmospheric
Research (NCAR), to immediately precede the annual Joint Statistical Meetings
(JSM) in Denver. Participants will be statisticians and probabilists that have
received their Ph.D. within the past five years or are expecting to receive
their degree within the next year. Each participant will present a talk or
poster. Topics will range across a variety of areas in statistical research from
theory and methods to applications. Senior speakers will discuss topics of
particular interest to new researchers. Panel discussions during the conference
will cover the topics of journal publications, opportunities in statistics
laboratories and industry, funding, and mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;