* 0804786
* Polymorphism of Organic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2008,04/30/2012
* Lian Yu, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 04/30/2012
* USD 260,000.00

This award to University of Wisconsin-Madison by the Solid State Materials
Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research is to investigate the
polymorphism of organic materials. Polymorphism is the ability of the same
molecule to crystallize in different structures with distinct properties, as the
ability of carbon to crystallize as diamond, graphite, and C60. This project
will synthesize novel polymorphs by cross-nucleation and will use polymorphs to
understand an unusual mode of crystal growth from amorphous solids. The project
builds on recent observations that rare crystal forms of chiral molecules may be
discovered by seeding and that some polymorphs show fast, diffusionless crystal
growth from the glassy state, while others do not. This project will study two
broad fundamental questions in the crystallization of organic and pharmaceutical
materials: (i) synthesis of solid solutions of enantiomers, with an enhanced
excess of one enantiomer, and (ii) the crystallization of amorphous materials.
The first project focuses on the seeding-induced crystal growth of chiral
molecules. The second part of the project will be on the crystal growth of
polymorph-forming molecules from supercooled liquids. Both projects seek to
address fundamental mechanisms of crystal growth.

Studying crystal polymorphs serve two missions of materials research: to
synthesize new materials and to understand structure-property relations. It is
anticipated that this research will impact several technological areas. The
discovery and control of polymorphs is critical in developing drugs, pigments,
explosives, and other materials. Better understanding of the crystallization of
amorphous materials will advance the ability to develop amorphous drugs,
silicon, metals, ceramics, and polymers. This research spans materials science
and chemistry and will provide multidisciplinary educational opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students. The research will involve students from the
Undergraduate Research Scholars program, which helps first- and second-year
undergraduates to gain hands-on experience in research by working with the
faculty and research staff at University of Wisconsin-Madison campus.