* 0804629
* N-Vortex Problems: Modeling, Analysis, and Numerics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2014
* Paul Newton, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2014
* USD 250,000.00

We propose to study a wide range of N-vortex problems based on singular or near
singular decompositions of the inviscid Euler equations and high Reynolds
Navier-Stokes equations written in vorticity form. With such a discretization,
the vorticity field equations become particle interaction equations and the
models can be viewed as N-body problems with long-range interactions governed by
a logarithmic Hamiltonian. The projects focus on three general themes: (i) the
N-vortex problem on a rotating sphere with applications to atmospheric flows,
(ii) vortex lattice theory with applications to recent experiments in Bose-
Einstein condensate systems, (iii) the study of streamline topology,
bifurcations, and evolution with the a focus on connecting this with chaotic
advection and particle transport. There are seven detailed projects described in
the proposal, each is designed to develop new analytical and computational
techniques in dynamical systems theory, test current techniques on models that
are physically well grounded, and push the models closer towards applications,
mainly in oceanographic and atmospheric flows, but also in molecular modeling
and the study of Bose-Einstein condensate lattices and vortices in thin film
superconductors, where some of the same underlying issues pertain (albeit
sometimes with Hamiltonians of a different form). An overriding theme of all of
the projects is to develop Hamiltonian particle models in conjunction with
probabilistic methods to analyze fluid flows and to develop and apply new
techniques in nonlinear dynamical systems theory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main
goals associated with the mathematical models being developed are to model,
analyze, and simulate specific atmospheric events, such as the Antarctic pole
vortex splitting event of September 2002, which manifested itself in the form of
a split ozone hole in the Southern Hemisphere and led to enhanced global
particle transport over the full stratospheric layer of the Earth's atmosphere.
The specific reasons for this enhancement are not well understood and we will
investigate several low dimensional models of this important and unprecedented
event. Interestingly, the mathematical models developed in this context are
similar to those used in completely different physical settings, such as the
study of Abrikosov lattices in superconductivity theory, the recent flurry of
experiments done on Bose-Einstein condensate lattices, and the modeling of
spherical molecules in chemical physics, such as the famous Buckminsterfullerine
molecule. We expect that developments associated with this proposal over the
three year funding period will shed light on many physical mechanisms important
to these areas as well. &lt;br/&gt;