* 0805468
* PostDoctoral Research Fellowship
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Ryan Hernandez, Hernandez               Ryan           D
* Continuing Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 08/31/2010
* USD 101,250.00

This National Science Foundation Minority Postdoctoral Fellowship will
investigate detailed questions regarding the interaction of the effects of
demographic and selective forces on patterns of genetic variation within and
between human populations. The Fellow will perform his research in the
department of Human Genetics at the University of Chicago under the direction of
Dr. Molly Przeworski. Dr. Przeworski?s research has focused on developing a
deeper understanding of the effects of natural selection on patterns of
variation, and enlightening our perspective on the effects of genetic
recombination. The research will produce broadly applicable population genetic
methods that will incorporate the action of natural selection on linked loci. In
particular, through both simulations and theoretical modeling, the Fellow will
quantify the effect of natural selection purging deleterious mutations from the
human genome on linked neutral loci (i.e. background selection). By simulating
data under realistic models of human evolution, the circumstances under which
background selection confounds our inference of adaptation and historical
demographic events can be better understood. Moreover, such simulations will
provide a basis for identifying novel characteristics of background selection,
which could then be used to identify novel targets of deleterious mutations in
the human genome. By constructing a population genetic model of background
selection, more accurate inference of our species' demographic history can be
obtained, and a more thorough understanding of adaptation can be achieved. The
broader impact of the proposed work is the refinement of a computer package for
forward population genetic simulations that is currently in its initial stages,
and the production of a novel program for inferring the effect of background
selection from genomic polymorphism data. The two programs would initially be
used for human population genetic analysis, but would be developed in sufficient
generality to be applied to any organism. Moreover, by studying patterns of
polymorphism in the context of background selection across several species,
genomic regions that have long been subject to recurrent deleterious mutations
may be identified. Such regions would be strong candidates for functional
analysis, and could provide insight into whether or not model organisms for
human diseases share evolutionarily important genetic features. The extensive
array of seminars and courses offered at the University of Chicago will broaden
the Fellow?s perspective on the field of population genetics, and the research
experience in the Przeworski Lab will enhance the Fellow's quantitative skills.
Coupled together, the Fellow's postdoctoral experience will help to position him
in the rapidly growing field of evolutionary genomics with the specific goal of
attaining a tenure-track position at a research-intensive university.