* 0805045
* FRG: Spin and Valley Measurements in Silicon Quantum Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Mark Friesen, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 07/31/2012
* USD 1,152,000.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;Modern electronic devices work by
controlling the location and motion of electrons through semiconductors. Past
and current devices work with relatively large numbers of electrons at a time,
but there is a continuing drive towards smaller and smaller devices, including
those that control and manipulate one electron at a time. In such one-electron
devices, the role of quantum mechanics is especially important and potentially
useful. Materials properties are important in enabling such devices, and silicon
has especially useful characteristics. Fabrication of silicon devices in which
individual electrons can be controlled and manipulated has recently been
achieved. This project will optimize, characterize, and further develop these
materials and devices with the aim of enabling potentially transformative
applications in which quantum mechanics is a critical factor. One such
application is the quantum computer, which promises to be much more powerful
than the classical computers used today. Graduate students participating in this
project will obtain valuable interdisciplinary training. In addition, the
project will involve the creation of a new workshop for high school teachers, to
provide the necessary background for understanding the operation and
functionality of modern nanodevices, including the role of quantum mechanics.
This award receives support from the Divisions of Materials Research and
Physics, as well as the Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;Research
has shown that gated quantum dots in semiconductors can be tuned to contain a
controllable number of electrons, and that number can be monitored noninvasively
by using integrated charge sensors. Quantum dots in silicon are of particular
interest because the electron spin coherence times in silicon quantum dots
containing only a few electrons are expected to be quite long ? a feature that
may be useful for storing and manipulating quantum information. This project
focuses on the fundamental role of materials properties on the coherence and
control of spins in silicon/silicon-germanium quantum dots. In addition to
research on the manipulation of spin and the measurement of spin coherence
times, this project will focus on the design, simulation, fabrication, and
measurement of silicon/silicon-germanium quantum devices to study the physics of
the valley degree of freedom and its interaction with spin. Students
participating in this project will obtain valuable interdisciplinary training.
The project also involves the creation of a new workshop for high school
teachers. The workshop is designed to provide the necessary context for
understanding the basic operation and functionality of modern nanodevices,
particularly the role of quantum mechanics. The workshops will be accomplished
in conjunction with physics outreach specialists at UW-Madison. The project
receives support from the Divisions of Materials Research and Physics, as well
as the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities.