* 0805670
* Efficient Bi-Level Variable Selection in High-Dimensional Models
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Jian Huang, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2011
* USD 133,597.00

This project proposes a class of novel bi-level variable selection
method&lt;br/&gt;in high-dimensional regression models when there is group
structure in covariates. The existing variable selection methods are designed
for either individual variable selection or group selection, but not for both.
Furthermore, standard methods for evaluating a statistical procedure assume that
the number of variables in a model is fixed and much smaller than the sample
size which, in general, are not applicable for high-dimensional settings.
Analysis of high-dimensional data presents novel and challenging theoretical and
computational questions in statistics. The proposed methods are capable of
simultaneous group and individual variable selection within selected groups. For
the proposed bi-level selection methods, computational algorithms will be
developed and the theoretical properties in a class of important regression
models will be investigated. The proposed methods are expected to be able to
correctly select the important groups and variables simultaneously with high
probability in sparse models even when the number of covariates is much larger
than the sample size.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-dimensional data arise in many
scientific fields, including biology, economics, finance, information
technology, and health sciences. In all these fields, the identification of
important features from data is a crucial step in the process of scientific
discovery. The intended applications of the proposed study are to the analysis
of high-dimensional genomic data. In particular, the proposed research will
obtain novel methods for genome wide association studies and genetic pathway
regression analysis. These are two of the most important approaches for
understanding how genes and genetic pathways cause common and complex diseases
such as various types of cancers. The proposed research aims to translate novel
statistical approaches into new methodologies for analyzing high-dimensional
genomic data.