* 0805372
* Novel Dielectrics for Transparent Electronics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2008,11/30/2012
* John Conley, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 11/30/2012
* USD 350,256.00

Technical. This project aims to improve fundamental understanding of the
composition, structure, interface, and electrical properties of thin dielectric
films used as gate dielectrics for amorphous oxide semiconductor (AOS) channel
transparent thin film transistors (TTFTs). The approach involves synthesis of
novel multi-constituent and stacked (laminate) high dielectric constant films on
AOS substrates (including In2-xGaxO3, InGaZnO, ZnSnO, ZnInO, ZnO, etc.) via
conformal atomic layer deposition (ALD) and low temperature mist vapor
deposition (MVD). Materials properties as a function of synthesis method and
adjacent AOS material will be inves-tigated using x-ray diffraction, scanning
electron microscopy, transmission electron microscopy, and atomic force
microscopy. Simple capacitor test structures and complete TTFT devices will be
fabricated. Electrical measurements made on these structures will be used to
assess the impact of materials properties on dielectric constant, breakdown
strength, dielectric trap density, interface trap density, stability, and
electron mobility in the channel. Strong fundamental understand-ing of the
Si/SiO2 system (complementary metal/oxide/semiconductor (CMOS) devices) and the
a-Si/Si3N4 system (TFT devices) has played a large role in allowing these
materials to dominate microelectronics and liquid crystal display applications.
A similar understanding of novel dielectrics and their interface with new
channel materials will help AOS electronics to approach com-mercialization. Non-
Technical. The project addresses fundamental research issues in a topical area
of electronic/photonic materials science having technological relevance. Basic
understanding gained is expected to lead to improved device performance, and to
allow design of new electronic and photonic components. Potential applications
include windshield navigational displays and possibility of low cost, high
performance transparent alternatives to a-Si TFTs for the display industry. The
project will provide opportunities for both graduate and undergraduate students
to gain hands-on experience with state-of-the-art thin film synthesis techniques
and a broad range of so-phisticated fabrication and analytical characterization
techniques while working in a new and exciting field. Results from the proposed
study will be disseminated widely in journals and conferences as well as be
incorporated into undergraduate and graduate courses taught by the PI. The PI
and students involved will participate in two existing high school outreach
programs in place at Oregon State University, giving young students early
exposure to leading edge research through presentations and hands-on experience.
Students will experience broad exposure to multiple disciplines including
materials synthesis, analytical characterization, and electrical
characterization of materials and devices. Through PI coordination,
opportunities will also be available for under-graduate internships in industry.