* 0805204
* Quartz Crystal Microbalance Studies of Atomic-Scale Friction
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2014
* Jacqueline Krim, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 07/31/2014
* USD 780,000.00

Technical&lt;br/&gt;The late 20th century marked a renaissance in fundamental
areas of tribology, sparked by new experimental and theoretical techniques
capable of studying the force of friction in geometries which are well defined
at the atomic scale. This project involves the use of one such technique, namely
the Quartz Crystal Microbalance, to probe critical topics in this field. A first
set of experiments will explore how friction impacts directed transport of
polystyrene microspheres, to document control of motion through variations in
atomic-scale friction levels. The second involves studies of the impact of
sliding on the two-dimensional melting point of monolayer thick Krypton layers,
important for fundamental studies of temperature rise and heat transport. The
final set of experiments will document the manner in which magnetic fields
influence the firmly established, yet still poorly understood phenomenon of
superconductivity-dependent friction, for helium and oxygen films. The goal is
to deepen our knowledge of electronic contributions to energy dissipation
mechanisms in sliding friction. A complimentary educational component includes
(1) ongoing participation of undergraduates in the research, and (2) direct
dissemination of state-of-the-art information on friction to instructors
developing curriculum on the topic, as well as to more general audiences through
lectures and written reviews.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical&lt;br/&gt;By
most recent estimates, improved attention to friction and wear would save
developed countries up to 1.6% of their gross national product, well over $100
billion annually in the U.S. alone. As the price of energy rises, and the need
to conserve both energy and raw materials becomes increasingly urgent,
physicists' rush to understand basic tribological processes can only be expected
to accelerate. The late 20th century marked a renaissance in fundamental areas
of tribology (the study of friction and wear), sparked by a number of new
experimental and theoretical techniques capable of studying the force of
friction in geometries which were are well-defined at the nanometer scale. This
project involves the use of one such technique, namely the Quartz Crystal
Microbalance (QCM), (1) to explore the role of friction to control micron scale
particles, an important feature in emerging nano-technological areas that
include medical, electronic and manufacturing applications, (2) to probe the
temperature of a simplified sliding contact, a quantity that has been
exceptionally difficult to quantify from theoretical, experimental and
computational approaches, and (3) to explore the firmly established, yet still
poorly understood phenomenon of superconductivity-dependent friction. The goal
is to deepen our fundamental knowledge of how electrons contribute to energy
loss. A complimentary educational component includes (1) ongoing participation
of undergraduates in the research, and (2) direct dissemination of state-of-the-
art information on friction to instructors developing curriculum on the topic,
as well as to more general audiences through lectures and written reviews.
&lt;br/&gt;