* 0805293
* Computational and Experimental Design of Novel CoNiGa High Temperature Shape Memory Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2008,12/31/2011
* Ibrahim Karaman, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Taleff
* 12/31/2011
* USD 345,000.00

TECHNICAL: Shape memory alloys (SMAs) are an important class of smart materials
that can produce large recoverable shape changes as a result of reversible
martensitic phase transformations, which can be triggered by changes in
temperature, stress or magnetic field. Currently, practical uses for SMAs are
limited to temperatures below 1000 C, i.e. the transformation temperature (TT)
limits of NiTi binary and Cu?]based systems, the most successful SMAs to date.
Recently, SMAs based on the CoNiAl/Ga systems have shown promising
characteristics, such as broad range of TT control through compositional
adjustments, cheaper constituents than Pd, Pt, and Au used in NiTiX high
temperature SMAs (HTSMAs), higher thermal stability, and less affinity to
oxygen/carbon. Moreover, the fact that a third, hard, ordered phase is often at
equilibrium with the transformable phases, offers the possibility of forming
nanocomposites to improve the cyclic stability, creep susceptibility, and shape
memory (SM) properties of such alloys. The ultimate goal of the current work is
to develop CoNiGa HTSMAs through a combined computational/experimental approach.
The specific objectives are to: 1) maximize TTs through
computational/experimental composition optimization of the high symmetry
transformable phase; 2) determine the phase equilibria to find optimal
compositions and temperatures at which three?]phase systems can be found; 3)
design heat treatment schedules through predicted/experimentally determined
kinetics of the precipitation/dissolution of secondary phases; 4) fabricate and
characterize the SM and PE responses of single crystals as a function of
distribution and amount of secondary phases and crystallographic orientation; 5)
explore the selection of hard nanoprecipitate variants through constrained aging
and their effects on cyclic stability and creep of SM properties; and 6)
demonstrate improved formability of polycrystalline CoNiGa HTSMAs in the
presence of ductile secondary phases. The scientific merits of this
transformative research are: (a) the potential of revolutionizing the field of
HTSMAs, by moving away from current expensive, unstable and brittle materials to
HTSMAs possessing high thermal stability, low susceptibility to creep, aging and
cyclic damage as well as good ductility to improve the formability of
polycrystals for transportation, aerospace, and public utility applications.;
(b) transformation of the design process for new HTSMAs through the synergistic
experimental computational approach; (c) the creation of an entirely new family
of SMAs, i.e. shape memory superalloys, with very high temperature (500?]7000C)
SM and PE properties. NON-TECHNICAL: The broader impacts of the activities are
reflected in the following areas: (a) maintaining US leading role in active
materials research despite the vast amount of recent works at overseas on SMAs;
(b) development of teaching modules for incorporation into undergraduate
courses; (c) helping K-12 students in developing science projects with SMAs; (d)
enriched graduate and undergraduate research experiences in coordination with
the new IGERT and Nanomaterials certificate programs; (e) development of a
graduate course in computational materials science; (e) involvement of
underrepresented groups; (f) disseminating the knowledge generated to both
academia and industry through the presentations, publications, and a website,
and (g) close collaboration with industry.