* 0805881
* Operads and the Topology of Possibly Singular Spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2013
* Ralph Kaufmann, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2013
* USD 142,005.00

The PI's investigations will focus on the continuing study and understanding of
the topology of spaces, manifolds and orbifolds in the geometric category and
varieties and stacks in the algebraic category. The general tools for this
analysis are operations on algebraic structures associated to these spaces such
as operations on cohomology or on K-theory. Famous examples of this type of
operations are String Topology and Gromov-Witten theory. The latter yields
operations on the cohomology of a variety while the former provides operations
on the homology of the loop space of a compact manifold. Additionally, the PI
will use other methods and techniques such as operads, (quasi-)Hopf algebras,
representation theory, category theory, moduli spaces, vertex operator algebras
and cosimplicial sets in his analysis. Concretely based on his previous work,
the PI expects to define and construct a new spectrum from an operad that
detects loop spaces as well as to establish a cosimplicial setup for moduli
space actions in string topology. Furthermore he expects to define quantum
K-theory, Gromov-Witten invariants and characteristic classes for global
quotients. Extending these orbifold constructions to other types of global
quotients will yield deformation spaces for singularities with symmetries and an
orbifold version of the chiral deRham complex. These constructions are tied
together by conjectural symmetries such as the Landau-Ginzburg/Calabi-Yau
correspondence and mirror symmetry which have their origin in physics.

The proposal contributes to several fields of mathematics and as the
constructions are often motivated by considerations of string theory and quantum
field theory it also finds applications in physics. In particular, the
mathematical investigation of the above are expected to bring about important
new results that cross-fertilize the subjects of topology, algebra, geometry,
and number theory on one hand and on the other hand add to the transfer of
knowledge between theoretical physics and mathematics. The outcome will be
helpful in understanding a wide spectrum of problems ranging from the purely
mathematical such as the basic structure of solutions sets of equations which
exhibit symmetries or are not smooth to a better mathematical description of the
universe predicted by string theory.