* 0805332
* Hydrogeochemical Evolution of Arsenic Concentrations and Speciation Along Groundwater Flow Paths: Linking Aqueous and Solid Phase Arsenic Speciation in Sedimentary Aquifers
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2007,08/31/2009
* Karen Johannesson, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 08/31/2009
* USD 110,530.00

0510697 Johannesson

The principal vector responsible for arsenic (As) poisoning in human
populations is consumption of drinking water, chiefly from groundwater sources.
Such poisoning currently affects millions of people in the Ganges delta and
other regions of Southeast Asia. Because groundwater is also the chief source of
drinking water in the United States, understanding the factors responsible for
As mobilization in aquifers is critical. Before predictive models can be
assembled, it is first necessary to quantify As behavior along groundwater flow
paths as conditions (i.e., pH, redox conditions, solution compositions, aquifer
mineral surface sites) change and evolve over spatial and temporal scales. Many
previous studies, including those for the Ganges delta, have suffered in their
attempts to identify processes responsible for As mobilization. The failure of
such studies reflects, in part, the lack of As speciation data for groundwater
and aquifer solid phases collected along flow paths. Furthermore, because redox
reactions, and hence As cycling, are strongly influenced by microbes, microbial
processes likely play an important role in As mobility. The central hypothesis
is that changes occurring along groundwater flow paths that accompany chemical
weathering and microbial facilitated oxidation-reduction reactions catalyze As
mobilization from, and capture by, the aquifer substrate via
adsorption/desorption, co-precipitation, and/or mineral dissolution reactions.
To investigate the hypothesis, we will: (1) quantify As concentrations and
speciation [i.e., As(III), As(V), organoarsenicals, thioarsenite species] and
ancillary geochemical parameters (e.g., pH, temperature, major solutes,
alkalinity, phosphate, dissolved silica, Fe concentration/speciation, dissolved
O2, Eh, H2S, DOC, d34S, d13C of DIC and DOC) along flow paths in two well
studied aquifers (Carrizo Sand, Texas; Aquia aquifer, Maryland); (2) determine
As speciation [As(III), As(V)] of aquifer solid phases, emphasizing the labile
and nonlabile pools of solid phase As; and (3) assemble a conceptual/semi-
quantitative model of As mobility and speciation along flow paths based on the
field and laboratory studies. The importance of microbial metabolism on As
mobilization will be indirectly examined via a series of batch incubation
studies. In addition, collaboration with an internationally recognized
microbiologist who has conducted seminal studies on microbial cycling of As is
planned, as are spectroscopic investigations of aquifer sediments. The project
will significantly improve our understanding of As biogeochemistry in
groundwater flow systems, and will lead to a conceptual model of As mobilization
and biogeochemical cycling in aquifers. It is expected that project results will
provide fundamental information that will seed future research (e.g., more
detailed microbial studies, surface complexation models, reactive transport
modeling).

