* 0805619
* NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2008,10/31/2010
* Suann Yang, Yang                    Suann
* Fellowship
* Carter Kimsey
* 10/31/2010
* USD 123,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2008. The fellowship supports a research and training plan entitled
"Understanding the relationship between the web of species interactions and the
coexistence of species in a plant-pollinator community" for Suann Yang. The host
institution for this research is Pennsylvania State University and the
sponsoring scientists are Dr. Katriona Shea and Dr. Reka Albert.

The structure of the links between dependent interacting species can provide
clues to the resilience of a community to extinctions, but less well understood
is how this structure may shape a community as new species are added, either
through natural processes of colonization or human-aided invasion. This research
is focusing on how the network structure of links between plants and pollinators
influences community assembly, or the colonization and extinction of species. In
turn, this species change over time may alter the structure of the interactions
within the community. This feedback will be studied by developing simulation
models of community assembly (using data from real plant-pollinator systems),
while tracking the changes in the interaction structure as species are added or
go extinct.

Training objectives of this research are in network theory and simulation
modeling. The broader impacts have conservation significance. Much of the
world's change in biodiversity is due to human-caused local and widespread
extinction; and this may cause ripple effects across a community as species
interaction links are disrupted. Understanding how different species are linked
to their communities will allow scientists to assist policy makers in
appropriate conservation management for their maintenance and restoration.