* 0805259
* n-Type and Ambipolar Polymer Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2012
* Samson Jenekhe, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2012
* USD 342,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;The performance of all current polymer
semiconductor devices, such as thin film transistors, photovoltaic cells, light-
emitting transistors, light-emitting diodes, and photodetectors, is limited
primarily by the charge carrier mobilities of current materials. A fundamental
challenge to improving the performance of all these devices and moving them
towards practical systems applications is thus to achieve higher charge carrier
mobilities. Furthermore, investigation of n-type and ambipolar polymer
semiconductors has lagged far behind p-type polymer semiconductors. In this
project, fundamental insights into the structural factors that govern high-
mobility electron and ambipolar charge transport in polymer semiconductors are
sought. Novel organic solvent-soluble n-type polymer semiconductors will be
synthesized and studied, including poly(anthrazoline)s,
poly(pyrazinoquinoxalines)s, and ladder poly(pyrazinoquinoxaline)s whereas
poly(bisindoloquinoline)s and other donor-acceptor copolymers will be explored
as ambipolar semiconductors. The solid state morphology and molecular packing in
thin films and nanowires of polymer semiconductors will be characterized by
electron microscopy and X-ray diffraction techniques. Charge carrier mobilities
of polymer semiconductor thin films and nanowires will be measured by using the
field-effect transistor as a platform. The most promising materials will be
explored in high-performance field-effect transistors, complementary inverters,
and photovoltaic cells. Polymer semiconductors that combine air-stability with
high electron mobility or ambipolar transport with high carrier mobilities will
be useful for developing all-plastic complementary integrated circuits for logic
and memory functions and for improving the efficiency of plastic solar cells.
Indeed, the realization of ambipolar polymers with high carrier mobilities could
revolutionize the design of organic solar cells, light-emitting transistors, and
all organic electronic devices and systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Electronic devices based on organic and polymer
semiconductors, termed plastic electronics, are beginning to find many
applications such as displays in cell phones, digital cameras, and car
dashboards. Plastic electronics are also being tested for uses in applications
ranging from flat-panel displays for computer and television screens, solid-
state lighting, chemical- and bio-sensors, to low cost solar cells. This project
will develop the basic knowledge for improving the performance of polymer
semiconductors. Results from the project will lead to new materials and
manufacturing technologies for plastic electronics and related applications in
information technologies and renewable power sources. The project provides
excellent opportunities for the training of scientists and engineers, including
women and minorities, in the emerging interdisciplinary field of plastic
electronics, which requires knowledge of chemistry, physics, materials science,
and engineering. The principal investigator?s laboratory has several research
collaborations with scientists in Greece, South Korea, Taiwan, Switzerland, and
Japan in the general area of plastic electronics; it has hosted visits by senior
scientists and students from some of these countries. This project will
strengthen those international collaborations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;