* 0805331
* Towards a Hydrochemical Transport Model for Rare Earth Elements in Groundwater Flow Systems: Coupling Field, Laboratory, and Computational Techniques
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2007,03/31/2011
* Karen Johannesson, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 03/31/2011
* USD 287,577.00

0538084 Johannesson

Realistic approaches to modeling transport of reactant solutes in groundwater
flow systems must contend with solution and surface complexation reactions that
affect solutes as groundwater composition and aquifer surface site chemistry
change along flow paths. Consequently, the limitations of applying the linear
isotherm approach (i.e., Kd) to modeling advective, dispersive transport of
reactive solutes is generally well accepted. To meet these challenges, we have
sought to integrate field and laboratory investigations in our studies of the
rare earth elements (REE) in well characterized aquifers (Carrizo Sand, Texas,
and Upper Floridan, Florida). The REEs are naturally occurring, generally non-
radioactive elements that are chemical analogs of radioactive transuranic
elements such as Pu(III), Am(III), Cm(III), and Cf(III). Because the REEs occur
naturally and are stable in the environment, their study provides a unique way
to investigate the geochemical behavior of trivalent transuranics in the
environment without the obvious safety concerns and restrictions associated with
working with transuranics in the laboratory. Our previous studies of REEs in
aquifer systems involved investigations of how REE concentrations and
fractionation patterns respond to changing groundwater compositions, including
redox conditions, along flow paths. Laboratory adsorption experiments led to a
preliminary surface complexation model (SCM), which was linked to an existing
solution complexation model, and which allows for quantitative assessments of
competition between surface and solution ligands for REEs in groundwater
systems. Preliminary observations indicate that adsorption of REEs onto Carrizo
sand involves free metal ions (Ln3+) and the dicarbonato complex, Ln(CO3)2-. The
fraction of adsorbed dicarbonato complex increased along the flow path as pH and
alkalinity increased, explaining the flattening of REE fractionation patterns.
Proposed herein is a return to the monomineralic Carrizo Sand, the carbonate
Upper Floridan aquifer, and initiation of study of the heterogeneous Aquia
aquifer in order to conduct the following work: (1) better characterize REE, Mn,
Fe, DOC, sulfide concentrations, and ancillary geochemical parameters along flow
paths, to better constrain redox related controls and changing solution
composition on REEs in aquifers; (2a) apply nanoscale techniques (XRD, SEM, TEM,
synchrotron radiation) to characterize the mineralogy and geochemistry of
aquifer sediments with emphasis on mineral surface coatings and the association
of REEs with such coatings and (2b) conduct allied batch adsorption experiments
of aquifer sediments as a function of pH, REEs, PCO2, and dissolved organic
matter concentrations to significantly improve the existing combined solution
and SCM for REEs; and (3) develop a 1-D advective, dispersive transport model
using PHREEQC, or a more robust computer code, linked to the improved solution
and SCM that can reproduce REE breakthrough curves in proposed laboratory column
experiments. Emphasis will also be placed on conducting ultrafiltration studies
of groundwater REEs in order to better sort out the fraction of the aqueous REE
pool that is associated with colloidal materials, large-molecular weight organic
ligands/humics, from that which is more truly in solution. Collaborative efforts
with colleagues (groundwater flow modelers, molecular geochemists,
geomicrobiologists) are planned to further our understanding REE association
with aquifer mineral surfaces, colloids, and/or nanoparticles within groundwater
flow systems.

