* 0805050
* Statistical Methods for Dependent Data
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2014
* David Stoffer, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2014
* USD 319,999.00

This proposal concentrates on various topics relating to the statistical
analysis of dependent data. The first project extends the spectral envelope
concept for analyzing DNA sequences. A common problem in analyzing long DNA
sequence data is in identifying protein-coding sequences that are dispersed
throughout the sequence and separated by regions of noncoding. DNA sequences are
heterogeneous, so it is necessary to expand the methodology to capture the local
behavior of such sequences. To address the problem of local behavior, a local
spectral envelope with estimation via mixtures of smoothing splines will be
explored. It is the hope that this methodology will help emphasize any periodic
feature that exists in a categorical sequence of virtually any length in a quick
and automated fashion. Projects such as the human genome project have produced
large amounts of data and the methods established in this project will prove to
be useful in the analysis of the vast quantities of data being produced by
various genome projects. In another project, the focus is on the analysis of
longitudinal data and the development of a practical nonparametric procedure for
the estimation of the within-subject correlation structure. This technique is
used to develop a data driven functional principal components analysis procedure
(FPCA). Because longitudinal data often possess the property that observations
made within a subject are correlated, an effective analysis of these data is
required to account for this within-subject correlation. When a parametric form
for the covariance structure is unknown, using a misspecified structure can
result in biased and inefficient estimates. This project focuses on the analysis
of longitudinal data that can be modeled as observations from smooth subject
trajectories that are realizations of a stochastic process observed at discrete
time points with noise. The high dimensionality and complexity of longitudinal
data has made FPCA a popular tool for data reduction and visualization by
capturing the primary modes of variation of the stochastic process generating
the data. Scientists are often interested in using longitudinal data to
determine the effect that a set of possibly time-varying covariates have on a
given response over time. Functional linear models, and in particular the
varying-coefficient model, provide a framework for analyzing such data. In many
of these data sets, the functional coefficients have shapes that cannot be
modeled parametrically. An effective analysis of these data is required to both
account for the within-subject correlation and to allow for the flexible shapes
of the coefficients. Because a parametric form for the within-subject covariance
is not always known, a third project focuses on creating an iterative data-
driven spline based procedure for fitting varying-coefficient models.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal concentrates on solving problems involved in
the analysis of dependent data. The first project will develop a method for
detecting genes in a long DNA sequences. Projects such as the human genome
project have produced large amounts of data and the methods established in this
project will prove to be useful in the analysis of the vast quantities of data
being produced by various genome projects. A second proposed project focuses on
the analysis of complex data collected over time. This project is also motivated
by the analysis of DNA, and in particular, the analysis of gene expression data.
In a third project, the investigators will focus on a technique called
functional linear models. For example, techniques will be developed for studying
the effect that a growth factor should have on the decision to supplement
chemotherapy with antiangiogenic therapy when treating ovarian cancer.