* 0805233
* Fundamental Studies of Model Molecular Plasmonic Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2008,05/31/2012
* Lloyd Bumm, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 05/31/2012
* USD 447,856.00

Technical: This project is to study molecular plasmonic materials. The
methodology is to introduce tethered dyes onto the surface of flat gold
nanoparticles in conjunction with a matrix monolayer. The resulting dye-
molecule/gold-nanoparticle hybrid will be characterized by single nanoparticle
spectroscopy (light scattering and fluorescence), atomic force microscopy,
scanning electron microscopy, and optical microscopy. Parameters to be
investigated include the dye-flat gold nanoparticle spacing, orientation of
transition dipoles with respect to the metal surface, absorption and
fluorescence wavelength of the attached dyes, and patterned placement of dyes
with respect to the particular flat gold nanoparticle's higher-order plasmon
intensity pattern (mode structure). The project aims to establish general
techniques for functionalizing and patterning surfaces of gold nanoparticles,
and to experimentally test applications using nanoparticle?s higher-order
plasmon modes for wavelength-controlled direction of photon energy. The project
will also investigate the effect of adding two different dyes to spatially
separated regions of the flat gold nanoparticle to further explore plasmon
mediated fluorescence resonant energy transfer.&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical: The
project addresses fundamental research issues in a topical area of importance to
materials science. Through an increased understanding of plasmonic materials,
the project is expected to contribute to the development of practical devices
such as optical detectors, optical switches, and chemical sensors. The project
constitutes an effective integration of research and education through training
of graduate and undergraduate students in a technologically significant area.
Through the inherent interactions between the directed synthetic work in the
chemistry laboratory and measurements in the physics laboratory, students will
gain first-hand experience functioning in an interdisciplinary and integrated
research program. The research project has synergistic overlap with an
undergraduate nanotechnology lab that the co-PI has developed and an organic
teaching lab the PI co-supervises. The undergraduate research support can extend
the experience of students though hands-on experience in either of these
collaborative research laboratories. Research dissemination will be through
departmental web postings, presentations to undergraduates at institutional and
regional research days, and presentations at conferences as well as publication.