* 0805529
* Degenerate Microlocal Methods in Geometric Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2013
* Rafe Mazzeo, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2013
* USD 393,819.00

Abstract of NSF Award DMS 0805529 (Rafe Mazzeo):&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's
research focuses on a number of problems in geometric analysis involving
degenerate elliptic or parabolic equations on stratified spaces. One theme is
the search for canonical metrics on the class of compact iterated cone-edge
spaces; special low-dimensional cases include a new analysis of Riemann surfaces
with conic singularities, and more significantly, some robust deformation
results for three dimensional polyhedra in space forms. Closely related is a
project to determine the deformation theory of noncompact Einstein spaces
modeled on noncompact symmetric spaces of general rank; this is a generalization
of the theory of Poincare-Einstein metrics which has played a prominent role in
many recent papers in conformal geometry, and also in string theory, where it
appears as part of the AdS/CFT correspondence. Another project concerns minimal
submanifolds of these Poincare-Einstein spaces, and in particular, in three-
dimensional convex cocompact hyperbolic manifolds. The goal here is to define
and study the variational properties of the renormalized area functional on the
space of properly embedded minimal surfaces with embedded asymptotic boundary
curves; this seems to be a natural context for studying the Willmore functional
from differential geometry for surfaces with boundary. Finally, the PI has also
been studying geometric evolution equations on singular spaces. The first case
in terms of geometric simplicity is the generalization of the curvature flow
from the setting of closed embedded curves to that of networks of curves; the
goals are to establish a good existence theory for the flow, to examine
questions of nonuniqueness and to prove long-time existence to a Steiner
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To put this work into a broader context, most work
in geometric analysis is in the setting of geometric objects which are smooth,
i.e. do not have corners, edges or other singularities.&lt;br/&gt;However,
spaces with singularities appear naturally and very frequently in geometry,
physics and other applications, and it is natural to try to extend the methods
and results of geometric analysis to this broader class of objects. However, the
appropriate tools from analysis and partial differential equations do not exist
in this generality, so a major part of the work needed is to extend these
techniques to spaces with singularities. This has been a major endeavour of the
PI throughout his career. The specific problems on which he is now working
involve refined questions such as the existence and nature of optimal metrics,
or shapes, on these singular spaces, and the study of evolution equations which
continuously deform such a space into one of these optimal shapes. On smooth
spaces, these questions have been some of the principal directions of research
in geometric analysis, but their analogues in this singular setting have not
been studied in any systematic way. Another problem involves the study of a
renormalized version of the surface area of a class of optimal (minimal)
surfaces inside a space with constant negative curvature. This is an action
functional which has been studied intensively in string theory.&lt;br/&gt;One
final part of this PI's work is of an educational nature: he is the founder and
director of a residential summer program (SUMaC), held at his institution each
year, which is directed toward highly motivated and talented high school
students to encourage their continued study of mathematics. This program is now
in its fourteenth year of operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;