* 0805858
* Calibrations and Manifolds with Special Holonomy
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Sema Salur, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2011
* USD 116,568.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The research topics of this project are motivated by
questions in geometry and topology of low dimensional manifolds and mathematical
physics. Firstly, the P.I. plans to study the deformations of calibrated
submanifolds in G_2 and Spin(7) manifolds. In joint work with S. Akbulut, the
P.I. studied complex associative and complex Cayley submanifolds&lt;br/&gt;and
showed that the moduli space of these submanifolds is smooth without any
obstructions to such deformations. She also introduced the mathematical
definitions of mirror Calabi-Yau and G_2 manifolds. This project aims to follow
these footsteps and to obtain a compactification of these moduli spaces and to
study the mirror dualities in Calabi-Yau and G_2 manifolds. These will lead to
the construction of new counting invariants and provide a better understanding
of the mirror symmetry phenomenon. In the second part, the P.I. plans to
continue her work in noncompact G_2 manifolds. In joint work with D. Joyce, the
P.I. studied deformations of asymptotically cylindrical coassociative
submanifolds and their Topological Quantum Field Theories. Also, in recent joint
work with C. Robles, she studied the Cartan-Kahler Theory for associative and
Cayley embeddings into G_2 and Spin(7) manifolds. She plans to use these results
to construct new examples of G_2 and Spin(7) manifolds. Similarly, special
Lagrangian submanifolds of Calabi-Yau manifolds are expected to give analogous
Topological Quantum Field Theories. Understanding the special Lagrangian moduli
spaces inside degenerating Calabi-Yau manifolds will provide a rigorous
framework for the Floer homology program. Therefore, the P.I. plans to study the
moduli spaces of asymp. cylindrical special Lagrangian submanifolds with
boundary.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long range goal of studying the geometry and
topology of manifolds with special holonomy is to bring a broader mathematical
understanding of M-theory in physics. Despite its highly conceptual nature,
M-theory has proven to be of great interest to the U.S. public, yielding popular
literature and television specials that describe the essence of this potential
``theory of everything''. The P.I. believes that this makes M-theory an
excellent subject with which to catch the interest of students who might decide
to study math and science,and as a female researcher in this exciting area she
feels a particular responsibility to encourage young women to begin and to
continue their studies of mathematics. She is currently supervising two Ph.D
students and is serving as the faculty advisor of the Society of Undergraduate
Mathematics Students. She also organizes the geometry seminars and the
colloquium talks at UR. Additionally, she is the co-organizer of the joint
Cornell-UR geometry seminars. She will continue to encourage both undergraduate
and graduate students and to collaborate with them in this research field which
is expected to have a long-lasting impact on both mathematics
and&lt;br/&gt;theoretical physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;