* 0805525
* Projective Structures in Teichmuller Theory and Kleinian Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* David Dumas, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2012
* USD 152,776.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0805525&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: David Dumas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator will
explore complex projective&lt;br/&gt;structures on surfaces and their
applications to Teichmuller&lt;br/&gt;theory, Kleinian groups, and hyperbolic
3-manifolds. The space&lt;br/&gt;of all complex projective structures on a fixed
surface is a&lt;br/&gt;contractible manifold which has two natural but very
different&lt;br/&gt;coordinate systems: A classical analytic approach uses
the&lt;br/&gt;Schwarzian derivative to identify the moduli space with
a&lt;br/&gt;holomorphic vector bundle over Teichmuller space, while a
more&lt;br/&gt;recent geometric approach builds each projective structure
from&lt;br/&gt;hyperbolic and Euclidean pieces in a process known as
grafting.&lt;br/&gt;The major goals of this project are to understand the
relation&lt;br/&gt;between these two coordinate systems (both theoretically
and&lt;br/&gt;using computer experiments), and to use that understanding
to&lt;br/&gt;study Teichmuller spaces and deformations of Kleinian
groups.&lt;br/&gt;The PI will also explore ways in which the techniques used
to&lt;br/&gt;study complex projective structures could be adapted to
other&lt;br/&gt;low-dimensional geometric structures, such as real
projective&lt;br/&gt;structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of the shapes
and configurations of geometric objects&lt;br/&gt;has applications to diverse
areas of science and engineering,&lt;br/&gt;from understanding the folding of
proteins or the formation of&lt;br/&gt;galaxies to programming autonomous robots
that must navigate&lt;br/&gt;complex terrain. In a mathematical abstraction of
this type of&lt;br/&gt;problem, one studies the space of all possible shapes, or
"moduli&lt;br/&gt;space", of a geometric object. This project focuses on
the&lt;br/&gt;moduli space of complex projective Riemann surfaces, a class
of&lt;br/&gt;geometric objects that encode information about
3-dimensional&lt;br/&gt;spaces (hyperbolic manifolds) in 2-dimensional form.
Through&lt;br/&gt;both theoretical study and computational experiments, the PI
will&lt;br/&gt;develop new tools for analyzing these structures, enhance
the&lt;br/&gt;connections between 2- and 3-dimensional geometry, and
expand&lt;br/&gt;applications of these structures in related fields. The
project&lt;br/&gt;will also produce computer images of the moduli space,
displaying&lt;br/&gt;its rich structure and complexity in a way that can
be&lt;br/&gt;appreciated by scientists and non-scientists
alike.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;