* 0805559
* Statistical peak detection, adaptive classification and protein-protein network construction using mass spectra
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2011
* Susmita Datta, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2011
* USD 149,391.00

The main goal of this proposal is to develop novel and improved statistical
methods for analyzing high dimensional proteomic data generated from mass
spectrometers. These data usually consist of spectra each with thousands of
features. However, these features contain true signals of proteins/peptides and
noises. This proposal focuses on three interconnecting (and sequential) goals:
1) separating the true peaks from chemical noise in a mass spectrum using
statistical modeling and hypotheses test, 2) comprehensive evaluation and
aggregate ranking of a number of classification techniques to classify the case
and control samples using proteomic profiles and construction of an adaptive
classifier which is expected to perform better than individual classifiers under
an ensemble of performance measures and 3) construction of a protein-protein
association network from the truly classifying peaks in a case-control study by
reverse engineering. An overall and ultimate goal of this proposed research is
to study the performance of the three pieces put together in a sequential manner
to understand the inner working of proteins in a case-control study based on
mass spectrometry data.

High throughput proteomic profiling using mass spectrometry measurements have
enormous potential in scientific/biomedical research. Identification of
proteomic biomarkers for complex diseases and conditions like cancer, acute
renal disorder and fetal alcohol syndrome etc. from easily available bodily
fluids like blood, plasma, urine, amniotic fluid and serum could be very
beneficial. These biomarkers are expected to be much more sensitive and specific
than the existing ones and hence are better in terms of early detection and
prevention of such diseases and conditions. Proteomic signature profiling also
can be used to quickly identify different biological agents (as for example,
anthrax). This particular application demonstrates its implication in the
matters related to homeland security. Similarly, proteomic profiling of bodily
fluids of subjects exposed to different environmental toxins can also be useful.
However, complexity of these data poses new statistical challenges for their
analysis. Hence proper analytic tools are much needed for the proper utilization
of these data. The proposed research is expected to make significant
contribution towards this relatively new area of research. Last but not the
least, the analytical and computational tools developed for this project can be
used to analyze other types of high dimensional data.