* 0805073
* RUI: Optical Studies Of Magnetic, Charge And Orbital Ordering In Lone-Pair Compounds And Magnetite
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2013
* Lev Gasparov, University of North Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 05/31/2013
* USD 173,237.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The idea of ordering is an important
one in physics. Charge, magnetic and orbital order are good examples of the
ordering processes that may take place in materials. The basic idea is that when
conditions are right the electric charge in a compound will organize itself in a
certain fashion. The electron "spin" is another electronic property that may
result in ordering. One can think of an electron spin as a small permanent
magnet carried by an electron. The magnetic strength and orientation of this
magnet is called its magnetic moment. Sometimes these magnetic moments order in
a particular fashion resulting in magnetic (spin) ordering. Yet another type of
ordering is associated with the way electrons orbit the nucleus of the atom.
There are different types of electron "orbitals" that can be distinguished by
their shapes (spherical versus dumbbell like for example). It is believed that
in some compounds orientation of the orbitals may result in orbital ordering.
Any type of ordering results in new properties of the compound. For instance
charge ordering my lead to a compound with less electrical conductivity. Spin
and orbital ordering may result in a compound that is a stronger magnet.
Understanding how ordering happens therefore will lead to better materials
engineering. This project uses optical spectroscopy to study and understand
different types of ordering in two types of materials. Magnetite is the first
magnetic material known to mankind and the physics of charge ordering in
magnetite has been a puzzle since its discovery in 1939. Transition metal
tellurite halides Co5(TeO3)4Br2, Co7(TeO3)4Br6 display a rich magnetic phase
diagram indicating intricate magnetic and possibly orbital ordering and
therefore are good candidates to study spin and orbital ordering. Students will
be actively involved in this project and benefit significantly from the state-
of-the-art equipment and from the collaboration with some of the nation's
leading scientific laboratories. High school students will have a chance to work
on some aspects of this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Correlated electron systems are known to display a
number of different types of ordering resulting in a rich phase diagram.
Understanding the complex nature of these ordering processes can be achieved by
optical spectroscopy. This individual investigator award supports a systematic
infrared and Raman spectroscopic study of the evolution of the electronic,
orbital, spin and lattice excitations as the magnetite, and lone-pair transition
metal tellurite halides, undergo structural and magnetic transitions. After more
than six decades of research the nature of the structural transition (Verwey
transition) in magnetite (Fe3O4) is still an open question. A number of
magnetite samples with different Verwey transition temperature provide a basis
for systematic studies of this compound. Lone-pair transition metal tellurite
halides Co5(TeO3)4Br2, Co7(TeO3)4Br6 are novel materials with low dimensional
arrangement of the Te4+ cations and magnetic properties controlled by the
unfilled d-orbitals of the Co2+ ion with the spin 3/2. Both Co7(TeO3)4Br6 and
Co5(TeO3)4Br2 possess a rich magnetic phase diagram indicating intricate
magnetic and possibly orbital ordering. Spectroscopic measurements in these
compounds will provide a critical experimental insight into the physics of
correlated electron systems. The students employed in this research program will
benefit significantly by working in a modern research environment and by
developing vital problem-solving skills.