* 0805061
* Surfaces that Selectively Manipulate and Kill Bacteria
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Maria Santore, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* David A. Brant
* 08/31/2011
* USD 471,996.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0805061 PI: Santore, Maria ORG: University of
Massachusetts-Amherst

Title: Surfaces that Selectively Manipulate and Kill Bacteria

INTELLECTUAL MERIT: This program will develop biomaterial surfaces that
selectively manipulate bacteria, controlling their adhesion at a level useful
for separations, while discriminating and killing targeted types. The surfaces
are designed not to harm mammalian cells or accumulate an overcoat of (dead)
bacterial debris that can reduce surface activity and support infection. On the
surfaces designed and fabricated in this program, the organization of cationic
and hydrophobic groups on copolymer chains within antimicrobial polymer brushes
will borrow from the membrane-active facially amphiphilic character of host-
defense peptides, part of the innate immune system, which evades bacterial
resistance. At the 10-300 nm length scale, these new surfaces will emulate the
heterogeneous energy landscapes of cell surfaces where rafts cluster
proteinaceous functionality to enhance adhesion and signaling. Nano-clustered
(10-50 nm) antimicrobial or adhesive functionalities will be randomly
distributed on synthetic surfaces whose underlying sterically repulsive
character towards cells and bacteria derives from PEG or zwitterionic brushes.
These heterogeneous surfaces distinguish bacteria through differences in dynamic
adhesion, sensitive to cell size, shape, local curvature, softness
(viscoelasticity), and average and local surface chemistry. Besides enabling
sensing and separations, the unique dynamic adhesion signatures (skipping,
rolling, sliding, arrest) of different bacterial strains and mammalian cells
form the basis for their different exposures to antimicrobial functionality,
producing selective antimicrobial action, independent of the molecular-scale
design. Activities will include synthesis of surface elements and fabrication of
surfaces, the experimental study of the dynamic adhesion and viability of
bacteria and mammalian cells on these surfaces, the interpretation of data via
semiquantitative physico-chemical treatments, and the development of variable-
space maps that summarize selectivity, bacterial motion, and viability in a
multidimensional materials parameter space. The latter will facilitate rational
surface design in diverse applications from implants to clothing.

BROADER IMPACTS: The widespread interest in antimicrobial surfaces is driven by
the mounting bacterial resistance to antibiotics. Each year in the US there are
90,000 deaths arising from hospital-acquired infections; of these 50,000 are
related to catheter infections. So the effective development of antimicrobial
polymeric surfaces could have huge practical implications. This project attacks
this problem with innovative thinking and technology. The project offers a
multidisciplinary setting in which students will be trained in elements of
biology, polymer chemistry, materials science, surface science, adhesion, and
biophysics. It is proposed that undergraduate students who have worked on the
project will be afforded opportunities for industrial intern experience with
relevant companies. Outreach to underrepresented groups will be carried out
through participation in the Northeast Alliance for Graduate Education and the
Professorate, and K-12 outreach will be carried out in conjunction with the
UMass MRSEC.





