* 0805691
* NSF Minority Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for FY2008
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Charles Stewart, Stewart                 Charles        E
* Fellowship Award
* Sally O'Connor
* 12/31/2011
* USD 189,000.00

This action funds an NSF Minority Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for FY 2008.
The fellowship supports a research and training plan in a host laboratory for
the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden participation in biology. The
title of the research and training plan for this fellowship to Charles E.
Stewart is "Structural basis for the evolution of novel functions in type III
polyketide synthases" The host institution for this research is the Salk
Institute and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Joseph Noel.

Polyketide synthases are enzymes that produce an amazing array of natural
products in plants and bacteria that find important uses in medicine and
agriculture. The diversity of these compounds is related to the variety of
cyclization mechanisms used by the enzymes during biosynthesis. This research
investigates the structural changes in polyketide synthases that show different
functions and result in different products. The 3-dimensional structure of two
closely related polyketide synthases with different cyclization patterns are
being studied using x-ray crystallography. Comparison of these structures will
help identify the specific amino acids responsible for the different cyclization
patterns.

The training objectives are to gain skills in enzymology and structural biology,
especially as they relate to natural products, scientific ethics and science
communication. The broader impacts include increasing the number of minorities
through innovative outreach programs targeting students of various ages and
education from the junior high to the post-doctoral level. This research will
have broad impacts across academic disciplines, in particular the fields of
biology, chemical biology, and natural product chemistry.