* 0805714
* NSF Minority Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for FY2008
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/2008,11/30/2010
* Holly Barnard, Barnard                 Holly          R
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 11/30/2010
* USD 123,000.00

This action funds an NSF Minority Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for FY 2008.
The fellowship supports a research and training plan in a host laboratory for
the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden participation in biology of
underrepresented minorities through mentorship in field and laboratory
experiments. The title of the research and training plan for this fellowship to
Holly R. Barnard is "Developing reliable methods for assessing water loss from
forest vegetation versus soil evaporation in a sub-alpine watershed" The host
institution for this research is the University of Wyoming and the sponsoring
scientist is Dr. David Williams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The role that
transpiration plays in water balance in the forest ecosystem is poorly
understood. Transpiration by plants is often measured with surface evaporation
as "evapotranspiration." Although measured as one unit, transpiration and
evaporation respond to environmental drivers in fundamentally different ways. As
a result, the understanding of the importance of water used for biological
processes (such as photosynthesis) versus water that evaporates and is not
biologically available is relatively limited in forests. This research measures
changes in the stable isotope composition of water along the soil-plant-
atmosphere-continuum. The composition of stable isotopes of hydrogen and oxygen
are being used to separate the components of evapotranspiration as water vapor
is exchanged between vegetation and the atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
training objectives include techniques in stable isotopes and the fusion of
basic plant ecophysiology with hydrology to assess how plants modulate
biologically available water in forested ecosystems. Results will have
agricultural impacts as developing techniques to improve water management and
water use will increase efficiency for crops growing in water limited
environments of developing countries through collaboration with the
International Atomic Energy Agency's (IAEA) Soil and Water Section. Activites to
broaden participation include mentoring of undergraduate students and serving as
a role model.