* 0805330
* Kinetic Properties of Multicomponent Charged Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Francisco Solis, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2013
* USD 219,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education at the interface between the physical and biological sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;Molecular-level multicomponent aggregates are ubiquitous in
biological systems. Many functional structures in living cells are multimers,
and are often composed of heterogeneous units. The components of these groups
are associated through physical interactions such as electrostatic attractions,
hydrogen-bonding and the shielding of hydrophobic protein segments from an
aqueous environment. The production and degradation of these structures can
occur in equilibrium or be part of a driven process. These composites can have
long life-times, even when they are not the global thermodynamic ground state of
the system. Their stability arises from the presence of large activation
barriers that make a more energetically-favorable disassembled state
unreachable. This and many other kinetic features of biological systems invite
theoretical exploration and their imitation in the construction of synthetic
systems. &lt;br/&gt;While synthetic multicomponent systems have not achieved the
degree of complexity observed in biological structures, a number of examples
already exist where similar structures and methods of construction and
stabilization have been successfully copied. Kinetic trapping is a well known
tool of chemical and physical nanofabrication; nanoparticles and polyelectrolyte
based structures are reliably formed in this way. In spite of the effectiveness
of these methods of construction, they have not been fully addressed
theoretically. As a result, many nanofabrication methods and structural features
remain unexplored. &lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this research project is to
theoretically understand how to imitate both structural and processing features
in biological systems. In particular, the PI aims at a more precise description
of instances where charged multicomponent systems remain stable within a variety
of environmental changes. The PI will use novel and unexploited theoretical
techniques, such as path exploration methods coupled to variational approaches.
He will apply them to two main types of systems: (1) nucleosome-like structures
where charged entities interact with large polyelectrolytes; and (2) assemblages
of multicomponent charged structures near a charged surface. &lt;br/&gt;The
ideas on which this work is based originated from the identification of
structures and processes in biological systems. To pursue these ideas in a
systematic way, the PI aims to use bioinformatic techniques to exploit
biological information for synthetic purposes. He plans to query protein
databases for information regarding the use of charge and shape in
multicomponent systems. These questions form the basis of involvement of
undergraduate researchers in the proposed investigations. It will provide them
with a physical perspective to tackle biological problems of structure and
function. &lt;br/&gt;The bioinformatic component of the project will have an
impact on the education of students in the biological sciences in providing
further concrete examples of the applications of physical principles and ideas
useful that are useful in biological contexts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-
TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education at the interface between the physical and biological sciences. The PI
will apply novel theoretical techniques to study biologically inspired systems
to with the goal of devising methods to synthetically construct nanostructures.
In essence, the PI seeks to understand how to imitate both structural and
processing features in biological systems. &lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on
understanding how to mimic biology to develop new materials and nanoscale
structures that are difficult to synthesize in any other way. This is a
promising area of biomaterials research that may have impact on developing new
materials with desired properties for a wide range of applications.
&lt;br/&gt;The research is structured to effectively involve undergraduate
students in the research project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;