* 0805865
* Applications and Computational Issues Involving Generalized Linear and Mixed Models
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2011
* James Booth, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Gabor J. Szekely
* 05/31/2011
* USD 149,829.00

The proposed research concerns theoretical and computational issues arising in
the context of generalized linear and mixed effects models. A new multivariate
model is suggested as a construct for analysis of covariance which provides a
unified framework for adjusting treatment means in balanced and unbalanced
design settings. Second, a new approximation for the number of contingency
tables and tables of zeros and ones, meeting certain linear constraints, is
proposed. This is relevant, for example, in determining the feasibility of exact
conditional analysis of log-linear models. The approximation arises from a novel
formulation of the problem in terms of a generalized linear model for geometric
responses. The approximation is much more generally applicable, and appears to
be far more accurate, than exiting competitors. Third, a practical fitting
algorithm for a broad class of mixed effects models with analytically
intractable likelihood functions is proposed. The approach involves an
implementation of the Monte Carlo EM algorithm that uses a randomized spherical-
radial integration rule at the E-step. Use of this integration rule reduces the
required Monte Carlo sample size by two orders of magnitude in test cases.

Statistical models are ubiquitous in almost all areas of modern research,
including such diverse fields as agriculture, economics, medicine, and
sociology. Advances in computing power enable statisticians to consider models
and do calculations that were not feasible even a few years ago. This research
targets three problems related to widely-used statistical models. The first
concerns a technique for adjusting treatment means in designed experiments to
account for observed covariates related to the response of interest. This is a
classical problem with its roots in agricultural field trials. The technique has
a long history dating back to the mid-20th century. It is somewhat surprising
then that there is still disagreement on the correct way to make the
adjustments, even in simple balanced experiments. An explanation is that the
mathematical tools and computing power necessary for a complete solution were
not available when the method was first developed. The second problem relates to
the feasibility of exact statistical tests when data is sparse, and the standard
approximations break down. Exact methods are used, for example, in medical
studies testing for factors associated with various diseases. Finally, a new
fitting algorithm is proposed for an important class of statistical models. Test
cases suggest that the methods will significantly extend the range of models for
which the computations are practically feasible.