* 0805089
* Monodisperse, Thermoresponsive Microgels Based on Poly(ethylene Glycol) Derivative Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2011
* Zhibing Hu, University of North Texas
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2011
* USD 309,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Synthesizing monodisperse polymer
colloids is usually the first step toward the study of self-assembling processes
and especially important for the fabrication of nanostructured materials. The
current available polymer colloids include polystyrene, polymethyl methacrylate
(PMMA) and poly-N-isopropylacrylamide (PNIPAM) spheres and their derivatives.
The objective of this proposed project is to create new monodisperse, thermo-
responsive polymer colloids based on poly(ethylene glycol) derivative polymers,
joining in these well-known colloids of polystyrene, PMMA, and PNIPAM. The
central idea is to synthesize these colloids with copolymerization of
poly(ethylene glycol) ethyl ether methacrylate (PEGETH2MA), poly(ethylene
glycol) methyl ether methacrylate (PEGMEA), poly(ethylene glycol) acrylate
(PEGA) and their derivatives using precipitation polymerization method. The
first two components give the low critical solution temperature (LCST) near the
physiological temperature while the third component (PEGA) provides a functional
group. Under proper chemical compositions and reaction conditions, PEG
derivative microgels with a very narrow size distribution may be obtained. As a
result, these PEG derivative microgels can be used as building blocks to
fabricate hydrogels with colloidal crystal structures. This proposed project
consists of five specific aims. The first is to synthesize and characterize PEG
derivative microgels that should be monodisperse, thermoresponsive, and with
functional groups. The second aim is to synthesize biodegradable PEG derivative
microgels by first synthesizing biodegradable PEG-polylactic acid macromer and
then using them as crosslinkers for microgels. Self-assembling processes of the
PEG derivative microgels will be explored by establishing the relationship
between crystallization kinetics with the softness (low mechanical modulus) of
the microgels. (Aim 3) Hydrogels with colloidal crystalline structures will be
synthesized using PEG derivative microgels as both crosslinkers and as a light
diffraction lattice (Aim 4). Aim five will focus on preparation of PEG-
microgels-based colloidosomes and build a theoretical model that will describe
swelling kinetics of a gel shell such as
colloidosomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed project is innovative because if
successful, it will lead to a new class of polymer colloids that have thermal
responsive properties and monodisperse size distribution. In contrast to
polystyrene spheres and PMMA spheres that are hydrophobic, the proposed PEG
derivative particles are hydrophilic and have a thermally responsive volume
phase transition near the physiological temperature. Different from PNIPAM
microgels that are extremely soft in terms of elastic modulus, the PEG
derivative microgels will be denser, harder and easier to form a crystalline
structure as revealed by the feasibility study. Furthermore, in the past two
decades the most research on thermally responsive polymer microgels has focused
on PNIPAM and its derivatives. However, the extraordinary thermo-sensitive
properties of PNIPAM have not been transferred into a biomedical breakthrough.
One of the major hurdles is that PNIPAM monomer is carcinogenic or teratogenic.
Thus, finding a biocompatible polymer microgel replacement of PNIPAM will be one
of the major advancements in this field. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will
provide direct support for two graduate students and broaden the participation
of underrepresented groups. This program will integrate its undergraduate
educational efforts with three existing programs that promote research
experiences: the Texas Academy of Mathematics and Science, the Ronald F. McNair
Post-baccalaureate Achievement Program at UNT, and NSF-UNT REU summer program.
From this proposed inter-disciplinary project, both graduate and undergraduate
students will gain valuable experimental and analytical skills in the rapidly
growing fields of polymers, colloids and nanostructured materials. The basic
sciences established in this research will have impacts not only in polymer
sciences but also in biomedical technology.&lt;br/&gt;