* 0805917
* Topological Hochschild Homology and Beyond
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Vigleik Angeltveit, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2011
* USD 99,259.00

Topological Hochschild homology and cohomology are spectrum-level versions of
Hochschild homology and cohomology, and come up in a variety of subjects
including the calculation of algebraic K-theory, universal deformations,
obstruction theory and string topology. Given a ring or S-algebra A, the
topological Hochschild homology spectrum THH(A) carries a circle action. The
topological cyclic homology spectrum TC(A) is defined in terms of the fixed
points of THH(A) under finite subgroups of the circle, and there is a map from
the algebraic K-theory spectrum K(A) to TC(A) which is often close to an
equivalence. We are especially interested in trying to understand K(ku) using
this approach. Here ku is the connective spectrum for complex K-theory, and the
spectrum K(ku) models algebraic K-theory of the category of 2-vector bundles.
There is a corresponding spectrum K(ko) for real 2-vector bundles, and we can
ask if the canonical map from K(ko) to K(ku) is close to being a Galois
extension. This is a higher chromatic analogue of the Lichtenbaum-Quillen
conjecture. We also want to take the S^1-action on THH(A) more seriously and
study the RO(S^1)-graded homotopy groups of the various fixed points of THH(A).
These groups enter in the calculation of algebraic K-theory of truncated
polynomial rings. A good understanding of the de Rham-Witt complex has been very
useful in calculations, and we would like to be able to define the
RO(S^1)-graded version of the de Rham-Witt
complex.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In algebraic topology there
is a world of ``brave new rings'', technically known as S-algebras, which
combines the worlds of algebra and topology. In this world we can use techniques
from topology, a branch of geometry, and from algebra. Topological Hochschild
homology is the generalization of Hochschild homology to this setting.
Hochschild homology is a standard construction in algebra which has proven to be
very useful, and topological Hochschild homology has already been used to solve
some previously unsolved questions in algebra. For example, given a ring A, the
algebraic K-theory K(A) captures much of the arithmetic and number theory of A.
The Hochschild homology HH(A) gives a (poor) approximation to K(A), while the
topological Hochschild homology THH(A) together with some extra structure gives
a much better approximation to K(A). Hence the study of topological Hochschild
homology ultimately gives insight into arithmetic and number theory, as well as
geometry and topology. The project studies several aspects of topological
Hochschild homology, some foundational and some calculational. We also go
further, studying generalizations of topological Hochshcild homology and its
relative, topological Hochschild cohomology. These generalizations have no
algebraic analogue.