* 0805143
* Nonlinear geometric evolution equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Lei Ni, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2011
* USD 119,923.00

Abstract - DMS - 0805143&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are two classes of problems
on which this project is&lt;br/&gt;focused. The first is about the geometric and
analytic&lt;br/&gt;properties of the Ricci flow equation and their applications
to&lt;br/&gt;the study of geometry and the topology of manifolds.
Secondly,&lt;br/&gt;there are a couple of nonlinear partial differential
equations&lt;br/&gt;appeared in the applied science, to which some techniques
and&lt;br/&gt;results obtained by the PI are related and can be applied.
The&lt;br/&gt;first part of project consists of the classifications
of&lt;br/&gt;self-similar solutions, namely gradient solitons, and
the&lt;br/&gt;convexity type estimates for Ricci flow solution in
high&lt;br/&gt;dimensions. Such results have far-reaching consequences in
the&lt;br/&gt;applications of Ricci flow in the study of&lt;br/&gt;geometric-
topological structure of the manifolds. The second&lt;br/&gt;theme of the
project is about the sharp gradient estimates of&lt;br/&gt;Li-Yau-Hamilton type,
related monotonicity formulae and their&lt;br/&gt;applications in geometric
nonlinear PDEs. Their relations to&lt;br/&gt;physics, statistical mechanics in
particular, shall be studied&lt;br/&gt;too. The aim is to discover a fundamental
physical/geometric&lt;br/&gt;principle to unify various sharp estimates and
monotonicity&lt;br/&gt;formulae. It will also provide the guideline for
further&lt;br/&gt;discovery of the new monotonicity formulae in other
geometric&lt;br/&gt;partial differential equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project is on the geometric and analytic properties of&lt;br/&gt;Ricci flow, one
of the most important geometric partial&lt;br/&gt;differential equation in
mathematics and physics. The&lt;br/&gt;completion of the project will enhance
the current&lt;br/&gt;understanding of the singularity formation of the Ricci
flow&lt;br/&gt;equation and its relation with several branches of
applied&lt;br/&gt;science and theoretic physics. By giving lectures for
general&lt;br/&gt;audience including high school students, writing
several&lt;br/&gt;monographs and survey articles, the project contributes to
the&lt;br/&gt;dissemination of enhancing the scientific understanding
of&lt;br/&gt;mathematical community as well as the general publics.