* 0805397
* NSF PostDoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2010
* Noa Pinter-Wollman, Pinter-Wollman          Noa            M
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 07/31/2010
* USD 123,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;_____________________________________________________________________
_______&lt;br/&gt;This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for
FY 2008. The fellowship supports a research and training plan entitled ? The
role of social networks in task allocation of harvester ants? for Noa M. Pinter-
Wollman. The host institution for this research is Stanford University and the
sponsoring scientist is Deborah M. Gordon. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biological
systems self-organize through the interactions between different components of
the system. The research examines how the structure of interaction networks
affects the organization of ant colonies. Individual ants within colonies
perform various tasks, such as foraging, patrolling, and nest repair, but the
assignment of each task is organized without central control. Previous work
shows that an ant uses its recent experience of interactions, in the form of
brief antennal contact, in task decisions. This research is tracking the network
of ant interactions in laboratory colonies of harvester ants using tiny Radio
Frequency Identification (RFID) attached to each ant. Experiments and agent-
based computer simulations are being used to investigate the roles of
individuals in the network. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Training objectives include
development of quantitative, computational, and engineering skills. The
development of a novel tracking technique will provide a unique methodology that
may be applied to a broad array of social insects both in the lab and field. The
broader impacts of this research will also offer opportunities for mentoring
undergraduates, collaborating with engineers and statisticians, and promoting
the use of quantitative and computational methods in biological research that
will broaden the understanding of social networks and self-organization in
social insects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;