* 0805127
* Core Shell/Barrier Layer Structured Ceramics: Physical Mechanisms of Enhancements of the Desirable Dielectric Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,06/30/2013
* Relva Buchanan, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 06/30/2013
* USD 697,894.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Capacitors are devices which store
electrical charge, and as such are essential components of almost all electrical
machinery and modern electronic devices. The continuing need for increased
storage capacity of such devices, as well as for functional stability and
miniaturization, make capacitive materials a competitive and promising area for
expanded research and development, with exceptionally high potential for
practical innovations and discoveries of a fundamental nature. The electronic
components industry depends heavily on superior capacitor performance, and such
components immediately impact the global market, paving the way for higher
efficiency devices and often to new product innovations. The aim of the proposed
investigation, therefore, is to explore the structural limitations of optimized
capacitors based on barium titanate ceramics, and to use modern physical
concepts, including nanotechnology, to develop superior capacitor systems and
new devices based on these concepts. The high cost of fossil fuels of necessity
focuses attention on the development of alternate energy conversion and storage
strategies. An ambitious goal of the proposed research is to develop a capacitor
system (a supercapacitor) that will convert solar energy and store it as
electrical energy. Such solar rechargeable supercapacitors can revolutionize
energy and transportation technologies and be widely applied to various sensor
and storage devices. The proposed research is multidisciplinary and will involve
participation by students with outreach to high school students and their
teachers. The experience gained in these exercises will significantly advance
their science background education and awareness of engineering materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Barium Titanate
(BaTiO3) continues to be the preferred dielectric material for capacitor use,
because of its inherently high dielectric constant, and almost limitless
potential for chemical modification to enhance dielectric and storage
properties. Superior BaTiO3 capacitative systems have originated from core-shell
structuring of the grains, with chemical gradients induced by doping, leading to
stress-strain micro-domains and high polarization. The proposed research will
explore these issues in depth, experimentally and theoretically, with the aim of
minimization of percolative recombination loss of the stored charge, yielding
high breakdown voltages and high dielectric constants. Effects of grain
dimensions down to the nanoscale will be analyzed in detail to identify and
quantify gradient features in the prepared microstructures, and to develop
analytical relationships linking these structures to exhibited properties. Based
on these associations, the proposed study will also focus on fabrication
methodologies for nanostructured supercapicitors. A futuristic goal will be to
develop devices that can harvest sunlight and store it as electrical potential
energy in the supercapacitor. A possible strategy might involve integration of a
dye-sensitized solid-state solar cell with the nanostructured supercapacitor,
requiring exploration of loss issues resulting from recombination of the
separated charges. The proposed work is multidisciplinary in scope, involving
condensed-matter physics, electronics and materials science, instrumentation
analysis and chemistry. This gives wide scope for the training of graduate
students, as well as outreach to and involvement of undergraduate and high
school students in hands-on experiments.