* 0805295
* The Influence of Stacking Fault Energy on the Phase Transformations and Deformation Mechanisms in Iron-Manganese Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2014
* James Wittig, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 01/31/2014
* USD 209,997.00

TECHNICAL: Austenitic Fe-Mn alloys have exceptional mechanical properties.
Recent trends in the automotive industry towards improved safety standards,
reduced weight, and cost effective manufacturing have led to a renewed interest
in these high strength and ?super tough? steels. Alloys of Fe-Mn exhibit
extensive ducility and strength over a large temperature range (-200 to 250 C)
where low temperature deformation can show elongation &gt;75% and ultimate
tensile strength over 1000 MPa. These outstanding mechanical properties are
produced by the transformation induced plasticity (TRIP) effect, which is
related to the low intrinsic stacking fault energy (SFE) in austenitic steels.
The additions of elements such as Al, Si, C, and N have large influences on both
the SFE and deformation mechanism. Temperature dependent plasticity can change
from TRIP to twinning induced plasticity (TWIP) when the SFE is affected.
Although extensive work has been performed in this area over the last 50 years,
there is still a considerable lack of understanding and disagreement for the
underlying factors that determine whether the temperature dependent deformation
mechanism will be dislocation glide, strain induced martensite, or mechanical
twinning. The research is a systematic study with model FeMn(AlSi) and FeMnC
alloys as well as more complex high Mn-N stainless steel materials to
investigate the influence of alloys elements (Mn, Al, Si, C, N) on the SFE for
these austenitic materials. A major objective of the research is the development
of structure property relationships between quantitative measurements of SFE as
a function of composition and temperature and the temperature dependent
mechanical deformation mechanisms for austenitic Fe-Mn alloys. These fundamental
studies will provide the basis for optimizing the Fe-Mn alloy composition to
achieve improved mechanical properties in new commercial alloys. NON-TECHNICAL:
The research involves collaboration between Vanderbilt University, the Max-
Planck Institut fur Eisenforschung, and Oak Ridge National Laboratory. This
collaboration will not only serve to make a strong scientific approach to the
research, it will also provide an educational component to the program where
both graduate students and undergraduate students will be exposed to
international interactions and state-of-the-art facilities at a national
laboratory. Undergraduates will be involved in this program with both senior
independent research opportunities and summer internships. Graduate students
involved in this program will receive the training required to pursue a career
in Materials Science and Engineering. A second objective of the current project
is to train underrepresented groups as future scientists. The P.I. of this
project (co-PI for the Vanderbilt/Fisk IGERT program and director of the
Vanderbilt Interdisciplinary Materials Science Program) is dedicated to
increasing the diversity of the Vanderbilt Ph.D. program. He is currently the
principal advisor for one of the Vanderbilt/Fisk IGERT minority students, and
this NSF funded program would provide for future support of new Fisk masters
students interested in a Vanderbilt Ph.D. The research program has the potential
to make major contributions to the education, training and knowledge of future
scientists.