* 0805272
* Collaborative Research:    Competing Sinks as Constraints on Plant Defense Responses
* BIO,IOS
* 07/12/2007,06/30/2010
* Heidi Appel, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 06/30/2010
* USD 240,629.00

INTELLECTUAL MERIT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plants often respond to attack by pests
and pathogens by activating complex defense responses, which include the
production of toxic or deterrent chemicals. However, all plant tissues are not
equally responsive to attack. In nature the distribution of plant defenses,
which provide pest and pathogen resistance and enhance harvest quality, is
uneven and notoriously difficult to predict. &lt;br/&gt;Recently, a critical
first step in the activation of defense responses was discovered. In poplar
trees, it was shown that wounded tissues must import resources, in this case
sugars, via the plant vascular system to support the production of defensive
substances. In these trees, wounded tissues alter their metabolism, becoming
stronger "sugar sinks" and drawing resources away from elsewhere in the plant.
As a result, stronger sugar sinks have stronger defense responses which
disappear whenever the flow of sugars is interrupted. This observation helps to
explain why plant defenses are unevenly distributed in nature. It also suggests
several strategies for manipulating levels of plant products, including those
from agriculturally-important species. &lt;br/&gt; This project would determine
if wounding boosts the "sugar sink" strength of other plant species and types,
including herbs and vines producing a wide variety of defensive substances such
as tannins, alkaloids, proteins, and glucosinolates. The project involves large-
scale experiments to test the hypothesis that many different plants shift the
long-distance flow of sugars and other resources in response to attack. It will
also examine factors that would disrupt sugar flow in nature, such as the
development of flowers and fruits which out-compete wounded tissues for sugar
resources or the simultaneous attack by multiple insects or pathogens.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Results of these
studies will provide insight into factors that influence pest resistance of
plants and may be manipulated to enhance crop or tree productivity. The
strategies plants use to manipulate sugar flow are important in agriculture,
since they determine both the timing and quality of production and harvest. The
mechanisms studied are also central to carbon sequestration and release by
plants and may impinge on the global carbon budget. Results should determine
whether trees like poplar can be altered to sequester additional carbon
belowground. The project will engage a substantial number of undergraduates from
two contrasting (large/small) institutions in interdisciplinary, collaborative
research and outreach (including K-12 schools). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;