* 0805508
* Topology and Dynamics of Mapping Class Groups and Automorphism Groups of Free Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2008,11/30/2008
* Alexandra Pettet, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Yongwu  J. Rong
* 11/30/2008
* USD 105,538.00

The mapping class group Mod(S) of a surface and the outer automorphism group
Out(F) of a free group are known to share many properties, but often the
techniques used to study them are necessarily quite different. The PI will study
the combinatorial group theoretic and cohomological properties of well-known and
important, but poorly understood subgroups such as those of the Johnson
filtration, or "higher" Torelli groups, of Mod(S) and Out(F). One component of
this project investigates questions related to spines of spaces which can be
used to study cohomology and find presentations for these groups. Concerning the
dynamical aspects of Out(S), the PI expects to develop a method for constructing
fully irreducible outer automorphisms which are in some sense customized. This
technology is already well-developed for Mod(S), but relies heavily on metric
properties of Teichmueller Space and the complex of curves. Analogues of these
objects for Out(F) are very recent and not yet well-understood, and it is one of
the PI's long term goals to probe their geometry via the dynamics of the
constructed automorphisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mapping class
group is important to many areas of mathematics, including algebraic geometry,
geometric group theory, and low-dimensional topology, and it also plays an
important role in recent developments in theoretical physics. A successful
program for studying the mapping class group Mod(S) and its relative, the
automorphism group Out(F) of a free group, is based on their relationship to
linear groups, i.e., groups consisting of matrices. Linear groups have been very
well studied and appear everywhere in mathematics, physics, and computer
science. Because matrices are relatively easy to understand, it is productive
when studying a particular group to understand how closely it resembles a linear
group. The PI is involved in developing the theory for Mod(S) and Out(F) by
understanding possible obstructions to their being linear groups, as well as
understanding the extent to which they behave and can be considered like linear
groups. The goal of the project is to study these groups and particular elements
therein via their algebraic, topological, geometric, and dynamical properties.