* 0805031
* Reliability Inference and Degradation Modeling based on a Class of Nonhomogeneous Levy Processes
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2010
* Xiao Wang, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2010
* USD 59,474.00

This proposal aims to study semiparametric likelihood inference of some
nonhomogeneous Levy processes for degradation data. In some studies where the
subjects are put on test at time zero, these subjects degrade over time. Failure
is defined as the time when the amount of degradation reaches a pre-specified
critical level. Data of this type are called degradation data. The setting for
observed data is one on which n independent units, each with a nonhomogeneous
Levy process with common shape function and scale parameter, are observed at
several possibly different times during the study. The difficulty is that
unknown parameters of these processes include a monotone function and a finite
dimensional parameter and also the data themselves are correlated. The
investigator studies the maximum likelihood estimator (MLE) and maximum pseudo-
likelihood estimator (MPLE) of the unknown parameters and develops efficient
algorithms to compute both the MLE and the MPLE. Asymptotic properties of these
estimators including consistency, convergence rate and asymptotic distribution
are established. Related problems, including semiparametric inference of models
with random effects and/or time-independent covariates, joint modeling of
failure time data and degradation data, and a variation of the Neyman-Scott
problem on variance estimation are also
investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditional analysis in reliability focuses
on collecting and modeling failure time data. This poses difficulties in high-
reliability applications where there are few failures. Advances in sensing
technologies are making it possible to collect extensive amount of data on
degradation associated with systems and components. The degradation modeling
allows the manufactures to obtain the reliability information required in a
timely manner such that they can make effective business decisions regarding
warranty periods or demonstrate that the product meets the customer's
reliability specifications. The proposed work develops a class of flexible
models to analyze the degradation data and has direct applications in industrial
engineering and AIDS patients' immune system study, as it formulates real
degradation data. The investigator develops numerical software in the forms of R
and/or MATLAB for degradation analysis for public use through the internet.