* 0805785
* Algebraic Structures of Mathematical Physics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Alexander Voronov, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2012
* USD 145,726.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0805785 &lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Alexander A. Voronov&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project
is to solve a number of important&lt;br/&gt;problems in the rapidly developing
fields of Topological Field&lt;br/&gt;Theory (TFT), Symplectic Field Theory
(SFT), and Gromov-Witten&lt;br/&gt;theory. The first part of the project will
span from higher&lt;br/&gt;category theory, to cobordisms and to quantum field
theories. The&lt;br/&gt;plan is to place cobordisms of manifolds with corners
within an&lt;br/&gt;appropriate n-category framework and describe TFTs as
n-functors&lt;br/&gt;from the n-category of cobordisms to that of n-vector
spaces, as&lt;br/&gt;well as show that physical models, such as
gauge&lt;br/&gt;(Wess-Zumino-Witten), Yang-Mills, Chern-Simons, Seiberg-
Witten&lt;br/&gt;theories, and sigma-model may be described as such
higher&lt;br/&gt;TFTs. The second part of the project consists in
bringing&lt;br/&gt;together algebraic geometric and symplectic methods to
construct&lt;br/&gt;a full solution to the so-called Quantum Master Equation
in&lt;br/&gt;Gromov-Witten theory. This equation describes the topology of
the&lt;br/&gt;moduli spaces of holomorphic curves and relevant
algebraic&lt;br/&gt;structures, providing important invariants in symplectic
and&lt;br/&gt;algebraic geometry. The third part of the project aims at
lifting&lt;br/&gt;Gromov-Witten theory to the (Floer) chain level and developing
a&lt;br/&gt;combinatorial version of Gromov-Witten theory, thus bridging
the&lt;br/&gt;areas of enumerative algebraic geometry, symplectic Floer
theory,&lt;br/&gt;and graph homology. The last, SFT part of the project will
result&lt;br/&gt;in constructing a new compactification of the moduli space
of&lt;br/&gt;Riemann surfaces, which would govern the algebraic operations
and&lt;br/&gt;invariants arising in SFT. This compactification will be an
SFT&lt;br/&gt;analogue of the Deligne-Mumford compactification relevant
to&lt;br/&gt;Gromov-Witten theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims at
discovering and studying new algebraic&lt;br/&gt;structures in topology
suggested or motivated by mathematical&lt;br/&gt;physics, in particular, string
theory, Symplectic Field Theory,&lt;br/&gt;and Gromov-Witten theory. Another
long-term goal is to build a&lt;br/&gt;bridge between several mathematical
cultures working on problems&lt;br/&gt;related to mathematical physics. These
cultures include&lt;br/&gt;algebraists, algebraic topologists, symplectic
geometers,&lt;br/&gt;algebraic geometers, and geometric topologists, to name
a&lt;br/&gt;few. The algebraic structures is a mathematical reincarnation
of&lt;br/&gt;such fundamental structures of physical theories as
correlators&lt;br/&gt;and relations between them (Ward identities).
Understanding this&lt;br/&gt;structure is crucial for understanding the physical
theory. From&lt;br/&gt;the point of view of mathematics, the project leads to
new&lt;br/&gt;mathematical ideas, new algebra, geometry, and
topology,&lt;br/&gt;motivated by physics.&lt;br/&gt;