* 0805722
* Studies in Fractional Factorial Design
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2013
* Ching-Shui Cheng, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2013
* USD 260,000.00

This project is concerned with how to choose good fractional factorial designs.
Minimum aberration is a well accepted optimality criterion for selecting the so
called regular fractional factorial designs. Using results from finite
projective geometry and coding theory, the investigator continues his work on
the determination of minimum aberration designs, in particular, those of
resolution IV. Resolution IV designs have nice structures and good statistical
properties, but have not been well studied in the past, partly due to the lack
of a good structural theory. Some recent results in finite projective geometry
provide powerful tools for understanding the structures of resolution IV designs
and for helping solve the problem of constructing optimal and efficient designs.
The investigator also studies the construction of new orthogonal arrays of
strength three, the nonregular counterpart of regular designs of resolution IV.
Finally, the investigator addresses several issues of designing experiments that
involve multiple processing stages, ranging from formulation of optimality
criteria to theoretical and algorithmic construction of good designs.

Statistical design of experiments is used in a wide range of scientific and
industrial investigations. Experiments need to be properly designed so that
valid information can be extracted at a lower cost. In industrial experiments,
often a large number of factors have to be studied, but the experiments are
expensive to conduct. In this case, only a small fraction of all the possible
combinations of the factors can be observed, and how to choose a good fraction
is an important issue. The study of such designs has received considerable
attention, mainly due to the success in applications to experiments for
improving quality and productivity in industrial manufacturing. This research is
to study the construction of efficient designs to extract more information.
Better industrial experiments can improve the quality of products and reduce
production cost. Experimenters will be benefited by having a greater repertoire
of new and good designs at their disposal, and will be able to run their
experiments more efficiently. For example, one of the proposed activities is
concerned with experiments with multiple processing stages which often arise in
industrial applications such as the fabrication of integrated circuits.