* 0805301
* Self-Assembly of Diblock Copolymer-Based Supramolecule Thin Films at Two Length Scales
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Ting Xu, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2009
* USD 70,000.00

The synergistic assembly of block copolymers and small molecules combines (a)
the possibility and nanoscopic self-assembly of block copolymers and (b) the
rich chemical functionality and molecular assembly of small molecule which can
lead to hierarchical functional materials. A fundamental understanding will be
developed on the assembly processes of diblock copolymer-based supramolecules in
thin films and the interplay between the assembly processes of diblock copolymer
and the small molecules on two different length scales. Specifically efforts
will focus on the phase behavior of block copolymers in the presence of small
molecules in thin film and the self assembly of the small molecules within the
bock copolymer microdomains and their effect on the copolymer microdomain
orientation in thin films.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed studies add a new
dimension to our existing knowledge of hierarchical assembly of soft materials
and will improve our understanding of the interplay between self-assembly
processes of two different length scales namely tens of nanometer and sub-
nanometer (molecular) level. Since the built-in functionalities can be readily
incorporated and the fundamental principles underpinning the synergy are
general, the proposed studies will open mew avenues to functional hierarchical
thin film materials.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;Visualization of nanostructures
effectively demonstrates the bridge between polymer science and nanoscience and
will stimulate viewers? interests in fundamental sciences. Supramolecular
assemblies produce a large library of fascinating images at different length
scales. Programs will be developed to use these images to promote polymer
science among different non-technical groups. During the funding period of this
proposal, efforts will be initiated in the following three areas. &lt;br/&gt;1.
For undergraduate and graduate students, class modules will be developed for the
polymeric materials course to educate students with different
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;2. For aspiring students from under-represented groups,
summer research opportunities will be crated. The students will collect images
from his/her experiments to help their peers appreciate polymer
science.&lt;br/&gt;3. For the general public, a seed program will be initiated
on the West Coast to promote science using arts.&lt;br/&gt;