* 0805220
* Tuning the Current of Organic Semiconductors by Magnetic Fields
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2008,05/31/2011
* Arthur Epstein, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 05/31/2011
* USD 422,811.00

Technical. This project combines a theoretical and experimental approach to
address resistance, photoconductivity, light emission, photovoltaic, and field
effect transistor response of organic- and polymer-based organic materials at
room temperature and low magnetic fields (&lt;100 Oe), with the objective of
establishing a broadly applicable model that describes and predicts mag-netic
field effects at low fields. Experiments will be guided by predictions of
competing mecha-nisms for low field behavior, magnetoresistance due to
interconversion of singlets and triplets (MIST mechanism) and magnetic field
control of bipolaron transport. Experiments will be car-ried out to explore the
roles of chemical composition, processing, and microstructure to clarify and
understand mechanisms or develop new models for magnetotransport in several
classes of organic-based semiconductors including small molecules, oligomers,
conjugated polymers, and non-conjugated polymers. Organic based LEDs with
different spin-orbit and hyperfine interac-tion strengths will be fabricated and
studied as a function of magnetic field and electric field. In particular,
oligomers where there are long lived excitons and carbon-based material such as
C60, graphene, where the hyperfine constant is anticipated to be negligible are
of special interest. In situ EPR study of organic- and polymer-based LEDs will
also be used to study spin transfer. &lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical. The project
addresses fundamental research issues in a topical area of elec-tronic/photonic
materials science having technological relevance. Basic understanding gained is
expected to lead to improved device performance, and to allow design of other
important com-ponents for future plastics electronics. Magnetic field effects in
organic- and polymer-based semiconductors represents an emerging field in
nanoscience with impact in areas such as or-ganic- and polymer based
photovoltaics, light emitters, and spintronics. The project integrates re-search
and education providing students with hands-on laboratory experience and
training while conducting forefront research.&lt;br/&gt;