* 0805164
* Integrating Biomaterials and Biophotonics to Assess How ECM Mechanics Regulate Cell Function in 3-D
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Elliot Botvinick, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* David A. Brant
* 08/31/2011
* USD 405,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0805164 PI: Putnam, Andrew ORG: University of California-
Irvine&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Integrating Biomaterials and Biophotonics to
Assess How ECM Mechanics Regulate Cell Function in
3-D&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The extracellular matrix (ECM)
provides both chemical and mechanical cues to cells, and an improved
understanding of how these cues govern cell function in 3-D is critically
important to design biomimetic materials as morphogenetic guides for tissue
engineering. In this proposal the PI plans to utilize a unique biosynthetic
hybrid hydrogel based on poly(ethylene glycol) and fibrinogen (PEG-fibrinogen)
to explicitly test the hypothesis that local substrate mechanical properties
influence cell phenotype in 3-D. This hypothesis will be addressed using
vascular smooth muscle cells (SMCs) as a physiologically relevant model cell
system, based not only on the PI's documented experience with this cell type but
also these cells' well-known ability to respond to static and dynamic mechanical
stresses both in vitro and in vivo. Preliminary data demonstrate that PEG-
fibrinogen hydrogels support SMC adhesion, spreading, viability, and the
expression of differentiation markers in 3-D over relatively long culture
periods. This material also provides the means to predictably tune bulk
mechanical properties independently from adhesion ligand density and proteolytic
sensitivity, something which cannot be achieved using native biopolymers (e.g.,
collagen, fibrin). The PI also proposes to develop novel methodology to measure
the local mechanical properties of PEG-fibrinogen gels, leveraging the co-PI's
expertise with optical tweezers to investigate mechanotransduction mechanisms to
address a major unanswered question in the area of cell-material interactions.
The following three objectives constitute the proposed study: (1) Engineer,
characterize, and develop novel biosynthetic hybrid hydrogels using PEG-
fibrinogen and demonstrate that their bulk mechanical properties can be
predictably manipulated while holding the concentration of fibrinogen constant.
(2) Interrogate the local elastic and viscoelastic properties of the PEG-
fibrinogen gels, comparing the measured values to the bulk measurements in the
previous objective. (3) Assess the impact of gel mechanical properties on the
phenotypic switch of SMCs (synthetic to contractile) cultured in 3-D in the
context of this PEG-fibrinogen ECM analog, and quantify how the bulk and local
mechanical properties of these cell-material constructs change over
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: Completion of the objectives of this
proposal requires an integration of emerging principles from biomaterials,
biophotonics, and cell and molecular biology. It will contribute to the near-
term research goal of developing material systems and methods to address
fundamental questions regarding ECM chemistry and mechanics. Such systems and
methods will have a much broader impact defining biomechanical design parameters
for biomaterials useful in tissue engineering, and allow fundamental mechanics
questions relevant for developmental biology, cardiovascular physiology, wound
healing, and tumorigenesis to be addressed in future proposals. To facilitate
dissemination of the methods developed here they will be integrated into the
Laser Microbeam and Medical Program, an NIH Biomedical Technology Resource
Center at the Beckman Laser Institute on the UCI campus. In addition to training
graduate students on the project, the PIs have established a working
relationship with the California Alliance for Minority Participation (CAMP) and
the Mathematics, Engineering, and Science Achievement (MESA) programs on the UCI
campus to involve minority undergraduate and high school students in the
program.