* 0805277
* Magneto-Acoustic and Quantum Transport in Helium Three
* MPS,DMR
* 11/15/2008,04/30/2012
* James Sauls, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 04/30/2012
* USD 276,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and education in
theoretical condensed matter physics in magneto-acoustic and quantum transport
in helium three. The theoretical investigations describe and explain newly
discovered and newly predicted quantum condensed phases of matter. The research
responds to recent experimental results establishing the existence of new
superfluid phases of 3He in confined geometries and the existence of new
collective modes of superfluid 3He exhibiting unusual magneto-acoustic
properties, including acoustic birefringence of transverse sound. Transverse
magneto-optical phenomena have been recently observed in electronic
superconductors. The theoretical efforts address predicting and characterizing
the magneto-optical and magneto-acoustic properties of quantum condensed phases
of 3He. Another vein of research develops theory to predict new phases of 3He
with properties characteristic of both solid and superfluid states of matter,
i.e. ''crystalline order in superfluid 3He''. In particular, the PI will carry
out theoretical research based on transport theory for quantum fluids that will
examine the physical properties and experimental signatures of this predicted
phase of 3He. A third effort employs theoretical models and quantum statistical
methods for analyzing the interplay between ordering associated with symmetry
breaking phase transitions, and extrinsic disorder that is present in virtually
all macroscopic forms of matter. These theoretical developments connect with the
experimental systems of liquid 3He impregnated into low-density silica glass,
also called aerogel. This system permits theory to compare to a controllable and
tunable medium to study effects of quenched random disorder in strongly
correlated Fermi liquids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has a strong
education component involving the training of graduate students and a
continuation of the PI's long history of recruiting undergraduates in cutting
edge research projects with publishable outcomes. The research connects with
substantial international collaborations in Germany and France focused on the
research topic, thereby strengthening and enriching the US physical
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports research and education in theoretical studies of a unique fluid,
helium three, which exhibits magnetic and flow properties governed by the laws
of quantum physics. Just as common materials exhibit different phases such as
the liquid, gas and solid phases, so do quantum fluids, but the laws of quantum
physics allow a wealth of complexities not normally encountered in everyday
materials. The theoretical investigations of this research describe and explain
newly discovered and newly predicted quantum phases of the fluid. The research
responds to recent experimental results establishing the existence of new
quantum phases of helium three which occur if the fluid is confined in small
regions of space, such as cavities, droplets or films. In these confined
geometries the existence of new physical behavior is exhibited as remarkable
magnetic properties that appear when sound travels through the droplet or the
film of liquid. Such behaviors reflect the quantum laws of nature operating in
the liquid. These phenomena allow for a deeper understanding of similar
phenomena in the technologically important superconductors, which can carry
electricity with no energy loss. The theoretical efforts extend to other
geometries that are important for investigating a wide range of quantum
behavior, and in expanding basic scientific understanding beyond helium three to
superconducting wires, and to practical quantum electronic and magnetic devices
that will be part of the next revolution in ultra-miniaturization and quantum
computers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has a strong education
component involving the training of graduate students and a continuation of the
PI's long history of recruiting undergraduates in cutting edge research projects
with publishable outcomes. The research connects with substantial international
collaborations in Germany and France focused on the research topic, thereby
strengthening and enriching the US physical community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;