* 0805629
* PostDoctoral Research Fellowship
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Zoua Vang, Vang                    Zoua
* Continuing grant
* Fahmida N. Chowdhury
* 08/31/2010
* USD 120,000.00

This National Science Foundation Minority Postdoctoral Fellowship will extend
current knowledge about the role of residential segregation in racial/ethnic
health disparities, significantly enhance the Fellow's training as a research
scientist in population health and demography, and contribute to the future
vitality of scientific enterprise. The Fellow will perform her research at the
University of Pennsylvania under the direction of Dr. Frank Furstenberg in the
Department of Sociology and Population Studies Center. Dr Furstenberg is a
renowned expert in the areas of family demography, development across the life
course, teen pregnancy, and urban neighborhoods. He has published extensively on
the black family and family dynamics in top peer-reviewed journals and is the
author of influential books on poor urban families. Additionally, the Fellow
will work with Drs. Samuel Preston, Irma Elo and Jason Schnittker?a group of
leading demographers and medical sociologists, also at the University of
Pennsylvania, who specialize in black mortality, racial/ethnic and socioeconomic
health disparities. The research combines quantitative, qualitative and spatial
approaches to investigate the relationships among residential segregation,
community violence and premature black mortality. Specifically the study will
examine the mediating effects of racial discrimination, family-level social
capital, and family processes in contributing to disparities in black-white,
violence-related mortality rates. The Fellow will spend the first postdoctoral
year acquiring methodological and substantive training in social demography and
population health through auditing courses in the Department of Sociology and
possibly the Medical School. The Fellow will also use the first year to explore
some of the quantitative aspects of the project. For example, she will use
publicly available data sets from the National Center for Health Statistics
(e.g., National Health Interview Survey) to obtain small area estimations of
morbidity and mortality rates for sub-Saharan African and West Indian
immigrants. Other data sets (e.g., the Philadelphia Neighborhood Information
System data, census summary tape files, etc.) will also be used to explore some
of the mechanisms underlying the residential segregation-community violence-
premature mortality nexus. Last but not least, the Fellow will apply agent-based
computational demography and GIS techniques to simulate how racial residential
segregation affects features of the physical and social neighborhood environment
(e.g., disorder and crime), and in turn, increasing individual agents? risks for
morbidity and ultimately, mortality. In the second year of the postdoctoral
fellowship, the Fellow will field a pilot study (most likely in either New York
City of Boston) to explore how African American and black immigrant families
residing in segregated neighborhoods negotiate their environments with respect
to health and safety. Information about mechanisms from the quantitative
analyses in year one will be used as a starting point for understanding how
family social processes and social capital influences individual and aggregate
risks for morbidity and mortality. The pilot study will be instrumental in
setting up the research design and interview guides for a larger proposed three
cities (Boston, New York and D.C.) ethnographic study on residential segregation
and morbidity/mortality among black immigrants and African Americans.



