* 0805632
* Asymptotic Methods in Quantum Statistics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2011
* Michael Nussbaum, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2011
* USD 240,000.00

The processing of quantum information is emerging as a challenging new field for
statisticians. While the concept of inherent randomness is central to quantum
mechanics, it cannot be described in terms of traditional probability alone,
i.e. notions such as observed random variables, sample spaces etc. are not
sufficient. On the simplest level, finite probability laws have to be replaced
by states, which are defined as complex positive definite Hermitian matrices of
trace one. A very general framework is provided by the theory of operator
algebras. In quantum statistical decision theory, families of states generalize
families of probability measures (statistical experiments), and the tensor
product of many states replaces the classical simple random sample. One problem
which is already known in the classical context is the risk asymptotics for
symmetric hypothesis testing, or Bayesian discrimination of two states with
equal prior weights (the Chernoff bound on the exponential rate of decay of the
error probability). In the recent solution of this problem on the quantum level
by the investigator and coauthors, a new method has been developed to reduce the
quantum risk to a classical one, via associating a pair of probability
distributions to a pair of states by measurement on a purification. The present
project aims at exploring further this new method, with regard to wider
applicability in quantum testing, estimation and possibly in approximation of
quantum statistical experiments. Further subjects of study are quantum
statistical applications of information theoretic concepts like channel
capacity, Kolmogorov complexity, and rate
distortion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Natural phenomena on the very small (subatomic)
level are governed by quantum theory, where physical laws and cause-effect
relationships are thoroughly different from the world of ordinary human
experience. Physicists and computer scientists realized some time ago that these
phenomena might be harnessed to build computers of extraordinary speed, and also
allow rapid advances in cryptography such as breaking all presently known secret
codes or constructing new unbreakable ones. While quantum computers have long
remained an abstract idea and have only been built at an embryonic stage so far,
the theoretical groundwork for far-reaching applications is already being laid
in the interdisciplinary field of Quantum Information Theory. In the need for
finding benchmarks for optimal performance, researchers in this field have
recently begun to exploit some well developed theories of signal processing and
statistics. The present project is situated precisely at this new frontier
between traditional statistics and quantum theory. The aim is to achieve a
better mathematical and statistical understanding of quantum computing and
communication, areas which promise to be of great technological impact once they
reach an applied stage. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;