* 0805570
* Probabilistic Analysis of Large Complex Geometric Structures
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Joseph Yukich, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2011
* USD 135,000.00

Fundamental questions pertaining to large, complex geometric structures often
involve sums of spatially dependent terms having short range interactions, but
complicated long range dependence. A chief goal is to show that sums of
spatially dependent terms behave as though they were sums of independent
identically distributed random variables. Thus the goal is to show that such
sums satisfy laws of large numbers, including moderate and large deviation
principles, that the sums have asymptotically a normal distribution, and that
the random point measures defined by these sums satisfy functional central limit
theorems. Yukich will employ a spatial dependence structure termed stabilization
to establish general thermodynamic limits for functionals in geometric
probability and to establish Gaussian limits for such functionals. He will apply
the general results to establish limit theory for particular problems in
stochastic geometry, ballistic deposition models, random geometric networks and
graphs, and spatial statistics.

Many real world problems involving the performance analysis of transportation
and communication networks, extreme values, signal analysis, and even random
packing of spheres can be understood as problems involving functionals of
interacting particles, where particles interact locally but have long range
dependencies. In many cases the dependencies are weak enough so that sums of
such functionals behave as though they were the sum of independent particles and
therefore, when the number of particles is large, behave roughly as a sum of
independent coin tosses, where each coin has its own probability of coming up
heads. This project aims to study the similarities between problems involving
complex systems in telecommunications, statistical mechanics, and random
networks and problems involving independent coin tosses. In the process Yukich,
in collaboration with colleagues from the Lehigh engineering school and Bell
labs, hopes to increase our understanding of problems arising in networks,
random graphs, combinatorial optimization, and extreme values.