* 0805237
* Nanometer-Scale Studies of Contacts to Nanowires, Advanced Oxide Films, and Molecular Layers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2013
* Jonathan Pelz, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 06/30/2013
* USD 336,216.00

Technical: This project is to study metal contacts to semiconductor nanowires
and thin films at the nanometer scale. The systems to be investigated include
(1) metal contacts to semiconductor nanowires, (2) metal contacts to advanced
oxide films in metal/complex oxide/semiconductor junctions, and (3) metal
contacts to organic films in metal/organic-monolayer/semiconductor junctions.
Contacts are critical for injection of charge and spin in electronic devices,
but in these emerging materials the energy band alignments and microscopic
transport process are still poorly understood. Ballistic electron emission
microscopy (BEEM), internal photoemission spectroscopy, and three-dimensional
electrostatic modeling are used in this project, aiming to obtain a quantitative
understanding of these important topics. The emphasis of the project is on metal
contacts to semiconductor nanowires. Schottky barrier contacts to nanowires in
both the ?end-on? and the more conventional ?side? contact geometries will be
studied using BEEM, in order to determine how the nanowire energy band alignment
to the metal Fermi energy (i.e., the Schottky barrier height) depends on the
nanowire diameter, on the metal work function, and on the electrostatic
environment around the nanowires. Non-technical: The project addresses basic
research issues in a topical area of materials science with high technological
relevance, and is expected to provide new scientific understanding of metal
contacts to semiconductor materials, a knowledge that is critically needed for
the development of nanowire-based electronic devices of the future. This project
provides highly interdisciplinary and collaborative training for graduate and
undergraduate students and enhanced research opportunities for students and a
faculty member from an undergraduate-only institution. The PI will continue
active involvement with curriculum development to better integrate laboratory
experiments, group work and problem solving into introductory physics courses,
science outreach, teacher mentoring, and outreach activities aimed at providing
information and advise about nanotechnology to middle school students.