* 0805144
* Mechanical Shock and Vibration Fatigue Behavior of Environmentally-Benign PB-Free Solders in Electronic Packaging
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Hanqing Jiang, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Taleff
* 06/30/2012
* USD 366,000.00

TECHNICAL: With the increasing focus on developing environmentally-benign
electronic packages, Pb-free alloys have received a great deal of attention. The
mechanical behavior of these alloys is extremely important because solder joints
must retain their mechanical integrity under thermo-mechanical fatigue, creep,
and mechanical shock and vibration fatigue. The latter has become an increasing
problem in the industry. Relatively low cyclic stresses may be applied to
electronic packages, particularly in automotive and aircraft applications, which
results in isothermal fatigue. Fundamental issues related to this problem have
received very little attention. To date, the understanding of mechanical shock
is largely empirical. Typical testing involves dropping the modules on the
ground, from a given height, and measuring the electrical resistance and
qualitative appearance to determine whether the component has failed. An
understanding of the stress and strain state in the package during mechanical
shock is largely non-existent. Furthermore, the role of intermetallic thickness
and solder microstructure on mechanical shock and vibration fatigue has not
really been examined. A methodology for modeling the stress state under
mechanical shock is urgently required. PIs will conduct a thorough study and
analysis of the mechanical shock and vibration fatigue behavior of
Sn-3.5Ag-0.7Cu and Sn-Ag solders with a comparison to pure Sn. The program will:
(i) quantify the mechanical shock and vibration fatigue behavior using a novel,
sophisticated system that enables application of realistic and controlled strain
rates (10/s or higher) on single and multiple solder joints, as well as bulk
solder, (ii) measure the strain distribution and evolution in a small-length
scale solder joint, with fiducial marks micromachined by Focused Ion Beam (FIB),
using a high speed camera and digital image correlation (DIC), (iii) understand
the relationships between intermetallic thickness at the solder/joint interface
and solder microstructure with mechanical shock and vibration fatigue
resistance, (iv) model deformation of solder joints during mechanical shock and
vibration, using multi-scale numerical techniques, to obtain a fundamental
understanding of microstructural and geometric effects on solder deformation.
NON-TECHNICAL: Pb-free solders are of importance because of the environmentally-
benign nature of these materials. The research program will yield a thorough
understanding of mechanical shock and vibration fatigue damage in Pb-free
solders. It will also provide the semiconductor industry with a quantitative
understanding of high strain rate deformation in these materials. The research
program will include substantial interaction between university and industry.
While research on solders has been extensive over the last several years,
education of students in this area has not received the same attention. An
integrated education outreach program that combines: (a) contributions to the
development of a new Master?s in Electronic Packaging Program at ASU, (b)
project-oriented activities for students, and (c) industrial outreach, is
planned.