* 0805797
* Holomorphic Vector Bundles, Harmonic Maps, and the Topology of Moduli Spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2010
* Richard Wentworth, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria H. Noronha
* 06/30/2010
* USD 210,829.00

Abstract: DMS-0805797&lt;br/&gt;PI: Richard A.
Wentworth&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The grant addresses several research
projects in geometric analysis. The first part continues work on the Yang-Mills
flow on higher dimensional Kaehler manifolds. A special focus is a comparison of
the analytic singularities that occur along the flow with the algebraic
singularities associated to Harder-Narasimhan filtrations of holomorphic vector
bundles. The second project analyzes the topology of moduli spaces of coherent
systems on Riemann surfaces. Coherent systems are related to a variety of
geometric objects such as higher rank Brill-Noether loci and holomorphic maps to
Grassmannians and other homogeneous varieties. New methods of Morse theory in
the setting of singular spaces provide a framework for these computations. An
ongoing project studies energy minimizing maps to the Weil-Petersson completion
of Teichmueller space. Such maps are associated to homomorphisms of fundamental
groups of Riemannian manifolds to the mapping class group of a compact oriented
surface. Regularity of harmonic maps is the main issue, as this is related to
rigidity questions. The fourth project consists of further topics related to
representation varieties of surface groups. The PI will continue to investigate
the functional on Teichmueller space defined by the energy of equivariant
harmonic maps associated to surface group representations. A particular aim will
be to develop new criteria for the properness and uniqueness of minima of this
functional. Results will have implications for the dynamics of the mapping class
group action on the moduli space of representations. Representations into the
isometry group of the complex ball are related to spherical CR-structures, and
there are many open questions as to how these relate to hyperbolic structures.
The project also proposes to establish new existence and rigidity results.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A significant branch of mathematical inquiry has been the
relationship between the geometric, analytic, and algebraic properties of
manifolds. Manifolds are higher dimensional generalizations of curves and
surfaces, and they appear in a variety of situations in pure and applied
mathematics. Symmetries are also a natural and fundamental part of physical
systems, and the dynamics of these symmetries carries important information. The
research projects in this proposal will further our understanding of some of
these objects. The equations studied -- energy minimizing maps and the Yang-
Mills flow -- have their origins in the mathematical description of the physical
world and are therefore are of great importance to both mathematicians and
physicists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;