* 0805197
* Dynamical and Structural Studies of Spider Silk Fibers
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Jeffery Yarger, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* David A. Brant
* 07/31/2012
* USD 375,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0805197 PI: Yarger, Jeffrey ORG: Arizona
State&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Dynamical and Structural Studies of Spider
Silk Fibers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: Spider silk is among the
most interesting of all the naturally occurring fibers. A spider may produce up
to six different silks which display a wide range of strength and extensibility.
In some cases the strength and extensibility significantly exceed what has been
observed in man made fibers. Some dragline silks exhibit the phenomenon of
supercontraction wherein they contract by as much 55% in length upon exposure to
water, leading to an increase in extensibility and reduction in strength. The
origin of different behaviors in different silks is thought to relate to the
primary amino acid sequence and to the secondary structure of the peptide chain,
which has yet to be fully understood. The proposal outlines a schedule of
research, based largely on solid state nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy
(NMR) and neutron and X-ray scattering, designed to provide a major extension of
our knowledge of the molecular structure and dynamics in the disordered region
in spider silk fibers. The objectives are as follows: (1) Develop NMR
spectroscopic techniques to better elucidate the short-range order, intermediate
range order and/or secondary structure in amorphous or semi-crystalline
biopolymers, such as spider silk fibers. (2) Better elucidate the role water
plays in the (i) solvation, (ii) plastizing, and (iii) as an intercalant
molecule in spider silk fibers and to determine both dynamic and structural
changes brought about by hydration. (3) Provide a complete secondary structural
analysis of the amorphous region in spider silk fibers using multidimensional,
multinuclear NMR spectroscopy. (4) Use X-ray and neutron diffraction in
collaboration with scientists at the Argonne National Laboratory to further
elucidate the short and intermediate range order in spider silk fibers. (5)
Correlate information regarding secondary structure with known primary amino
acid sequences in order to devise a fundamental understanding of how these
repetitive motifs relate to spider silk?s impressive mechanical properties. (6)
Use the group's expertise in multi-instrument characterization of amorphous
materials to further elucidate thermal and physical properties of spider silk
materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: These studies offer a new
window into the relationship of structure and mechanical properties of a
fascinating class of natural biological fibers. Understanding of these
substances can lead to design of better synthetic polymers for a variety of
important applications. Students involved in the project will be trained for
scientific careers in biomaterials science, physical chemistry, and chemical
physics and will have an opportunity to become familiar with the capabilities of
a major national laboratory. The PI participates in several educational and
outreach activities. He has teamed with the Center for Research on Education in
Science, Mathematics, Engineering and Technology (CRESMET) to become a research
lab partner for the inaugural 2007 Math and Science Teaching Fellows program at
Arizona State University. This program brings high school and junior high
teachers into the research labs for the summer for immersion in active research
and the development of activities for articulating research into their K-12
classrooms. This program is funded jointly by the National Science Foundation
and Science Foundation Arizona, and continues throughout the school year with
in-school activities, including regular communication with the PI and research
group members at the university and at the school site. An emphasis has been
placed on involving underrepresented minorities in both research and educational
outreach projects. Specifically, several school districts with large populations
of Hispanic and Native American students have been targeted for the K-12
outreach activities described above.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;