* 0805240
* Nanoscale and Collective Physics of One-Dimensional Conductors
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2014
* Robert Thorne, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2014
* USD 480,000.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;Charge-density-wave (CDW) conductors
are among the most remarkable electronic materials ever discovered. They exhibit
collective charge transport, nonlinear electronic conduction, coherent voltage
oscillations, a low-temperature glass phase and gigantic dielectric constants.
They provide a nearly ideal model experimental system for studying the static
and dynamic properties of disordered elastic media, providing a tractable way
station between simple mechanical oscillators and the complexity of fully
developed turbulence. This individual investigator project will explore the
electronic properties and possible applications of microfabricated CDW devices,
and the complex dynamical response of these devices. The project is part of a
broader program that has yielded several patent applications and a commercial
product used around the world, and that provides excellent training to graduate
students for careers in research and development. Complimentary activities are
attempting to address major problems in the STEM pipeline. These include
developing methods and curricula for teaching physics to diverse audiences,
developing methods and materials for recruiting and retaining students in high
school and college physics and, with PhysTEC support, recruiting and training
more high school physics teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;Quasi-one-dimensional conductors exhibiting collective
charge transport by sliding charge (or spin) density waves (CDW) are among the
richest systems in condensed matter physics. This project will address two broad
classes of problems using a combination of materials synthesis, microfabrication
and transport measurements. The first class involves the meso- and nano-scale
physics of quasi-one-dimensional conductors and devices that incorporate them.
Experiments on the physics of charge injection, of nanowires and of
metastability with potential applications in memory devices are enabled by
fabrication processes developed in the previous funding period. The second class
addresses the collective pinning and dynamics of the disordered CDW, a focus of
renewed interest as theoretical methods developed to explain other disordered
elastic objects are being used to address the full richness of CDW systems. The
project is part of a broader program that has yielded several patent
applications and a commercial product used around the world, and that provides
excellent training to graduate students for careers in research and
development.&lt;br/&gt;