* 0805677
* NSF PostDoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Mitchell Day, Day Mitchell D
* Fellowship
* Julie Dickerson
* 09/30/2011
* USD 189,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2008. The fellowship supports a research and training plan entitled "Surveying
intact microbial communities using binary hybridization fingerprints" for
Mitchell D. Day. The host institutions for this research are University of Idaho
and the National Institute of Genetics in Mishima, Japan, and the sponsoring
scientists are Dr. James Foster and Dr. Takashi Gojobori, respectively.

Currently sequencing the genomes of individual microorganisms can be done
quickly; but it is hard to describe complex communities using the same methods
used for solitary genomes. A microbial genome may be 4 million base pairs long,
but a pinch of soil may contain 10,000 billion base pairs of unique sequence.
This research is using next-generation sequencing technology to understand the
metagenome, the collected genomic information in a microbial community by
obtaining a binary fingerprint of millions of long DNA fragments extracted
directly from an intact community. This fingerprint can be correlated with
existing sequences found in databases. This approach gives a broad sampling by
exchanging detail at the base-pair level for a global picture of the entire
metagenome.

Training objectives include expanding proficiencies in the fields of
computational biology, bioinformatics, and mentorship. This research will have
an impact in the general understanding of microbial communities and contribute
data to metagenomic databases available to the public.