* 0805644
* NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2008,12/31/2011
* Nathaniel Bletter, Bletter Nathaniel
* Fellowship
* Julie Dickerson
* 12/31/2011
* USD 123,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2008. The fellowship supports a research and training plan entitled "A
quantitative ethnobotanical approach to determining the movement of plants
between Southeast Asian and Hawaii" for Nathaniel Bletter. The host institution
for this research is University of Hawaii-Manoa and the sponsoring scientist is
Dr. Will McClatchey.

How does the diversity of plant uses change as immigrant communities spend more
time away from their home country, in proximity to and exchanging plant
knowledge with many neighboring ethnic communities? This question is especially
important in Southeast Asia with its patterns of immigration and emigration, as
this area is the origin of much of the world's important economic flora, such as
rice, coconuts, bananas, tea, and ginseng. In conjunction with the University of
Hawai'i and Thailand's Khon Kaen University's "Taxonomy and Ethnobotany in the
Lao People's Democratic Republic" project, this research seeks to answer this
question using a quantitative synthesis of the relationships of the plant
species, their uses, and the cultures that employ plants in order to understand
the patterns of transfer of plant uses by employing field interviews with Thai
and Lao speakers in Hawai'i, Thailand and Laos and plant collections in these
areas. Plant data are being analyzed using "ethnobotanical quantum" units and
plant use data using phylogenetic "relational efficacy." Broader impacts include
sharing and preserving this valuable plant knowledge within the communities via
books and training. The hypothesis being tested is that, over time in a new
country, immigrant plant use diversity initially decreases, but eventually
increases with exposure to other cultures, and that newly selected plants are
phylogenetically similar to the pre-immigration set of plants. Through a
combination of quantum and relational efficacy ethnobotanical theory another
hypothesis being modeled predicts which plants people will bring with them when
they move from one area to another. Quantum ethnobotany predicts that the
transferred plants are those that best help the most people survive and
relational efficacy predicts that the transferred plants are those that have
many closely related useful species. Through these various computational methods
spanning the field of biology, it is being observed how different cultures
communicate their most valued plant knowledge, leading to a broader impact of
being able to understand and possibly prevent introductions of new invasive
plant species while being better able to find the origins of important crops for
breeding of pest-resistant varieties.

Training objectives include new techniques and skills of quantitative and
theoretical ethnobotany, phytochemistry, geographic information systems,
research ethics, and field methods.