* 0805227
* Experimental Study of Superconductor/Ferromagnet Proximity Effects
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Thomas Lemberger, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 07/31/2012
* USD 315,000.00

Non-technical Abstract:

Many useful electronic devices are made from ferromagnetic films, such as read
and write heads for computer hard drives. Useful devices are made from
superconducting films, too, including medical systems that detect magnetic
fields from heartbeats and brain activity. Recent advances in the sophistication
of experimental apparatus for making thin-film structures and for measuring
them, and advances in theory, have opened a new avenue for possible devices that
incorporate superconducting and ferromagnetic films in close proximity. The
really exciting aspect of the science, and an important mechanism for new device
functionalities, comes from the persistence of superconductivity inside the
ferromagnet when the two materials are in such intimate contact such that
electrons can diffuse freely from superconductor to ferromagnet and back. This
project will study superconducting electrons in the ferromagnet directly via
magnetic field screening measurements in large and nano-scale devices, and
indirectly via electron tunneling measurements. The project will involve
graduate and undergraduate students in fabrication of SC/FM devices as well as
sophisticated measurements.

Technical Abstract:

Superconductivity and ferromagnetism are antithetical, the former demanding that
electrons form spin-zero pairs and the latter pressing for parallel electron
spins. Recently it has been appreciated that sample fabrication and measurement
techniques have become sufficiently sophisticated that the mutual interactions
of superconductors in intimate contact with ferromagnets can be reproducibly
created and studied. A surprising result of theory is that superconductivity can
persist into the ferromagnet. This project will explore the effective superfluid
density associated with supercurrents in the FM layer of various SC/FM bilayer
and trilayer structures. The superfluid density will be measured directly via
magnetic screening measurements involving the mutual inductance of coils on
opposite sides of a SC/FM bilayer or trilayer, and via transport measurements on
nanoscale patterned wires, to see the effects of reduced dimensionality. It will
also be studied via tunneling measurements into the FM film of a SC/FM bilayer
that is carrying a supercurrent. The project will involve graduate and
undergraduate students in fabrication of SC/FM devices as well as sophisticated
measurements.

