* 0805836
* Contact Topology, Knots, and Heegaard Floer Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2011
* Olga Plamenevskaya, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2011
* USD 107,158.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0805836&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Olga Plamenevskaya&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal focuses on
contact topology in dimension 3 and the&lt;br/&gt;related version of knot
theory, the study of Legendrian and&lt;br/&gt;transverse knots. Contact
structures on 3-manifolds encode subtle&lt;br/&gt;topological information, and
knots in contact manifolds (tangent&lt;br/&gt;or transverse to the contact
planes) have many additional&lt;br/&gt;properties. The goal of this project is
to better understand the&lt;br/&gt;relation between and find new applications of
various invariants&lt;br/&gt;of contact structures and Legendrian and transverse
knots. More&lt;br/&gt;specifically, the PI will study various versions of the
contact,&lt;br/&gt;Legendrian and transverse invariants in Heegaard Floer
homology;&lt;br/&gt;she proposes to investigate knots via associated
contact&lt;br/&gt;manifolds, such as those obtained by surgery on Legendrian
knots&lt;br/&gt;and branched covers of transverse knots. A related part of
the&lt;br/&gt;project is to develop similar invariants in knot
homologies&lt;br/&gt;arising from quantum algebra (Khovanov and Khovanov-
Rozansky&lt;br/&gt;homology). An intriguing relation between Heegaard Floer
theory&lt;br/&gt;(defined via holomorphic disks) and the quantum algebraic
knot&lt;br/&gt;homologies exists outside of contact geometry; the PI proposes
to&lt;br/&gt;study this relation in presence of a contact structure.
In&lt;br/&gt;particular, in her previous work the PI suggested a
transverse&lt;br/&gt;knot invariant in Khovanov homology. The interplay
between&lt;br/&gt;Heegaard Floer and Khovanov homologies allows to use
this&lt;br/&gt;invariant to prove tightness of certain contact structures
on&lt;br/&gt;branched double covers of knots. Further progress on this
project&lt;br/&gt;could yield quantum algebraic tools for studying
contact&lt;br/&gt;structures in a more general setting, and would improve
our&lt;br/&gt;understanding of the relation between theories of a
very&lt;br/&gt;different nature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is
on geometric topology, an area of&lt;br/&gt;mathematics that studies shapes of
curved spaces (manifolds) in&lt;br/&gt;various dimensions. In dimensions 3 and
4, this can be thought&lt;br/&gt;of as understanding the structure of space and
space-time, and is&lt;br/&gt;particularly interesting and important. The study
of knots in&lt;br/&gt;dimension 3 plays a major role in topology and has
important&lt;br/&gt;connection to other sciences (for example, DNA and
certain&lt;br/&gt;proteins can be knotted). The proposed project focuses on
study&lt;br/&gt;of 3-manifolds and knots in presence of a contact structure,
an&lt;br/&gt;object somewhat analogous to an electric field in
physics.&lt;br/&gt;(Historically, the study of contact structures was
first&lt;br/&gt;motivated by classical mechanics, optics and
thermodynamics.)&lt;br/&gt;Contact structures are important objects by
themselves, but also&lt;br/&gt;encode valuable information about the space they
live in. In her&lt;br/&gt;research, the PI plans to use tools and ideas from
different&lt;br/&gt;branches of mathematics such as geometry and quantum
algebra. The&lt;br/&gt;broader goals of the project thus include a better
understanding&lt;br/&gt;of the relation between these different branches, as
well as new&lt;br/&gt;results in and applications of the topology of contact
manifolds.&lt;br/&gt;