* 0805703
* Polar Sea-Ice Information Needs: Interdisciplinary Training, Outreach and IPY Legacy Products Through a Sea-Ice System Services Approach
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Elinor Salganek, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Renee Crain
* 08/31/2010
* USD 49,946.00

This proposal is based on the concept of sea-ice system services as a unifying
theme. The proposal focuses on the role of sea ice as a provider of services
that are crucial to a range of users, such as parts of an ecosystem, indigenous
populations, the oil and gas industry, or humanity as a whole, through the
climate regulating services provided by the ice. This proposal has four elements
(1) Conduct a sea-ice field course that provides a comprehensive, integrated
perspective on the state-of-the-art in field studies of sea ice, using sea-ice
system services as a unifying concept to link course modules and aid with
research design. (2) Develop a handbook and multimedia products comprising high-
quality digital video, animations, and supporting computer programs that serve
as resources for (under)graduate education, professional training, and as a
reference work for scientists in a range of relevant fields. (3) Distill an
outreach multimedia product out of the materials referenced above that can serve
as an entry point for members of the public interested in following up on media
reports on sea-ice change as well as a teaching tool in K-12 curricula. (4)
Create a documentary record of the state-of-the-art in studies of the sea-ice
system, the services it provides to a broad range of users, and the (field)
methods employed in its study during IPY-4 that can serve as a reference point
and legacy product for future outreach as well as studies of science history and
science culture. Using these three methods, the project intends to address five
major aspects of sea ice: (1) the changing role of sea ice as an important
habitat for microorganisms at the center of Arctic marine foodwebs, (2) the
status of the polar bear and other marine mammals heavily depending on sea ice,
(3) the role of sea ice as a hazard to shipping and coastal infrastructure, (4)
the reduced stability of coastal sea ice as a source of concern to indigenous
hunters, (5) sea ice in the context of environmental security, e.g., clean-up of
oil spills in ice-covered waters. The project will train a cadre of
interdisciplinary researcher to address sea ice issues and leave a legacy for
International Polar Year. The project also integrates the sea ice knowledge of
Alaska Natives living in Barrow. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;