* 0805678
* PostDoctoral Research Fellowship
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Kimberly D'Anna, D'Anna                  Kimberly       L
* Continuing grant
* Fahmida N. Chowdhury
* 08/31/2010
* USD 120,000.00

This National Science Foundation Minority Postdoctoral Fellowship will
investigate the relationship between psychosocial and biological factors in
relation to postpartum depression in the US Mexican population. Thus, in this
fellowship, postpartum responses to a relevant stressor will be used to detect
increased stress reactivity in association with psychosocial measures and
postpartum depression in the US Mexican population. In addition, this fellowship
will be the first investigation into the biology of postpartum depression in
Mexican women, significantly enhancing the Fellow's skills as a clinical
research scientist, and contributing to the field of maternal health disparities
and postpartum depression research. The Fellow will perform her research under
the direction of Drs. Randy Ross and Mark Laudenslager in the Psychiatry
Department at University of Colorado Denver Health Sciences Center (UCHSC).
UCHSC is a leader in health-related research and promotes a collaborative
environment, where the fellow will have access to laboratories that specialize
both in human maternal behavior and the neuroendocrine regulation of stress. The
research combines quantitative and qualitative approaches to investigate stress
reactivity (behavioral and physiological) in association with postpartum
depression and whether this variation is moderated the influence of
acculturation, life stress and social support on postpartum depression in the US
Mexican population. Immigrant and non-immigrant Mexican women ranging from
postpartum week 4-12 will be recruited and assessed for depressive symptoms,
acculturation, social support and number of positive/negative life events. The
infants first set of vaccinations will be used as the relevant stressor to
detect increased stress reactivity in association with postpartum depression. To
study stress reactivity in Mexican mothers, physiological (salivary cortisol,
heart rate, blood pressure) and behavioral changes (parent-child interactions)
will be observed before and after the stressor. The mothers perceived emotional
response to the stressor and her perceived response to her infants stress will
also be analyzed. The findings from this fellowship will help clinicians
understand what factors make Mexican women susceptible to postpartum depression,
such as psychosocial stressors, and how best to screen for it, likely during
pregnancy. Importantly, this study will begin a research and education
collaboration with local public and community agencies serving Mexicans and
other underrepresented populations in the area. The specific training objectives
of this fellowship are to enhance the Fellow's pyschosocial approaches to the
study of maternal-related stress, race-related health disparities and to gain
skills in psychobiology and to build her evolving program of clinical research,
which examines the influence of maternal experiences and how they relate to
postpartum depression for Mexican mothers within the US. These training goals
will help the fellow attain a tenure-track academic professorship at a leading
research university and develop a strong independent research program examining
postpartum depression in the Latina population. Seminars, coursework, and
participation in the Postdoctoral Research Training in Developmental
Psychobiology program at UCHSC will also expand her scope of training
experiences and prepare her to explore maternal behavior health disparities in
the US Mexican population in new and innovative ways.

