* 0805400
* PostDoctoral Research Fellowship
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2009
* Paulette McRae, McRae                   Paulette       A
* Continuing grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 07/31/2009
* USD 0.00

This NSF Minority Postdoctoral Research Fellowship would enable the PI to work
on a project that merges two fields together and ask questions that have not
been posed before. The formation and preservation of appropriate synaptic
connections in the central nervous system are critically dependent on normal
neuronal activity. Given its role in organizing the extracellular space, the
neural extracellular matrix (ECM) is thought to be critical in modulating
synaptic plasticity during development. The perineuronal net (PN), a
subcomponent of the neural ECM, likely mediates the decrease in synaptic
plasticity by enveloping the synapses and providing stabilization. This project
examines the effects of increased neuronal activity on the development and
maturation of the PN. In addition, a potential role for the PN structure in the
observed cognitive decline following increased neuronal excitation is explored
through behavior analysis, immunohistochemstry, biochemistry, and physiology.
This project provides a better understanding of the role the PN plays in
synaptic plasticity and cognitive functioning in the developing brain.

The Fellow's graduate work has provided her with a unique knowledge base about
the extracellular environment in the central nervous system. During her
Postdoctoral training she plans to continue exploring the developing brain and
the extracellular matrix using seizures as a model of increased neuronal
excitation. This project will allow the Fellow to gain new technical skills
including exposure to an animal model of epilepsy, new behavioral techniques,
and tissue slice physiology, all of which are skills that will enhance her
technical abilities and contribute to her progression as a scientist.

With regard to braodening participation, the Fellow is herself an African
American and she expresses the desire to set an example for future generations
by attaining a faculty position and helping to guide other students to consider
the academic profession a viable career option. Members of the academic
community are contributing to the edification of society and it is imperative
that they are able to reach out to all groups of people. This fellowship will
help the Fellow realize her goal of developing into an independent scientist so
that she may be a contributing member of the academic research community.