* 0805056
* Simple Molecular Systems at Ultrahigh Pressures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Ho-kwang Mao, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 07/31/2011
* USD 375,000.00

Technical&lt;br/&gt;A series of experimental studies of simple molecular systems
to pressures above 300 GPa (3 megabars) over a broad range of temperatures will
be carried out in this project. The research takes advantage of numerous
developments in diamond-anvil cell techniques, including advances in analytical
methods that utilize synchrotron x-radiation, optical spectroscopy, and
transport probes. Hydrogen-dominant simple molecular solids, alloys, and
selected elements will be examined to search for metallization and
superconductivity. The crystal structures and electronic structures of newly
discovered high-pressure phases will be determined using synchrotron x-ray
techniques. Newly discovered high-pressure radiation chemistry will be explored.
By improving our understanding of fundamental interactions in condensed matter,
the project will impact areas of the physical sciences as diverse as nanoscience
to the interiors of giant planets. The proposed work will showcase the synergy
between fundamental science and new technologies, including addressing future
energy problems. The project will advance technology necessary for studying
matter under more extreme conditions. The research will seek to enhance
capabilities major national facilities, and will train post-doctoral fellows as
well as high school students, undergraduates, graduate students, and visiting
investigators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical&lt;br/&gt;This project will
explore the nature of matter through experimental studies of simple molecular
substances subjected to pressures to above 3 megabars (3 million times
atmospheric pressure) over a broad range of temperatures from near absolute zero
to many thousands of degrees. The project takes advantage of numerous recent
developments in the ability both to subject materials to these extreme
conditions and to probe samples under those conditions with synchrotron x-rays,
lasers, and new magnetic and electrical methods. Hydrogen-rich molecules will be
transformed into new kinds of metals and superconductors, and the nature of
metallic hydrogen, a predicted entirely new state of matter with exotic
properties, will be explored. The dramatic changes in crystal structure and
chemical bonding expected for materials under extreme conditions will be
determined using a variety of synchrotron x-ray methods. The results impact
materials science, nanoscience, planetary science, and astrophysics. The work
will lead to development of new energetic materials, novel superconductors, gas
storage materials, and superhard materials. The research will enhance
capabilities at major national facilities, and will train high school students,
undergraduates, graduate students, postdoctoral associates, and senior
scientists. Impacts on both science and society broadly are therefore expected.
&lt;br/&gt;