* 0805755
* Problems in Stochastic Processes: Hyperbolic structures, Bayesian nonparametric estimation, and spatial epidemic and interspecies competition models
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Steven Lalley, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2011
* USD 179,991.00

The primary focus of the project will be the study of random processes random
walks and branching random walks, contact processes, Ising model, and
competition processes on hyperbolic groups and graphs. The last four of these
processes exhibit multiple phases, including an intermediate phase of weak
survival that is not seen on integer lattices. A major objective of the research
will be to understand how hyperbolic geometry constrains the upper phase
transition between weak and strong survival, and how this in turn is related to
asymptotic behavior of the Green's functions of random walk. This will involve
development of techniques centered around Ancona inequalities, symbolic dynamics
and infinite-dimensional Perron-Frobenius theory, and the Lyapunov-Schmidt
reduction of infinite systems of algebraic functional equations. Secondary foci
of the project will be (a) mathematical problems arising in Bayesian
nonparametric function estimation, and (b) stochastic models of epidemics and
interspecies competition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stochastic interacting
particle systems are widely used as models in various areas of science,
especially in statistical physics and in population biology, but also in the
social sciences. It is hoped that studying such processes in infinite hyperbolic
geometries will ultimately contribute to understanding their behavior in finite
"expander" and "small-worlds" networks, which may better model interactions in
various social and ecological systems.