* 0805821
* Hydrologic Responses to a Shrinking Arctic Sea Ice Cover
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* John Cassano, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 07/31/2012
* USD 594,932.00

&lt;br/&gt;This effort will test the hypothesis that the loss of arctic sea ice
and northern high latitude snow cover will invoke changes in the seasonality,
spatial distribution and magnitudes of precipitation (P) and net precipitation
(P-E) over the Arctic, which along with attendant changes in temperature, have
ramifications for the freshwater budget of the Arctic Ocean and the mass balance
of the Greenland ice sheet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers expect that:
(a) sea ice loss will lead to an increase in available water vapor over the
Arctic Ocean and peripheral seas, most pronounced in autumn and winter, when
delayed ice formation and thinner ice will promote large vertical fluxes of heat
and moisture into the atmosphere; (b) loss of sea ice and terrestrial snow cover
will invoke changes in arctic circulation patterns and hence patterns of water
vapor convergence, driven in autumn and winter by enhanced vertical heat fluxes
and during the warm season by altered differential heating over the Arctic Ocean
and surrounding land; (c) in lying "downwind" of the Arctic Ocean as well as
adjacent to the (presently) partially ice-covered East Greenland Sea and Baffin
Bay, the Greenland ice sheet will feel these changes both through impacts on
accumulation and surface melt.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The analysis tool will be
Polar WRF, a recently developed regional climate model optimized for polar
applications. Control simulations will be conducted for several arctic domains,
focusing on recent years which are characterized by extremely low September sea
ice extent, with lateral forcing supplied from the NCEP/NCAR reanalysis, and sea
ice conditions prescribed from satellite-based observations. Generated fields of
key hydrologic variables (precipitable water, precipitation, vapor flux
convergence, net precipitation, temperature) and atmospheric circulation will be
contrasted with those from a series of experiments with altered sea ice and snow
cover. These will include simulations with climatological maximum winter ice
extent and concentration through the annual cycle, prescribed reductions in ice
extent and concentration larger than those observed, 100% and 0% terrestrial
snow cover maintained over the annual cycle but with observed sea ice
conditions, and observed sea ice conditions but with increased sea surface
temperature over open water areas in summer.