* 0805576
* NSF Minority Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for FY2008
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Marcelo Ardon-Sayao, Ardon-Sayao             Marcelo
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 06/30/2011
* USD 189,000.00

This action funds an NSF Minority Postdoctoral Fellowship for FY 2008. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan in a host laboratory for the
Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden participation in biology. The
research and training plan for this fellowship to Marcelo Ardon-Sayao is
entitled "Nutrient cycling in coastal wetland ecosystems under an accelerating
hydrologic cycle." The sponsoring scientist is Dr. Emily S. Bernhardt at Duke
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Global climate change is forecasted to impact
society and ecosystems by altering the frequency and intensity of extreme
weather events. Increased intensity and frequency of storms could impair the
ability of coastal wetlands to prevent water quality problems, such as increased
nutrient runoff to coastal ecosystems. The main goal of this research is to
develop empirical relationships describing the effects of increasingly variable
wetland hydrology on nitrogen (N) and phosphorus (P) retention in nutrient rich
coastal plain ecosystems by addressing the following questions: 1) How does
timing and frequency of storms affect the fate and transport of N and P across a
recently restored wetland ecosystem? 2) How does the temporal variability of
rainfall affect transformations of N and P in wetland soils? 3) How do landscape
fluxes of N and P change during rapid experimental reductions of water level?
Research will be conducted primarily within a 400-ha wetland mitigation project
in Tyrell County, NC. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The training goals include learning
new experimental and analytical techniques to examine the effects of altered
hydrology on nutrient transformation in wetlands across different scales and
establishing long-term collaborations with scientists in different disciplines,
government officials, consultants, and land owners to further the application of
research to public policy. Broader impacts include increasing the participation
of under-represented minorities at the postdoctoral level and mentoring
undergraduate students in ecological research, making an effort to involve
underrepresented minority students. This research will aid predictions of the
likely direction of change of nutrient exports as a result of a more
hydrologically variable future for southeastern coastal plain ecosystems.