* 0805022
* FRG: Domain Orientation and Anisotropy in Poled Piezoelectrics
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2013
* John Blendell, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2013
* USD 878,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION Piezoelectric materials are critical for applications
in sensors and actuators that enable medical ultrasound, therapies that promote
bone healing, highly efficient portable power transformers, high performance
diesel engines and many other applications involving conversion between
electrical and mechanical energy. The goal of this research team is to improve
our understanding of piezoelectrics by fully optimizing existing materials and
enabling enhanced potential for industrial development of environmentally
friendly, lead free piezoelectrics. The research project will also be directed
towards developing educational materials on the science and engineering of
piezoelectrics for students from middle school to beginning college. The
educational materials will be used to enhance skill development in math and
science and to foster interest in science and engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: Exploration of crystallographic texture
with domain orientation and anisotropy in poled, lead free piezoelectrics
enables understanding of the interrelationships between texture and
microstructure that can lead to replacement of lead-containing piezoelectrics.
This project will couple domain textures and crystallographic textures in bulk
materials to understand the development of piezoelectric and other anisotropic
properties. Effects of poling field, poling temperature, conductivity and
intrinsic materials properties such as electrical and thermal conductivity,
elasticity and thermal expansion are critical aspects for developing this
understanding. The project consists of development of processing approaches to
produce bulk materials that can be used to fully describe the interplay between
texture and anisotropy in the rapidly evolving classes of lead free
piezoelectric materials. Project investigators are considering nanoscale and
microscale interactions between ferroelastic and ferroelectric domains across
grain boundaries as a function of stress state, temperature and processing
history via scanned surface probe techniques. The experimental aspects are
pivotal to describing the relationship of texture and microstructure to
properties for comparison to incisive microstructure-based numerical simulations
that capture the thermodynamics and physics occurring on the scale of the
domains and grains. Both the experimental and computational aspects of this
project will be carried out in collaboration with colleagues in the automobile
and diesel engine industries and at the Technical University of Darmstadt. This
project is producing a better understanding of poling processes, the limitations
imposed on poling by the underlying ferroelastic and ferroelectric domains and
their interactions with grain boundaries and microstructure. Undergraduate and
graduate student researchers are learning advanced techniques for numerical
simulation of nanoscale and microscale effects on properties, sample preparation
techniques for surface probe analysis and electron microscopy, surface probe
techniques, electron microscopy and x-ray and neutron diffraction
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;