* 0805531
* Homotopy-Theoretic Aspects of the Theory of Motives
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Jack Morava, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2013
* USD 174,561.00

The goal of this proposal is to develop an analog, in the homotopy category, of
the category of mixed Tate motives which have proved to be so important in
recent developments in arithmetic geometry. The central idea is to replace the
algebraic K-theory of the ring of integers in the latter subject with
Waldhausen's K-theory of the sphere spectrum. This would explain the appearance
of zeta-values at odd positive integers in both the theory of motives, and as
values of Igusa's Reidemeister invariants in differential topology.

Certain values of Riemann's zeta function are widely conjectured to be
transcendental. These numbers have recently been shown [through work of Connes,
Kreimer, and Marcolli] to play a central and unexpected role in the theoretical
basis for the renormalization techniques fundamental to perturbative quantum
field theory, but WHY they should be so important is quite mysterious. However,
these same numbers are of fundamental importance in other parts of mathematics,
eg in arithmetic algebraic geometry and in differential topology. Their role in
algebraic geometry has been rationalized by the development of a theory of
`motives', and it seems likely that some version of these ideas can be extended
to differential topology as well. The deep links between topological quantum
field theories and differential topology suggest that this will lead to a new
level of understanding of the geometric foundations of phyics.