* 0805631
* NSF PostDoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/2008,11/30/2010
* Tracy Heath, Heath                   Tracy          A
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 11/30/2010
* USD 123,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2008. The fellowship supports a research and training plan entitled "Complex
models of substitution rate variation and a comparison of Bayesian methods for
estimating species divergence times" for Tracy A. Heath. The host institution
for this research is University of California-Berkeley and University of Kansas,
and the sponsoring scientists are Dr. John Huelsenbeck and Dr. Mark Holder,
respectively. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among the questions explored in evolutionary
biology, understanding the timing and rates of evolutionary processes has been
central. Phylogenetic tree (branching diagrams depicting species relationships)
are essential tools for understanding broad evolutionary patterns and are
frequently used to estimate the timing of speciation events. Accurate estimates
of these species divergence times are vital to understanding historical
biogeography, estimating rates of speciation and extinction, and identifying the
causes of variation in rates of molecular evolution. This research is focusing
on the development of new molecular models for phylogenetic analysis and
divergence time estimation. The research provides a general and flexible
framework for incorporating more biologically realistic patterns of variation in
the rates of molecular evolution into statistical phylogenetic methods by using
a model called the "Dirichlet process prior". New models will be implemented in
freely available, open source software programs using Bayesian inference methods
(powerful methods for estimating the parameters of a statistical model).
Simulated data sets generated under complex molecular models will be used to
conduct a thorough comparison of Bayesian methods for dating species
divergences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Training objectives include
strengthening computational skills and programming ability. Moreover, because
this project integrates molecular evolution, statistics, and computer science,
it will lead to the cultivation of interdisciplinary collaborations with
researchers at all levels.