* 0805975
* Asymptotic Theory of Penalized Splines and Calibration of Computationally Expensive Models
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* David Ruppert, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor J. Szekely
* 06/30/2012
* USD 179,768.00

The investigator studies two areas. The first is the large-sample theory of
penalized splines. The second is Bayesian calibration and uncertainty analysis
for computational expensive models. The theory for univariate penalized splines
is generalized to quadratic and higher degree splines and to higher order
difference penalties. The univariate theory is extended to additive models and
to bivariate regression. Penalized splines methods are developed for
deconvolution with heteroscedastic measurement error. Bayesian calibration and
uncertainty analysis is studied in the cases of spatial-temporal correlations,
measurement error in environmental inputs, and multiple responses.

Splines are mathematical tools for defining curves and surfaces. Splines are
used, for example, to describe the shape of an automobile body in computer-
assisted design. In statistics, splines are used to describe curved
relationships between variables. For example, a recent study of the relationship
between blood-lead concentration and IQ in children used splines and found an
unexpected and important result. The dose-response curve is steepest at low
doses, meaning that, at low doses, IQ declines with increasing lead
concentrations more rapidly than previously realized. This unanticipated finding
implies that, if environmental lead concentrations are reduced, then the
intellectual development of children will be improved by an amount exceeding
what was previously thought. Splines are particularly useful in this type of
study because they can be combined with adjustments for maternal IQ and other
factors and for correlations between multiple IQ measurements on a single
subject. The investigator studies splines to improve the precision of estimation
and to extend the range of applicability. Calibration of complex models is used
in a variety of applications including, for example, petroleum exploration and
management of watersheds. The PI and his colleagues study the Cannonsville
watershed, a source of drinking water for New York City. Calibration of a model
means using data to estimate unknown parameters. Uncertainty analysis measures
the precision of the estimates. Calibration and uncertainty analysis is needed
so that these models can be used for management. For example, the model for the
Cannonsville Reservoir helps NYC manage the watershed to maintain water so that
expensive filtration systems are not needed.