* 0805729
* PostDoctoral Research Fellowship
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2010
* Khaya Clark, Clark                   Khaya          D
* Continuing Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 07/31/2010
* USD 120,000.00

This National Science Foundation Minority Postdoctoral Fellowship will generate
new knowledge about patterns of children?s racial and ethnic attitudes. This
project will develop and standardize an on-line racial and ethnic attitudes
instrument designed for five-to-nine year olds and will assess attitudes toward
Asian, Black, Latino, and White children. To date, there is a paucity of
research that examines children?s attitudes across multiple racial and ethnic
groups, and childhood is when racial and ethnic attitudes develop. The
psychometric properties of existing racial attitude measures for children in
grades K-3 are problematic, which has served to limit the theoretical
understanding of racial and ethnic prejudice across disciplines. The
concentrated focus on attitudes toward Black and White racial groups limits
understanding of attitudes toward other racial and ethnic groups.

The Fellow will perform her research at Emory University, under the sponsorship
of Dr. Tyrone Forman in the Sociology Department. The research environment at
Emory University provides an excellent base from which to achieve the
substantive and methodological training goals proposed by the fellow. Dr.
Forman?s research lies at the interface of the sociology of race and ethnic
relations, children and youth, and social psychology. Specifically, he theorizes
the contemporary racial terrain. In addition, Dr. Forman is conducting research
on intergroup attitudes among and between people of color using new measures of
racial attitudes.

One fundamental limitation of existing racial attitude measures is that all of
them use a two-option, forced-choice response format to measure attitudes.
Respondents are forced to choose just one target (i.e., Black or White child) in
response to simple positive or negative evaluative statements. The binary,
forced-choice formats confound the conceptually distinct phenomena of ingroup
favoritism and outgroup disparagement, which then obscures the locus of
children?s racial prejudice. To remove this confound, the project will use a
multi-item response format. The new response format and multidimensional
modeling techniques will reveal the relationship between ingroup preference and
outgroup derogation. In addition, the instrument will be able to assess other
dimensions of bias, such as generalized or selective racial prejudice. The on-
line attitudes instrument will use Audio Computer Assisted Self-Interviewing
(A-CASI) methodology. A-CASI is cited in the literature as an innovative method
to assess sensitive topics among special populations, such as children, and to
improve data collection procedures. Improved measurement of racial attitudes
will expand the social scientific understanding of racial prejudice across
disciplines (e.g., developmental psychology and social psychology as studied by
sociologists and psychologists).

The training objectives are to enhance the Fellow's statistical and theoretical
approaches to the study racial and ethnic attitude formation. Aside from
contributing to the social scientific understanding of integroup relations among
children, the postdoctoral training will help the Fellow attain a tenure-track
position at a research university. Seminars and coursework in multidimensional
modeling in the departments of psychology, sociology, and education will provide
the fellow an opportunity to enhance her methodological skills. In addition, the
fellow?s research will demonstrate the efficacy of improved racial and ethnic
attitudes measurement. Without clear assessment of the foundation of children?s
racial biases, school curricula, race-targeted interventions, and policies are
likely to be inadequate and ineffective. In the absence of empirical study and
innovative measurement techniques, the persistence of egregious racial and
ethnic disparities is likely at both the interpersonal and structural levels