* 0805834
* Parabolic differential equations and the geometry of manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2008,01/31/2012
* Tobias Colding, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 01/31/2012
* USD 126,999.00

The proposed research concerns several problems in the study of nonlinear
parabolic PDE and their application to the geometry and topology of manifolds.
One general area of concentration will be that of singularity formation in the
Ricci flow, with an emphasis on the study of ancient solutions and Ricci
solitons. A central theme in the theory developed by Hamilton, Perelman, and
others, is that the local geometry of a developing singularity possesses a
relatively rigid structure, modelled, in many important cases, upon these
special types of solutions. It is thus desirable to have as detailed a knowledge
as possible of the diversity of forms which they can
assume.&lt;br/&gt;Additionally, the co-PI proposes to investigate Type-II
singularity development and the question of unique continuation for the Ricci
flow equation. Another general area of concentration will be curvature flows of
hypersurfaces, with an emphasis on the application, interpretation, and further
development of differential Harnack inequalities for these flows. One aim will
be to refine such inequalities in the setting of evolving spacelike
hypersurfaces in Minkowski space, with an eye toward the study of eternal
solutions and translating solitons. In the case of the mean curvature flow, the
latter objects are of interest to researchers in general relativity as natural
foliations of Lorentzian spacetimes. In another direction, the co-PI proposes to
pursue a potential connection from this setting to the cross-curvature flow, an
intrinsic flow of potential use in the study of three-manifolds with negative
curvature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Ricci flow and other geometric evolution
equations considered in this proposal are representatives of the "heat-flow"
method in geometry, the techniques and objectives of which straddle the field's
lively interface with topology, analysis, and mathematical
physics.&lt;br/&gt;This method has proven effective in attacking certain cases
of one of the most fundamental questions in mathematics, namely, which manifolds
admit constant curvature or otherwise canonical geometries? Not only does this
question have ramifications for physical models of the universe, but the
development of tools attendant to the approach promise to pay continued
dividends to the analysis of the many structurally similar nonlinear PDE which
occur as models of diverse phenomena throughout the physical
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;