* 0805647
* NSF PostDoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 11/01/2008,01/31/2012
* Edward O'Brien, O'Brien, Edward P
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 01/31/2012
* USD 189,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2008. The fellowship supports a research and training plan entitled "Dissecting
the solution forces governing protein aggregation and amyloid formation" for
Edward P. O'Brien. The host institution for this research is the University of
Cambridge and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Christopher Dobson.

Protein aggregation and amyloid formation (a type of ordered protein aggregate)
occur in animals, bacteria, and fungi and can be either detrimental or
beneficial to survival depending on when and where they occur. The intracellular
and extracellular environments within these organisms represent a wide range of
conditions (in terms of temperature, pH and osmolytes) that can either promote
or suppress the formation of these aggregates. There is a fundamental gap in the
understanding of the mechanisms by which these solution conditions govern
protein aggregation. This research is modeling and predicting the impact this
wide range of biologically relevant solution conditions have on the
thermodynamics and kinetics of aggregation and, in the process, dissecting and
understanding the roles these various solution factors play.

Training objectives include techniques in computational and theoretical
modeling, fluorescence and electron microscopy, and enhanced sampling. This
research will advance knowledge in general biology, biophysical chemistry,
computation biophysics, bioinformatics, and impact areas of biotechnology
wherein protein aggregation is undesirable.