* 0805847
* 2008 Gordon Conference on Catalysis
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2009
* Stuart Soled, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 05/31/2009
* USD 11,000.00

CBET-0805847&lt;br/&gt;Soled&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests support
for the 2008 Gordon Conference on Catalysis. The conference, which will be held
at Colby-Sawyer College in New London, New Hampshire, on June 22 to June 27,
2008, will bring together leading experts to discuss 1) novel catalytic
materials and approaches, 2) diffusion and transport, 3) metals and active
sites, 4) catalytic fundamentals, 5) biocatalysis and 6) current topics in
catalysis. The GRC on Catalysis is one of the most prestigious catalysis
conferences as it allows leading researchers from around the world to discuss
their latest, most exciting work in catalysis. The format of the conference
encourages discussion of unpublished cutting edge results and extensive formal
and informal communication among the participants. The 2008 conference will
continue this tradition. The conference will cover a variety of themes including
new catalytic materials, theoretical and experimental approaches to improve
understanding of kinetics and transport phenomena, and state of the art
nanoscale characterization probes to monitor active sites. The speakers
represent the leaders from around the world in their areas of
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Catalysis is a key technology for improving the
quality of life while simultaneously reducing the adverse impact of human
activities on the environment and enhancing the economic impact of our
activities. The discovery of new catalytic processes and the improvement of
existing ones are also critically important for securing the nation?s energy
supply. A special effort will be made to support young scientists who otherwise
would be unable to attend: junior faculty members, postdoctoral fellows and
advanced graduate students. Participation by young catalytic researchers will
add significant value to this conference and will foster communications among
current and future leaders in a field that combines academic and industrial
issues. The poster sessions provide an excellent venue for the students to
present their results and traditionally the best 3 or 4 posters are selected for
short oral presentations. The conference promotes interactions among established
researchers and young scientists. It provides a venue for students to meet, talk
to and learn from some of the world leading researchers in the area.