* 0805934
* U.S.-Australia Planning Visit:   Automorphisms of Cauchy-Riemann (CR) Manifolds
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2010
* Roman Dwilewicz, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* R.  Clive Woods
* 09/30/2010
* USD 7,480.00

0805934 Dwilewicz

This award supports a planning visit to enable Professor Roman Dwilewicz at the
University of Missouri in Rolla to meet with Professor Vladimir at the
University of South Australia in Adelaide and Professors Gerd Schmalz and Adam
Harris at the University of New England in Armidale, Australia. The visit will
help develop a detailed international collaborative research and education plan
in the area of automorphisms of Cauchy-Riemann (CR) manifolds. The proposed
activity combines Complex Analysis, Differential Geometry and Algebraic
Geometry, in particular, geometry of real submanifolds in an ambient complex
manifold and the corresponding class of functions that satisfy the tangential CR
equations. The area of research is central to the study of Complex Analysis and
Several Complex Variables. The research will consider the higher codimensional
CR manifolds and their role in the boundary of domains in complex manifolds.

There is sufficient overlap of interests between the University of Missouri at
Rolla and the Australian Universities to indicate that they can successfully
pursue the activities proposed and that the interaction will benefit both sides.
The U.S. will contribute expertise in the area of local and global geometry of
CR manifolds, local and global approximation and extension of CR functions,
tubular manifolds and toric varieties. The Australians are world class experts
in normal forms of CR manifolds, groups of automorphisms of CR manifolds and
related fields. Following the planning visit, Professor Dwilewicz will propose a
research project that will include the participation of U.S. graduate students.
This opportunity will provide them a valuable global research experience. Based
on their research experience, it is anticipated that the students will likely
maintain connections with their Australian colleagues throughout their careers.



