* 0805463
* Microbial Biology Research Starter Grant: Linking Dissolved Organic Matter Composition to Prokaryotic Community Structure
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2010
* Jennifer Edmonds, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 07/31/2010
* USD 47,000.00

Bacterial communities play an essential role in cycling many essential
nutrients, including carbon, in aquatic environments. Because bacterial
communities are so complex, and because carbon sources in freshwater are
diverse, identifying the discrete roles of bacterial species in the
mineralization, export, and storage of carbon in freshwater streams and wetlands
has been impossible using traditional methods. The advent of new genome
sequencing methods has recently made extensive, culture-independent sampling of
microbial community diversity available. In this study, the researcher will use
454 pyrosequencing to characterize bacterial community diversity and to identify
the roles that diverse microbial species play in the cycling of different types
of organic matter. The resulting data will be analyzed to determine if bacteria
specialize on particular types of carbon and to test hypotheses on specific
metabolic functions of participating species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's
study site has been chosen as one of 20 national, NSF-sponsored NEON (National
Ecological Observatory Network) core sites, and the data collected through this
and the PI's future research will provide a critical foundation for future NEON
activities. The PI has targeted a portion of her research funding to support
student participation in her laboratory research; these students will gain
access to the most current techniques in microbial biology.&lt;br/&gt;