* 0805798
* Discovering Sparse Covariance Structures in High Dimensions
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2012
* Elizaveta Levina, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2012
* USD 249,993.00

This project focuses on discovering and exploiting sparse structures in the data
to improve estimation of covariance matrices in high dimensions. The covariance
matrix plays a key role in many data analysis methods, including principal
component analysis, discriminant analysis, inference about the means in
multivariate analysis, and inference about independence and conditional
independence relationships in graphical models. Advances in random matrix theory
have shown that the traditional estimator, the sample covariance, performs
poorly in high dimensions. The existing research on alternative estimators,
including previous work of the PI, focuses mostly on the situation when there is
a notion of distance or ordering for the variable indexes (time series,
longitudinal data, spatial data, spectroscopy, etc). However, there are many
applications where such ordering is not available: for example, genetics,
financial, social and economic data. This project develops several methods for
constructing regularized sparse estimators that are invariant to variable
permutations, both for the covariance matrix and its inverse. The main building
blocks of the methods are thresholding, smooth penalties that encourage
sparsity, permutation-invariant loss functions, adaptive weights, and manifold
projections to discover potential structured re-orderings of the variables.
Analytical results establishing consistency and convergence rates of the
proposed estimators in high dimensions are fully developed. These theoretical
results in high dimensions require tools that are different from standard
asymptotic analysis, and there are few available in the existing literature.
Efficient optimization algorithms needed to compute these estimators are
developed, with the emphasis on the computational cost growing as slowly as
possible with dimension. Some of the estimators proposed carry a very low
computation cost by design, while others require computational ingenuity to be
feasible in really high dimensions. The proposed methodology is tested
extensively, both in simulations and on a number of applications through the
PI's interdisciplinary collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Massive
amounts of data collected in the modern world are creating new challenges for
statisticians. There is an urgent need for new theoretical and practical methods
that deal with high-dimensional data, and a vast number of applications where
high-dimensional covariance matrices need to be estimated as part of data
analysis: finance, genetics, spectroscopy, remote sensing, climate studies,
brain imaging, speech recognition, and many others. The PI has ongoing
collaborations with chemists on Raman spectroscopy of bone, with oceanologists
on using spectral data for remote ocean sensing, with climate scientists on
temperature modeling and with a biostatistician on a new type of gene expression
technology that works at protein level. The PI also works actively in the area
of statistical signal processing by wireless sensor networks, where spatial
covariance estimation is important, and which has many security applications.
The new methodology for estimating high-dimensional covariances developed in
this project is analyzed theoretically and tested and validated in these
applications, and in turn, the directions in which the project develops at later
stages are influenced by the issues and needs of the applications. The project
also contributes to educating graduate students in an important area of modern
statistics.&lt;br/&gt;