* 0805352
* Contact structures, Floer homology and TQFT
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2008,05/31/2012
* Ko Honda, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2012
* USD 369,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0805352&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Ko Honda&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently it has become more evident
that contact structures play&lt;br/&gt;a central role in low-dimensional
topology and Topological&lt;br/&gt;Quantum Field Theories (TQFTs). The cut-and-
paste theory of&lt;br/&gt;contact structures in dimension three, developed by
numerous&lt;br/&gt;authors including the PI, can now be imported into Heegaard
Floer&lt;br/&gt;homology, a (3+1)-dimensional TQFT. The PI, together with
his&lt;br/&gt;collaborators, seeks to better understand the relations
among&lt;br/&gt;contact geometry, Floer homology theories, TQFTs and
string&lt;br/&gt;theory, and hyperbolic geometry. More specifically, the
PI&lt;br/&gt;proposes the following: (1) Analyze the TQFT properties
of&lt;br/&gt;Heegaard/sutured Floer homology. (2) Understand a
certain&lt;br/&gt;category obtained via contact geometry, which satisfies many
of&lt;br/&gt;the properties of a triangulated category. (3) Study
contact&lt;br/&gt;homology invariants of exact Lagrangian cobordisms
between&lt;br/&gt;Legendrian links in the symplectization of a contact
manifold.&lt;br/&gt;(4) Calculate the contact homology of tight contact
structures on&lt;br/&gt;hyperbolic 3-manifolds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI
proposes a study of 3- and 4-dimensional spaces using a&lt;br/&gt;probe called a
contact structure. The 3-dimensional spaces we&lt;br/&gt;study will locally be
similar to the standard (Euclidean)&lt;br/&gt;3-dimensional space. These objects
may be very complicated&lt;br/&gt;globally, but a local observer cannot tell the
difference, just&lt;br/&gt;as an ant cannot tell whether it is sitting on a flat
plane or a&lt;br/&gt;very large sphere. A contact structure is a field
in&lt;br/&gt;3-dimensional space, analogous to an electric field in
physics.&lt;br/&gt;Just as the nature of the electric field, such as the
strength&lt;br/&gt;and the direction at any point, gives some information about
the&lt;br/&gt;distribution of the electric charge, i.e., the source of
the&lt;br/&gt;electric field, a contact structure gives information about
the&lt;br/&gt;shape of the ambient 3-dimensional space. A more
thorough&lt;br/&gt;mathematical understanding of contact structures in
dimension&lt;br/&gt;three may contribute significantly towards our understanding
of&lt;br/&gt;the shape of the universe.&lt;br/&gt;