* 0805552
* Conference: Geometric and Asymptotic Group Theory with Applications, September 15-19, New York, NY
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2009
* Vladimir Shpilrain, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Yongwu  J. Rong
* 07/31/2009
* USD 25,000.00

The conference on "Geometric and Asymptotic Group Theory with Applications" will
be devoted to the study of a variety of topics&lt;br/&gt;in geometric and
combinatorial group theory, with special emphasis on asymptotic and
probabilistic methods and their applications.&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the
topics include: group actions, quasi-isometries, isoperimetric functions,
growth, asymptotic invariants, random&lt;br/&gt;walks, algorithmic problems,
etc. Applications will be emphasized, especially those concerning complexity
theory and information security. Building a solid mathematical foundation for
the use of infinite groups in cryptography will inevitably involve operating
with various asymptotic and statistical aspects of infinite groups, and this is
where modern group theory finds its important
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What makes this conference stand
out compared to other conferences on geometric and/or asymptotic group theory is
the emphasis on&lt;br/&gt;applications to other areas of science and to real-
life problems. More specifically, we are going to emphasize applications
that&lt;br/&gt;concern complexity theory and information security, in particular
cryptography. Cryptography and cryptographic protocols have become&lt;br/&gt;a
key element of information systems, protecting data and communications to ensure
confidentiality, integrity and authenticity&lt;br/&gt;of data. While most
symmetric key systems (block ciphers such as DES and AES and stream ciphers)
have relatively modest mathematical requirements, asymmetric or public key
systems, as well as cryptographic protocols, have become increasingly
mathematically sophisticated, and, in particular, the emerging "non-commutative
cryptography" exploits various properties of non-abelian infinite groups in very
non-trivial ways.