* 0805062
* The Wulff Shape, Interfacial Structure and Coarsening Behavior of Platinum Nanoparticles in Sapphire
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2014
* Ronald Gronsky, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 06/30/2014
* USD 440,101.00

TECHNICAL: This project executes a fundamental, systematic model study of the
factors that impact the morphologic evolution and stability of metal particles
embedded in an inert oxide matrix. Sapphire provides the inert matrix that
surrounds and constrains dispersed metal particles of Pt, a metal chosen for its
chemical compatibility with, and close thermal expansion match to, sapphire.
Parametric control is exerted over particle size, temperature, annealing time,
ambient atmosphere (oxygen partial pressure) and relative crystallographic
orientation between sapphire and Pt to allow assessment of their individual
effects. The equilibrium shape of a stress-free particle minimizes the total
interfacial energy although elastic energy terms can become increasingly
important as particle size increases. Ensembles of particles undergo coarsening
to reduce total interfacial energy, exploiting any and all available diffusion
paths to redistribute chemical constituents. In the nano dimensional domain,
this driving force is especially high, while in larger particles, elastic energy
effects can impede coarsening. To explore a wide range of particle size and
orientation relationships, two complementary synthesis methodologies are
employed. Equiaxed nanoscale particles are developed in Pt-ion-implanted
sapphire by annealing. Larger, non equilibrium shaped Pt particles are developed
by lithographic processing and etching to generate surface cavities that are
filled with Pt by thin-film deposition, then encapsulated by from diffusion
bonding to a second sapphire substrate. The sapphire orientation and
encapsulation cell geometry and crystallography are controlled and varied. The
high melting point of Pt allows experiments in a temperature range where
diffusion within Pt, within Al2O3, and along their interfaces allows shape
changes to occur. Proximity of the particles to the external surfaces allows
assessment of the influence of ambient oxygen pressure. The sapphire
encapsulation cell has the stable alpha-Al2O3 phase, not a metastable transition
phase. Structural and compositional analyses of all samples are conducted with
appropriate methods of transmission electron microscopy, including spatially-
resolved selected area diffraction, convergent beam electron diffraction,
imaging via diffraction contrast and phase contrast methods, and spatially
resolved spectrometry, including electron energy loss spectrometry of local
bonding configurations coupled to energy-filtered imaging. Equilibrium shapes
are characterized, stable facets are identified, and effects of interfacial
structure (faceted versus roughened, coherent versus incoherent) on shape
relaxation rates are assessed. Interfacial structure and elastic energy effects
on particle size distributions and evolution rates are also assessed by in-situ
hot stage (1300°C) transmission electron microscopy studies of nanosized
particle coarsening. NON-TECHNICAL: Novel synthesis and stabilization strategies
are based on understanding the interplay between interfacial structure and
kinetic response, and this study provides a platform for investigating more
complex systems. The project leverages local programs in the Center for Science
and Engineering Education at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory and the
Summer Undergraduate Program in Engineering Research at Berkeley (SUPERB) that
appeal to students historically underrepresented in science and engineering for
reasons of social, cultural, educational, or economic disadvantage, and includes
undergraduates and high school students in research. This effort also enhances
the scholarly activities of students seeking graduate degrees with a Designated
Emphasis in Nanoscale Science & Engineering (NSE) at Berkeley.