* 0805434
* Minority PostDoctoral Research Fellowship
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2008,10/31/2009
* Bianca Acevedo, Yeshiva University
* Continuing Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 10/31/2009
* USD 120,000.00

This National Science Foundation Minority Postdoctoral Fellowship will produce
one of the first human imaging studies of the neural systems underlying pair-
bonding. It will significantly enhance the Fellow?s knowledge of neural
circuitry involved in pair-bonding in humans; research skills; and knowledge of
neuroscience and functional brain imaging. The Fellow, Ms. Bianca Acevedo, will
perform her research at Albert Einstein College of Medicine (AECOM) with Dr.
Lucy L. Brown in the Department of Neuroscience and at New York University (NYU)
with Dr. Elizabeth Phelps in the Department of Psychology. AECOM and NYU are
premier research institutions and offer comprehensive courses, resources for
image analysis, and faculty members with expertise in neural functioning.
Further, AECOM has a Postdoctoral Association, which is an excellent resource
for the postdoctoral community, providing forums and a social network of peers.
Additionally, Dr. Brown has extensive experience in human brain anatomy and
functioning and has published several articles on the neural basis of early-
stage romantic love and rejection in humans. The proposed study will recruit
participants about to enter or just entering a first marriage with an opposite-
sex partner to examine the fMRI BOLD response to images of a partner and
controls before marriage and approximately 12 months later. Objective 1: To
determine how neural reward system responses change over the first year of
marriage. Analyses of imaging data will focus on the ventral striatum/pallidum.
Regions of interest previously identified in studies of animal pair-bonding will
be examined. Objective 2: To investigate the association between neural
circuitry underlying pair-bonding and marital outcomes (quality and stability).
The researchers predict that brain areas associated with pair-bonding in mammals
may show greater degrees of activation for individuals in marriages that remain
stable and strengthen (reporting high levels of satisfaction, affection,
positive regard, and low conflict) over time. Objective 3: To determine whether
changes that occur in neural systems over the transition to marriage are
moderated by individual differences in attachment style. For this, the
researchers propose to examine the BOLD response to images of a partner before
marriage and 12 months after and relate brain activation patterns to individual
differences in attachment style. Attachment styles will be assessed via standard
interview and self-report measures before marriage. The training objectives of
the Fellow?s post-doctoral plan are to enhance her research skills and gain
deeper knowledge of neuroscience and functional brain imaging to become a well-
trained social neuroscientist. Additionally, through this research the Fellow
will gain knowledge regarding the neural circuitry underlying reward, addiction,
and pair-bonding in humans providing a solid foundation for a future research
program. The Fellow proposes to enhance her research training by: (a) increasing
her knowledge of brain anatomy and functioning; fMRI techniques, design, and
analysis?through being actively engaged in research and direct consultation with
the sponsor, Dr. Brown; (b) being immersed and participating in the scientific
community by attending relevant courses, workshops, talks, and conferences; and
(c) enhancing her publication record by working closely with the sponsor on
writing and submitting manuscripts based on their research. These training goals
will help the Fellow achieve her goal, of attaining a faculty position at an
academic research institution in order to contribute to scientific knowledge of
human relationships, their maintenance and evolution, as well as the neural
circuitry underlying these processes.