* 0805533
* Inference for dynamical systems
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2012
* Edward Ionides, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2012
* USD 200,000.00

The starting point of the proposed research is a new algorithm that has recently
been shown to make maximum likelihood estimation feasible for previously
intractable partially-observed nonlinear stochastic dynamical systems. The
algorithm is based on a sequence of filtering operations which converges to a
maximum likelihood parameter estimate, and is therefore termed iterated
filtering. The availability of iterated filtering methodology opens up many
possibilities for developing new classes of stochastic dynamic models for use as
data analysis tools. One component of the proposed research program is
development of a new class of Markov chain models appropriate for biological
systems, consisting of interacting Poisson processes whose rates are subject to
white noise. Another goal is to broaden the class of dynamical systems for which
likelihood based inference is practical, via increased theoretical understanding
of iterated filtering. Specifically, a new theoretical framework for iterated
filtering will be developed, based on identifying a relationship with previously
studied stochastic approximation techniques. Techniques of averaging over
iterations and searching over a sequence of random directions, which have good
theoretical and practical properties for other stochastic approximation methods,
are expected to be applicable to iterated filtering. The third component of the
proposed research is to demonstrate the role of the new methodology in
facilitating a novel and scientifically relevant data analysis of malaria
transmission. &lt;br/&gt;Infectious diseases pose challenging and important
questions which have long been a testing ground for inference methodology for
dynamical systems. Carrying out data analysis via new classes of continuous time
dynamic models will require handling novel situations for diagnosing goodness of
fit, and appropriate techniques will be developed and
demonstrated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nonlinear stochastic dynamical models are
widely used to study systems occurring throughout the sciences and engineering.
Such models are natural to formulate and can be analyzed mathematically and
numerically. Despite decades of work, carrying out statistical inference for
nonlinear dynamical models remains a challenging and important problem.
Recently, progress has been made possible by new methodology taking advantage of
increasing computational resources. Continued progress requires building
theoretical understanding of successfully demonstrated methodology, developing
new methodologies, and showing how these advances can be used to further
scientific knowledge about dynamical systems of interest. Recent motivations for
understanding infectious disease dynamics include the threats posed by emerging
diseases (HIV/AIDS, SARS, pandemic influenza), re-emerging diseases (malaria,
tuberculosis) and bioterrorism. Inference for dynamical systems arises in many
diverse fields, including economics, neuroscience, chemical engineering, signal
processing, and molecular biochemistry. The field of Statistics forms a natural
bridge to make methodological advances available to a wider research
community.&lt;br/&gt;