* 0805716
* Discrete and continuous geometry in group theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Jon McCammond, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2012
* USD 229,672.00

Artin groups are a large class of groups commonly studied by geometric group
theorists. They are related to Coxeter groups, they include and generalize the
braid groups, and they have a natural definition involving complexified
hyperplane complements. Despite these affiliations with well-known objects, very
few Artin groups are currently understood, even at a basic level, and those that
are belong to highly restrictive families defined primarily by the situations
where existing techniques can be applied. The approach described here is
fundamentally new and different. The goal of this proposal is to understand the
natural, continuous geometric objects (recently introduced by the principal
investigator and his collaborators) that have the potential to serve as a
geometric foundation for the study of all Artin groups in a uniform fashion.
These geometric objects, called factor geometries, are of interest in their own
right. There is, for example, a natural continuous group G that has the
orthogonal group as a quotient, contains the braid group as a subgroup, and is
the fundamental group of a finite-dimensional metric simplicial complex whose
universal cover is the contractible factor geometry with a building-like
structure on which G acts. This unusual uncountable group and space, defined via
the collection of minimal factorizations of spherical isometries into
reflections, is a hybrid mix of Lie groups and metric simplicial complexes, and
every Artin group acts on a similarly defined continuous geometric object. The
eventual structure theory should resemble that of Lie groups and early
indications are that these types of complexes carry geometric and combinatorial
structures sufficient to resolve many longstanding conjectures about arbitrary
Artin groups.

Mathematical objects, like many physical objects, can be better understood when
we fully understand the symmetries they possess. The algebraic structure that
records how these symmetries interact is called a ``group'' and the groups under
consideration here are a class of groups generated by ``reflections'' (a
symmetry like the reflected image one sees through a mirror). The main goal of
this project is to deepen our understanding of the relationship between symmetry
groups built from reflections (specifically Coxeter groups) and a second class
of symmetry groups, called Artin groups. The most famous example of an Artin
group is the braid group, the group that keeps track of the distinct ways in
which several strands of string can be braided together. Constructions involving
Coxeter groups, Artin groups and braid groups proliferate throughout
mathematics, including some recent mathematical physics. In many of these cases,
the immediate connections are, strictly speaking, to Artin groups rather than
Coxeter groups, but these connections have not been pursued partly because the
theory of Artin groups is underdeveloped. Once this situation is rectified
within geometric group theory, the next step will be to export the resulting
structure theory to these neighboring domains