* 0805335
* Hydrostatic Pressure Studies of Intermetallic Phosphide, Antimonide, and Germanide Compounds
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* Milton Torikachvili, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 276,452.00

Technical: The application of hydrostatic pressure is a very important
experimental tool in the study of materials displaying complex electronic and
magnetic behavior, because pressure can alter the strength of the electronic
interactions in solids "cleanly", i.e., without the introduction of extrinsic
phenomena. Single-crystals of phosphide, antimonide, and germanide ternary
intermetallic compounds, also containing rare-earth or actinide elements, will
be grown using a flux-growth technique, and studies of electrical, thermal, and
magnetic properties in these materials will be carried out in the temperature
range from 0.4 to 400 K, in magnetic fields up to 18 T, and pressures up to 25
kbar. The rich and complex behaviors probed by these experiments include
superconductivity, long-range magnetic order, Kondo interactions, charge-
density-wave, and the very large thermoelectric power observed sometimes.
Hydrostatic pressure experiments can provide very useful information for
elucidating the underlying physics of these various ground states, and new
behaviors may emerge. This project will create many hands-on research,
educational, and mentoring opportunities for the students of an undergraduate
institution, as well opportunities for outreach visits to local high schools.
Non-technical: The application of hydrostatic pressure is a very important
experimental tool in the study of materials displaying complex electronic and
magnetic behavior, because pressure can bring the atoms in a solid slightly
closer together, therefore affecting the strength of their interaction with each
other, and the surrounding electronic charge. High-quality crystals of materials
containing lanthanide or actinide elements, as well as phosphorus, antimony, or
germanium will be synthesized, and experimental studies will be carried out to
determine their magnetic behavior, their ability to conduct electricity, as well
as their ability to retain and conduct heat. These experiments will be carried
out in extreme conditions of temperature (from about -459 to 260 F), magnetic
field (up to 500 thousand times higher than the earth magnetic field), and
pressure (up to 25 thousand times atmospheric pressure). The rich and complex
behaviors probed by these experiments include superconductivity, magnetic order,
periodic clustering of electrons, and the very large thermoelectric power
observed sometimes. Hydrostatic pressure experiments provide some very important
clues, and they are very helpful for elucidating the underlying physical
principles at play in these novel and exciting materials, and they can also
reveal new behaviors. This project will create many hands-on research,
educational, and mentoring opportunities for the students of an undergraduate
institution, as well opportunities for outreach visits to local high schools.

