* 0805172
* Grain Boundary Induced Stresses in Nanocrystalline Ceramic Coatings and Thin Films
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* Brian Sheldon, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2014
* USD 728,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;Internal stresses are a major factor in the
performance and failure of thin films and coatings that are used for a wide
range of applications, including microelectronic devices, protective coatings
for aerospace and energy systems, microelectromechanical systems (MEMS),
chemical sensors, and fuel cells. Recent research at Brown University has
discovered new methods for controlling these stresses in nanocrystalline
ceramics, where the small grain sizes lead directly to an extremely large number
of interfaces between neighboring crystals (i.e., grain boundaries). Small
changes in the atomic bonding at these grain boundaries can produce large
stresses in nanograined films and coatings (in contrast, the same processes
produce insignificant stresses in conventional large grained materials where
there are far fewer grain boundaries). This research explores new methods of
controlling these stresses in several different, technologically important
materials. Work on nanocrystalline diamond (NCD) includes a substantial
collaboration with scientists at General Motors who are interested in low
friction coatings for dry machining. This project also includes collaborations
with several groups making MEMS devices, where stress management is crucial.
Another focus is oxide ceramics where grain boundary induced stresses are
related to key electrochemical properties. In addition to supporting students at
Brown University, this research employs undergraduates from Trinity College (in
conjunction with co-PI Walden, a Trinity faculty member). Educational efforts at
Brown include an annual program for graduate students which foster research and
mentoring skills and a state-accredited professional development workshop for
K-12 teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS:&lt;br/&gt;Nanocrystalline
films and coatings of various materials are candidates for a wide range of
emerging applications. The ceramics chosen for study in this project include
nanocrystalline diamond (NCD) films which General Motors hopes to employ for dry
machining of Al alloys, and several oxides. Relationships between grain boundary
structure and residual stresses in these films are not well established, and
this research is expected to lead to grain boundary engineering strategies that
will significantly advance the application of these materials. In NCD, the grain
boundary induced stresses are relatively large, and can thus be manipulated to
have a significant impact on the total stress state of the material. Here,
reactions with hydrogen appear to be particularly important, and other chemical
effects are also being investigated. In oxide ceramics, the grain boundary
induced stresses are generally smaller. However, modest changes in the
composition of these films can induce stresses that are related to important
electrochemical phenomena (e.g., ionic and electronic conductivity in solid
oxide fuel cell electrolytes). Thus, precise stress measurements provide
information about grain boundary phenomena, which are directly related to key
electrochemical properties of these materials. These stress studies provide
valuable information that compliments data obtained with other, more established
techniques such as impedance spectroscopy. The students conducting the research
on grain boundary induced stresses in these different materials are being
actively trained in a variety of different experimental and modeling techniques.
The efforts on NCD include film fabrication by plasma chemical vapor deposition,
detailed film characterization with electron microscopy and Raman spectroscopy,
and modeling with both continuum finite element and atomistic methods. The work
on oxides includes film fabrication by metal organic chemical vapor deposition,
sol gel synthesis, electron microscopy, and detailed electrochemical modeling.