* 0805577
* Distributions of patterns and statistics in Markovian sequences
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2013
* Donald Martin, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2013
* USD 150,000.00

In this project the investigator studies the computation of distributions of
patterns and statistics in sequences through auxiliary Markov chains. In the
method, Markovian structure in the original sequence is exploited to associate
an auxiliary Markov chain with the sequence in such a manner that an event of
interest in the original sequence occurs if and only if the auxiliary Markov
chain lies in a class of states that corresponds to the event. Once the
auxiliary chain is set up, probabilities for the event may be computed by
tracking movements through the chain and then extracting the desired
probabilities. The goals of this work are threefold: (1) to compute
distributions of complex patterns that have not been addressed to date; (2) to
apply probabilistic tools that are developed to statistical testing and data
analysis; and (3) to quantify uncertainty in statistics of labeled and segmented
data modeled by probabilistic graphical models. These goals are integrated,
since probabilistic approaches to computing distributions of patterns and
statistics provide the mathematical tools necessary for the statistical
applications of goals (2) and (3), and in turn those applications drive the need
for computing distributions in increasingly complex situations. Whereas
satisfying the first two goals will provide an important contribution to the
literature, the major contribution of the research is represented by goal (3).
The computation of sampling distributions of statistics of hidden state
sequences provides a method of quantifying uncertainty in labeled and segmented
data, an area that has not been adequately addressed. In cases where one is
interested in inference on statistics of labeled data, a typical approach is to
determine the most likely sequence of states given the observations, and then
obtain the value of the statistic of interest from that state sequence. However,
whereas the most likely states are optimal if one is interested in the best set
of labels, it may not be so for inference on statistics of the labels. This work
provides a novel approach to compute the exact sampling distribution of
statistics of labeled data, providing a means for more accurate inference.
Sensitivity of computed distributions to estimated parameters and applications
to change points will also be considered. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The need for
distributional properties associated with patterns and statistics in sequences,
both realizations of data emanating from a model and hidden sequences used to
label and segment observed data, arises in many practical fields of study with
massive data sets, such as bioinformatics, time series, information theory,
economics, data mining, and quality control. In this research computational
tools are developed for computing such distributions. Results for distributions
of patterns and statistics may be applied to many practical problems, such as
detecting genes, promoters, or other functionally significant patterns in DNA
sequences, and determining probabilities related to classification of
observations in health-related studies, change points that indicate new regimes
in economic data, patterns that indicate an intrusion, or of patterns associated
with surveillance work. The theory may be used to compute distributions of
patterns in underlying sequences that are corrupted by noise or missing
observations, and also distributions of statistics that are intractable by
combinatorial or other means. Thus this research facilitates new scientific
studies that rely on results for patterns or statistics that have not been
computed to date. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;