* 0805179
* Polyphosphonates and their Complexes with Metal Oxides and Multi-Functional Cations
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2008,12/31/2011
* Judy Riffle, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 12/31/2011
* USD 369,000.00

DMR 0805179: Polyphosphonates and their Complexes with Metal Oxides and
Multifunctional Cations&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;Molecules
containing phosphonic acid or phosphate groups are well-known to bind strongly
with electropositive substrates including metals and metal oxides and cations.
Thus, research thrusts in this project are aimed toward gaining fundamental
knowledge of 1) synthesis and properties of phosphonate copolymers, and 2)
properties of complexes of those polymers with magnetite nanoparticles and
polycationic antibiotics (aminoglycosides). The characteristics of the
phosphonate/bisphosphonate functional groups could enable the use of many such
materials in physiological media by enhancing stabilities of their complexes.
Our approach will be to investigate the synthesis and properties of
homopolyphosphonic acids and their statistical copolymers with water-soluble
comonomers such as vinylamides and vinyl acetate (post-hydrolyzed to vinyl
alcohol), and to explore controlled radical polymerizations that could lead to
functional oligomers with targeted MWs. Tailored endgroups will be reacted with
functionally-compatible polyether blocks to produce polyphosphonate-nonionic
block copolymers with systematically varied compositions and MWs. This research
will lead to new statistical and block copolymers, as well as modified polyether
oligomers with strongly-adhesive properties. To our knowledge, this is the first
study of polyphosphonates with different architectures. Effects of
phosphonate/bisphosphonate moieties in these random, block and modified-polymer
architectures on complexation with metal oxide nanoparticles (i.e., magnetite)
and polycations such as the aminoglycosides will be elucidated. Structures of
the complexes in aqueous media will be measured and modeled, guided by DLVO
theory and our previous work, to relate polymer MW and composition to the
solution sizes and properties of the complexes. It is also anticipated that the
stability of magnetite complexes with the phosphonate binding groups will enable
assembly of controlled clusters, and this will contribute to an understanding of
how to prepare polymer-metal oxide assemblies in
solution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;There is
overwhelming evidence that phosphonic acid and phosphate groups bind strongly to
a myriad of substrates. Important examples include metals (to impart corrosion
resistance), metal oxide nanoparticles, tooth enamel, hydroxyapetite (bone) and
cationic antibiotics for intracellular drug delivery. Moreover, many potential
drug delivery systems based on polymers complexed with drugs are destroyed in
biological media and the binding characteristics of phosphorus-oxygen bonds may
avoid this problem. Thus, it is hypothesized that polymers containing multiple
phosphonate groups could enable many biomaterial complexes that could be
effective in physiological conditions. This project will investigate the
synthesis and properties of new polymers containing phosphorus-oxygen bonds and
methods for complexing these polymers to magnetic nanoparticles and key
antibiotics. Structure-property relationships of the new macromolecular
materials could lead to intracellular drug carriers for antibiotics, responsive
magnetic complexes for hyperthermia treatments for cancer, improved materials
for magnetic cell and protein separations, new actuator materials, new materials
for treating bone diseases, new dental materials, and materials with
unprecedented biological imaging capabilities. The project is broadly
interdisciplinary, and requires collaboration among chemists, physicists,
engineers and microbiologists. Students will be educated in this multi-
disciplinary environment, and will gain insight into the importance of a teamed
approach. They will outreach to the public through science demonstrations and
middle school programs, and to the industrial workforce by teaching laboratory
sessions in industrial short courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;