* 0805385
* Elucidation of Microbial Response to Temperature Variation and the Diurnal Cycle in the Yellowstone Octopus Hot Spring:  A Proteomic Study
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Laurey Steinke, University of Nebraska Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2012
* USD 449,994.00

Little is known about how microorganisms in nature adapt and change in reaction
to changes in their surroundings. Unlike the isolated bacteria grown in
laboratories, microbes in 'the wild' live in complex communities. These
communities are comprised of diverse species, most of which are still unknown to
science. One fascinating example is the community that exists as laminate mats
of heat-loving organisms in Octopus Spring in Yellowstone National Park. Changes
in light throughout the day affect interactions such as cross-feeding between
microbes in the mats. In addition to changes in light, the hot spring changes in
temperature. The hypothesis driving this work is that the presence of particular
proteins will reflect the activities, distribution, and changes in the
inhabitants of the microbial mat community during changes in light and
temperature. Mass Spectrometry will be used to identify these proteins in
samples from the mat in a new approach known as environmental proteomics. A
labeling method will be used to quantify the amounts of the proteins produced
under different sampling conditions. Genomic and transcriptomic data will be
compared to protein data, all collected under the same conditions.

This methodology is a new approach to identifying the influences of the
environment on a microbial community. There is currently much genomic
information about the different strains of heat-loving microbes, but
characterization of the proteins produced by these organisms is just beginning.
Knowledge of the proteins produced by the microorganisms in a well-characterized
microbial mat will provide a valuable resource to the microbiological community
and will aid in interpreting the microbial fossil record. Proteomic data
collected during the course of this project will be deposited in Yellowstone
National Park databases. This will coordinate findings from this proposal with
the ongoing genomic work in the park. Minority undergraduate students will be
involved in this research through a Summer Undergraduate Research Program. These
summer students will be exposed to both rigorous labwork and scientific
fieldwork in an exciting setting. This attractive setting will also be used to
educate the general public, both through an outreach speaking program and
displays in Yellowstone National Park. Thus this project will both improve the
scientific literacy of the public and provide new methods and information about
adaptation in microbial communities.