* 0805838
* Conference Proposal: Talbot Workshops 2008-2010
* MPS,DMS
* 03/15/2008,02/28/2011
* Haynes Miller, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 02/28/2011
* USD 52,725.00

The Talbot workshop program is a series of yearly workshop retreats bringing
together graduate students, recent PhDs, and faculty mentors for an intense
exploration of a topic of active mathematical research. Past workshops have been
devoted to Topological Modular Forms (mentored by Michael Hopkins),
Automorphisms of Manifolds (mentored by Michael Weiss), Geometric Langlands
(mentored by David Ben-Zvi), and Geometric Models of Elliptic Cohomology
(mentored by Stephan Stolz). Dennis Gaitsgory will mentor the 2008 Talbot
workshop, Affine Lie Algebras and Chiral Structures, which will focus on
geometric approaches to the representation theory of affine Lie algebras and
quantum groups using Beilinson and Drinfeld's theory of chiral algebras. Chiral
algebras are certain structured D-modules on curves that encode the data of the
operator product expansion of a conformal field theory; they provide a flexible
geometric analogue of the theory of vertex algebras for describing the
symmetries of conformal field theories. In recent work of Gaitsgory and Jacob
Lurie, the theory of chiral algebras has been combined with ideas of homotopy
theory and higher category theory to produce important new results in geometric
representation theory. A particular focus of the workshop will be some of this
work, in particular Gaitsgory-Lurie's derived version of the geometric Satake
equivalence and a formulation of geometric Langlands duality for quantum
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Talbot workshops seek to introduce aspiring
mathematicians to active areas of mathematical research, foster community and
collaboration across subdisciplinary and institutional lines, and form
pedagogical and research ties between established mathematicians and young
researchers. The topic for Talbot 2008 concerns the mathematical study of the
symmetries that exist in fundamental physical theories. Understanding the
structure of these symmetries lead to understanding the conservation principles,
such as the conservation of energy, that define physical theories. The study of
symmetries from recent quantum physics have led to new algebraic structures
defining these symmetries. The 2008 workshop will introduce participants to
recent work on these algebraic structures. The workshop will bring together
graduate students and junior faculty with different specialties and from many
universities to spend a week focused on this important subject. The participants
and their mentor, Dennis Gaitsgory, will share a residence as well as lectures,
discussions, and meals. This informal atmosphere, mixing fellowship and
intellectual interest, will promote a concentrated study of the material and lay
the foundation for future collaboration and research.&lt;br/&gt;