* 0805853
* An Experimental Approach to the Prediction of Complete Millimeter/Submillimeter Spectra at Astrophysical Temperatures:  Applications to Confusion Limited Astrophysical Observations
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2013
* Frank De Lucia, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* James Neff
* 06/30/2013
* USD 488,600.00

AWARD NO: AST - 0805853 INSTITUTION: Ohio State University Research Foundation
PI: Frank C De Lucia TITLE: An Experimental Approach to the Prediction of
Complete Millimeter/Submillimeter Spectra at Astrophysical Temperatures:
Applications to Confusion Limited Astrophysical Observations

ABSTRACT

This project will develop and exploit a new approach to laboratory spectroscopy
in the millimeter/submillimeter spectral region. It is expected to provide a
path to a long sought and challenging goal: a significant reduction in the
number of unidentified lines (U-lines) and a reduction in the clutter limit of
millimeter and submillimeter astronomical spectra.

Here, complete, intensity calibrated spectra (obtained over an appropriate range
of well defined temperatures) will be used to produce direct experimental
measurements of all of the line frequencies, transition strengths, and the
energies of the lower states involved in each transition of molecular species of
interest. These are the parameters required by the astrophysical community. Also
of note, this experimental approach will reduce the analysis time required for
molecules with even moderately complex spectra by a large factor.

The spectroscopic science and technology that are the foundations of this
project and its relation to the traditional bootstrap quantum mechanical models
used in line identification will also be developed. As an example of the
symbiosis of the two approaches, the experimental approach provides a complete
and intensity calibrated spectrum at an arbitrary temperature, and the lower
state energy and transition strength of each line. The latter are powerful
pieces of information that are ordinarily not available for use in the
assignment phase of the bootstrap cycle. In turn, the quantum models will
provide intensity calibration to the experimental approach and a means for
establishing error limits.

This work is expected to have a major impact on the field of molecular
astrophysics and its interdisciplinary partners, chemistry and spectroscopy. The
project will therefore be carried out in collaboration with a diverse team of
national and international astronomers, chemists and spectroscopists. Both a
postdoctoral research associate and a graduate student will be trained in
experimental/laboratory millimeter/submillimeter spectroscopy through this
project.

