* 0805175
* Multifrequency Spectroscopy of Rare-Earth and Transition Ions in Optical Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Galina Malovichko, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 07/31/2011
* USD 356,000.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fantastic achievements in
present-day electronics are based on detailed knowledge of the properties of
silicon doped with phosphorus and boron. Similar knowledge of physical
properties of optical materials doped with rare-earth and transition ions is
required for the fast and successful development of optoelectronics devices, for
instance, laser screens suitable for a use by the bright sun light on streets,
highways and airports. This project will be devoted to the investigation of
intentionally doped optical crystals with the help of techniques, which operate
at different frequencies of electromagnetic waves (multifrequency spectroscopy).
It is expected that this research will give a significant contribution to the
fundamental understanding of the nature, properties and interrelation of defects
created by doping, determination of their structures on atomic/nanoscale levels,
and finally, to tailoring properties of optical materials. This is of key
importance for optical communication technologies. Conducting cutting-edge
investigations, students and post-docs will become proficient in state-of-the
art experimental techniques; learn promising materials and their potential
applications. All these will improve their career prospects and efficiency of
their future activity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Doping materials like lithium niobate and
tantalate allows creating various elements for optoelectronics: waveguides,
modulators, lasers, fiber amplifiers, holographic memory etc. Electrical and
magnetic interactions of transition and rare earth ions with surrounding ions
have frequencies from kilohertz up to petahertz. Complementary techniques
including electron paramagnetic resonance, electron nuclear double resonance,
and optical spectrometers will be used in order to characterize these
interactions and to clarify structures of impurity and intrinsic defects on
atomic/nanoscale levels. It is expected that this research will give a
significant contribution to the fundamental understanding of the nature,
properties and interrelation of these defects, and finally, to tailoring
properties of optical materials. Findings of the project will have a potential
impact on various scientific projects, as well as on applications in optical
communication technologies. Conducting cutting-edge investigations, students and
post-docs will become proficient in state-of-the art experimental techniques,
learn promising materials and their modern applications, and consolidate
knowledge obtained in solid state physics courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;