* 0805353
* Photo-Stimulated Nanopattern Formation on Polarity Patterned Ferroelectric Surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Robert Nemanich, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 06/30/2012
* USD 420,386.00

Technical. The goal of this research is to reach greater understanding of photo
excitation of po-larity patterned ferroelectric surfaces and to devise
approaches for nanopattern formation. Prior research established that photo
excitation of a polarity patterned lithium niobate surface while immersed in an
aqueous silver nitrate solution leads to the formation of silver nanowire struc-
tures that form along domain boundaries of up and down polarity domains on
lithium niobate. Since the nanowires form at the polarity boundaries, their
width and thickness appear to not be limited by lithography or the domain
pattern, but by the physics and chemistry of photo-chemical phenomena. Since
precise polarity patterns can be readily configured in ferroelectric materials,
metallic nanostructures can be formed into unique patterns that extend over
hundreds of microns or even millimeters with nanometer scale precision. This
project aims for a comprehensive un-derstanding and a basis for the photo-
excited deposition of precise nanopatterns on polarity pat-terned ferroelectric
surfaces. The research involves experimental approaches for nanoscale char-
acterization of ferroelectric materials, approaches to prepare clean,
passivated, and characterized surfaces with controlled screening, processes for
improved photo-stimulated deposition, and the development of substrates for
surface enhanced Raman scattering (SERS). &lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical. The project
addresses fundamental research issues in a topical area of elec-tronic/photonic
materials science having technological relevance. There is potential that the
re-search could substantially impact the development of electronic devices and
sensors. Graduate and undergraduate students involved with this research will
gain expertise relevant to careers in the electronics field. A new initiative of
the ASU Department of Physics is the development of a Professional Science
Masters in Nanoscience (PSM-Nano). This project contributes to the pro-gram in
two ways: 1) The development of a research project that will pair one or two of
the PSM-Nano candidates with one of the graduate students in this project, and
2) the development of two seminars for the group. The PI has been successful in
involving undergraduates in re-search and in recruiting and mentoring women and
minority students through their graduate de-gree.&lt;br/&gt;