* 0805155
* Shape-Dependent Electronic and Optical Properties in Semiconductor Nanowires
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Cherie Kagan, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2012
* USD 385,750.00

Technical: This project addresses synthesis, processing and characterization of
PbSe nanowires. PbSe nanowires with controlled size and shape (straight, zig-
zag, helical, and branched topologies) will be synthesized via wet chemical
methods and studied electronically and optically to probe size and shape
dependent charge transport and excitonic interactions. Absorption and emission
linewidths and energies will be collected to test effective mass models, probe
wire homogeneity, and measure expected one-dimensional polarizations. Exposing
the nanowires to selected charge transfer dopants will enable n- and p-doping of
the wires and allow the transport of both electrons and holes to be probed.
Using, in combination, temperature-dependent, spatially and temporally resolved
photoconductivity and nanoscale electrical measurements, uniformity in
electronic structure along the lengths of the nanowires and the influence of
correlated, nanoscale roughness on a length scale (~10 nm) smaller than that of
the PbSe Bohr radii for excitons (~46 nm), electrons (~23 nm), and holes (~23
nm) will be investigated. These measurements will be used to characterize in
different topologies, exciton and charge trapping and scattering that impact the
length scale for ballistic transport, the electron and hole carrier mobilities,
and the absorption, emission, and diffusivity of excitons. &lt;br/&gt;Non-
technical: The project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of
electronic/photonic materials science with high technological relevance. The
research activities will help to expand the knowledge base in nanomaterials and
the teaching of low-dimensional materials physics and properties, and provide
important interdisciplinary research opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students. The PI places emphasis on teaching courses that span chemical
and physical concepts important to bridging between Materials, Chemical,
Physical, and Electrical communities where exciting research opportunities
exist. She is developing a new course on semiconductor physics and on the
electronic, optical, magnetic, and biological properties of materials and
devices. Additionally she is actively involved in speaking with students in
forums that encourage them to think about their careers. She also promotes
informal lunch and coffee meetings among departmental and interdisciplinary
women chemist groups at U. Penn and other academic institutions. &lt;br/&gt;