* 0805313
* Bioengineering Single Crystal Growth
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Derk Joester, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* David A. Brant
* 08/31/2011
* USD 360,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0805313 PI: Joester, Derk ORG: Northwestern
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Bioengineering Single Crystal
Growth&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: Despite the highly attractive
properties of biological mineralized tissues and great recent progress in bio-
inspired materials synthesis, many of the hallmarks of biological crystal growth
have yet to be reproduced in vitro: polymorph control, curving and/or branching
single crystals, and nm scale control of organic-inorganic composites. Much
could be gained by developing a biotechnological alternative to bulk materials
synthesis. In this proposal the PI will explore micro-patterned cell culture of
sea urchin embryonic primary mesenchyme cells (PMCs) as a means to guide the
cellular machinery responsible for single crystal synthesis. In this way the
project will take advantage of a fully capable synthetic engine and attempt to
reprogram it. This will then provide the basis for investigating and ultimately
reverse engineering it in vitro. The following specific tasks will be pursued to
explore and develop the range and limits of engineering single crystal shape,
connectivity, and larger composite structures by guided biological deposition:
(1) Develop micro-patterning to control the placement of PMCs on a surface. In
this way, guide the biological deposition of single calcite (CaCO3) crystals. In
particular, establish pattern topography, adhesiveness, chemotaxis induced by
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), and limiting cell numbers and
densities. (2) Explore junction patterns to reproduce the biological tri-radiate
branching or fusion of two individual single crystalline elements. Combine
simple shapes and junctions for increasingly complex crystal shape and
connectivity in 2D and 3D. (3) Further characterize the biological crystal
growth machinery with respect to routes of mineral/protein trafficking,
amorphous precursor phases, and amorphous-to crystalline transitions by a
complementary suite of techniques including live cell imaging, IR and Raman
microscopy, and electron microscopic imaging.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: The proposed research promises
a major advance in harnessing biosynthetic mineralization pathways to create
useful ceramic structures. The project also includes a thorough plan for
integration of research and education. The PI will develop a full quarter
undergraduate course in biomineralization designed to train students in
communications skills, expose them to professional peer review, and assess their
analytical skills. Students will disseminate the knowledge gained through an
online, public access WIKI that will be written, reviewed, and edited by
students. A design competition will be held to develop new cell culture devices
for guided crystal growth and thus draw students into questions actively
researched in the PI?s laboratory and engage their engineering skills in a
trans-disciplinary project. Undergraduate research opportunities in the PI?s lab
will provide highly interdisciplinary cross training in bio-related areas such
as sea urchin husbandry, cell culture, and live cell imaging, and these
activities will complement training in clean room photolithography and materials
characterization by advanced imaging techniques. Outreach to high school
students will be targeted to ethnically diverse neighborhoods of Chicago, Rogers
Park, and Evanston. As all current graduate students in the lab are female, an
especially focused projection of positive female role models will be achieved.
In conjunction with high school science teachers, engineering and biomaterials
class modules, visits on the Northwestern Campus, and a summer internship
program will be
organized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;