* 0805136
* Graphene- and Metal-based Atomically Precise Nanoelectronics
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,05/31/2012
* Douglas Strachan, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 05/31/2012
* USD 487,871.00

Technical: The goal of the project is to develop fabrication methods for
graphene- and metal-based nanostructures with atomically precise edges and
boundaries, and to perform comprehensive variable-temperature magnetotransport
measurements on these samples for comparison with theoretical predictions. Other
goals include the scientific exploration of graphene- and metal-based devices
with all three spatial dimensions smaller than 10 nm, and phenomena derived from
this quantum confinement, including the opening of an orientation- and width-
dependent energy gap, unusual quantum confinement effects due to the massless
graphene charge carriers, and half-metallic behavior of graphene of interest for
spintronic applications. Long-term objectives of the project are 1) precise
control over the fabrication of such samples so that the deleterious effects of
edge defects (vacancies) and the like can be avoided, and 2) a detailed
understanding of their physics so that the full power of their electronic
properties can be harnessed. A second theme of the project is the use of mass
transport processes due to applied currents, magnetic fields, temperature
gradients, and vapor flow to achieve atomically precise nanofabrication. This
detailed investigation of atomic scale mass migration effects will have broad
impact on the understanding of aging and failure of nanoscale devices, as the
two are closely linked. Methods of atomically precise nanofabrication will be
based on Feedback Controlled Electromigration of metal constrictions. This
method may enable creation of metal masks with atomically smooth edges that will
be used to define graphene nanostrips with all three dimensions smaller than 10
nm in size. Metal nanoparticles will be used to catalytically etch graphene into
nanoribbons whose edges run parallel to well defined crystal axes of the carbon
lattice. Graphene point contacts will be formed by direct FCE. Metal nanowires
with integrated contacts and atomically precise sidewalls will be fabricated by
controlling thermal gradients that develop during FCE. Micrometer-long nanowires
with atomically smooth sidewalls will be sought by performing the FCE process
with simultaneous independent control of thermal gradients provided by
integrated heaters. Details of the thermal gradients and their evolution will be
measured with nanoscale spatial resolution and 100 microsec. - 1 ms time
resolution. Non-technical: The project addresses basic research issues in a
topical area of electronic/photonic materials science with high technological
relevance. Research and education are integrated with emphasis in education,
outreach, international collaboration, and impact on related fields in science
and engineering. Training will be provided to graduate students, undergraduates,
and high school students in a dynamic and interdisciplinary research
environment. Outreach and education efforts by the PIs will include a
partnership with the Penn Science Teachers Institute to provide research
experiences for their teacher graduates and to develop short courses to increase
the content knowledge of high school science teachers. Philadelphia's K-12
community will be engaged through participation in the annual NanoDay@PENN,
including technical posters from the group and presentations appropriate for a
general audience. Research infrastructure will be enhanced through an
international partnership with NanoAFNET, the Nanosciences African Network; the
project will host up to three scientists per year with research interests in the
area of nanoelectronics and nanomaterials.