* 0805148
* Chemical Methods to Control Charge Transfer at Nanoscale Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2015
* Galen Stucky, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 06/30/2015
* USD 750,000.00

The aim of this project is to develop methods to control electron/energy
transfer processes at interfaces involving chemically synthesized nanoscale
inorganic materials. This control will be achieved through the solution-based
assembly of multiple inorganic components (metallic, semiconducting, and/or
insulating) with, in some cases, functional organic molecules. For initial
study, three systems of fundamental scientific and commercial importance are
targeted: (1) ionic surface coatings for controlling doping and interfacial
electric fields in nanoparticle assemblies; (2) organic-functionalized
semiconducting nanoparticles to drive spatially controlled photochemical
polymerizations; and (3) nanoparticles with multicomponent nanoscale inorganic
coatings for solar-to-chemical energy conversion. These research efforts will be
student-driven, with continued focus on scientific career training for female
and minority students, and will take place in the scientifically rich, cutting-
edge, multi-disciplinary environment at UC Santa Barbara. The graduate students
working on the project will serve as mentors to undergraduate students, high
school teachers, and high school students through NSF- and DoD-funded outreach
programs and informal collaborations.

%%%

Nanoscale materials with useful electronic and light-absorbing properties, made
using inexpensive and scalable chemical methods, could positively impact
important industries ranging from energy conversion, electronics, and catalysis
to use in chemical sensing, biotechnology and health care. In order to achieve
the societal benefits associated with such a transformation, we are working to
synthetically control, using molecules and inorganic coatings, the way in which
electrons move and interact in this emerging class of materials. These research
efforts will be student-driven, with continued focus on scientific career
training for female and minority students, and will take place in the
scientifically rich, cutting-edge, multi-disciplinary environment at UC Santa
Barbara. The graduate students working on the project will serve as mentors to
undergraduate students, high school teachers, and high school students through
NSF- and DoD-funded outreach programs and informal collaborations.

