* 0805051
* Investigations of Quantum Coherence in Josephson Junctions and Superconducting Circuits
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2013
* Robert McDermott, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2013
* USD 345,000.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT**** Recent years have seen considerable progress in
the development of superconducting circuits that display remarkable quantum
mechanical properties at low temperature. These circuits can be thought of as
"artificial atoms". Like atoms, they can exist in different quantum mechanical
states; unlike real atoms, however, the properties of these artificial atoms can
be adjusted by turning various control knobs. These systems are a fascinating
test bed for the exploration of fundamental concepts in quantum mechanics; in
addition, they might one day be used as bits in a quantum computer. A quantum
computer promises to be vastly more powerful than a conventional classical
computer. Recent work has shown that defects in the materials of the
superconducting circuit cause noise that destroys the quantum state of the
circuit. This individual investigator award supports research to understand the
underlying materials physics that governs disruption of quantum states in
superconducting circuits. Electrical measurements will be combined with
materials characterization tools to correlate quantum behavior with materials
properties. This work will contribute to the development of improved solid-state
quantum technologies, and could open the door to more accurate probes of a broad
range of quantum phenomena at the nanoscale. Undergraduates and graduate
students will be involved in all aspects of this research, and they will receive
invaluable training in a variety of state-of-the-art nanofabrication and
measurement techniques. This project receives support from the Divisions of
Materials Research and Physics.

****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT**** Superconducting quantum circuits based on Josephson
junctions form a fascinating test bed for the exploration of fundamental quantum
mechanics concepts such as entanglement, decoherence, and quantum measurement.
The continued development of superconducting quantum circuits as qubits and as
tools to probe quantum entanglement in condensed matter systems will require new
insights into the fundamental physics that governs energy relaxation and
dephasing. This individual investigator award supports a project to understand
the microscopic origin of microwave loss and low-frequency noise from defect
states in amorphous materials. Microwave transport measurements will be combined
with infrared and tunneling spectroscopy to correlate dielectric loss with
microscopic materials properties. SQUID-based noise measurements will be
combined with measurements of ac spin susceptibility to probe the microscopic
physics of dephasing due to surface magnetic states in superconducting thin
films. These investigations will pave the way to the development of scalable,
tunable qubit architectures. Additionally, these experiments will educate
students in a variety of state-of-the-art nanofabrication and measurement
techniques. The project receives support from the Divisions of Materials
Research and Physics.