* 0805298
* Crystal Templated Polysaccharide Hydrogels
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2008,10/31/2013
* Christine Schmidt, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 10/31/2013
* USD 650,905.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0805298 PI: Schmidt, Christine ORG: University of Texas-
Austin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Crystal Templated Polysaccharide
Hydrogels&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The goal of the proposal is
to engineer biomaterials that can guide the extension of cells in three
dimensions for therapies to enhance regeneration of complex branched tissue
structures such as nerve and vascular networks. Specifically, the PI proposes to
develop and characterize a novel in situ crystallization method to create 3D
oriented porous networks in biopolymer hydrogels using hyaluronic acid (HA) and
alginate polysaccharide hydrogels because they are well-established biomedical
materials that have mechanical properties that mimic soft tissues such as nerve.
It is desired to control the microgeometry and porosity of these gels since
physical guidance is critical for migration of cells during development and
regeneration, particularly for intricate neuron networks. Preliminary work has
discovered a completely unique method, which is also easy and inexpensive, to
pattern biopolymer hydrogels with the inverse shape of crystal networks to
create complex and intricate 3D branched porous structures in hydrogels. Urea is
used to grow a crystalline network within a hydrogel, permitting very intricate
and fine structures to be obtained that cannot be fabricated by any other
method. Crystal growth extends throughout the volume of the hydrogel creating 3D
dendritic patterns. After crystallization, the biopolymer is crosslinked around
the crystals to preserve the pattern. The hydrogel is rinsed with water to
dissolve and remove the crystals. The end product is a biopolymer hydrogel
containing a network of pores resembling the crystal network. The Specific Aims
of this project are: (1) Study the parameters that control patterning in HA and
alginate hydrogels exploring the use of various crystals (i.e., urea, guanidine,
potassium dihydrogen phosphate, glycine) and study the effect of concentration,
viscosity, and surfactants on the resulting pore morphologies. (2) Develop
methods to grow multiple separate and independent porous networks that, for
example, could mimic co-localized networks of branched neurons and capillaries.
(3) Adapt these hydrogels for regenerative medicine applications by developing
methods to perfuse and modify the networked pores with various biomolecules and
proteins to promote cell ingrowth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: In situ
crystallization to create continuous 3D networks of hydrogel pores has not
previously been reported. It represents a quick and inexpensive approach to
create microstructure within biopolymer hydrogels and could have very important
implications in a variety of tissue engineering applications, especially for
regeneration of nerve and vascular tissues. The project provides an excellent
platform for interdisciplinary training of graduate and undergraduate students.
The PI will work one-on-one with all graduate and undergraduate students on the
project. Students will be expected to provide bi-weekly project reports, draft
manuscripts, and make oral presentations at group meetings and at conferences.
The PI and her research group members will all participate actively in K-12
outreach activities, including, in particular, with the University of Texas
Careers in Engineering for Women program and the Minority Introduction to
Engineering program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;