* 0805174
* Atomic Structure and Reactivity of Ferroelectric Surfaces: the Effect of Polarization at the Surface
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Dawn Bonnell, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The family of compounds that exhibit ferroelectric
properties contains exciting materials that are enabling current and future
generation wireless communications, information storage in consumer electronics,
etc. This class of materials is inspiring exciting new strategies for catalysis,
hybrid sensors, and as the basis of novel nanofabrication routes. Recent results
have shown that the reactivity of these surfaces depends upon the orientation
ferroelectric domains. Exploiting this and the future potential of ferroelectric
materials requires that the atomic interactions at ferroelectric surfaces be
understood. This project is using atomic-resolution probes to study molecular
interactions at ferroelectric surfaces. In conjunction with this, a study of on
gender equity in engineering is being undertaken.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DETAILS: This program uses advanced scanning probe microscopy in conjunction
with surface scattering and spectroscopic tools to determine the origin of
surface structures on non-metallic perovskite oxides, specifically
ferroelectrics, and the effect of local polarization on surface behavior. The
interplay of atomic polarization and surface structure/reactivity is becoming
critical in electronic devices such as those enabling wireless communications as
components become smaller. It has recently been shown that ferroelectric domains
exhibit domain specific surface reactivity. This has led to new concepts for
nanofabrication, catalysis, and electronic devices. In order to develop a
fundamental understanding of domain specific behavior, the structures of BaTiO3
(100) surfaces will be determined and the effect of domain orientation on
adsorption will be quantified. In addition to training students on advanced
atomic imaging in the context of important technological materials, a study on
gender equity in engineering is being carried out.&lt;br/&gt;