* 0805462
* NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2010
* Kevin Wood, Wood Kevin B
* Fellowship
* Carter Kimsey
* 07/31/2010
* USD 123,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology for FY 2008. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan entitled "Physical
Underpinnings of Protein-DNA Interactions: The Role of DNA Tension in Modifying
Protein Binding" for Kevin B. Wood who will be hosted by Prof. Sunney Xie at
Harvard University.

Binding interactions between protein molecules and DNA form the basis for much
of molecular biology. A quantitative physical understanding of binding is
crucial for developing a complete picture of many genetic processes, including
DNA transcription and genetic regulation. In this project, a combination of
theoretical and experimental techniques are being employed to characterize the
binding of proteins to DNA, with an eye towards understanding how binding can be
modified by external forces. Specific goals of the project include the
development of general physical models of force-modulated protein binding to
DNA, the testing of these models using a fluorescence-based single molecule
binding assay, and the continued expansion of the still relatively young
statistical approaches for extracting model parameters from single molecule
data. Because external tension can be directly applied to single DNA molecules--
both in theory and practice-- the response of the binding interface to
perturbation can be quantitatively probed, lending insight into the underlying
physics of the protein-DNA complex. The synthesis of rigorous modeling with
statistical data analysis and a novel experimental approach provides a setting
in which model development can be constrained by experimental validation,
meaning that the theoretical and empirical thrusts will mutually reinforce and
guide one another.

In addition to research, the Fellow is taking an active role in mentoring and
training summer undergraduate students and graduate rotation students in the
lab. The research is presented at scientific meetings and also during
interactive seminars at several small undergraduate colleges which lack graduate
level science programs. The theoretical models and methods of data extraction
will be published, with software source code freely and openly available to the
wider science community.