* 0805878
* The Semiclassical Limit and Geometric Quantization
* MPS,DMS
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2014
* Alejandro Uribe, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 03/31/2014
* USD 196,001.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0805878&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Alejandro Uribe&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator
will study aspects of the relationship&lt;br/&gt;between the semiclassical
behavior (i.e. as Planck's constant&lt;br/&gt;tends to zero) of quantum-
mechanical objects with their geometric&lt;br/&gt;counterpart in phase space.
More specifically, problems to be&lt;br/&gt;investigated include: Direct and
inverse spectral problems for&lt;br/&gt;Schrodinger operators in various semi-
classical settings,&lt;br/&gt;rigorous analyses of semiclassical approximations
commonly used&lt;br/&gt;in the physics and quantum chemistry communities (Bohr-
Sommerfeld&lt;br/&gt;conditions, approximate propagators and computation
of&lt;br/&gt;correlation functions), as well as quantum-mechanical
analogies&lt;br/&gt;of constructions in symplectic geometry (like
symplectic&lt;br/&gt;cutting). The settings will be both classical (when the
phase&lt;br/&gt;space is Euclidean) and more geometric (e.g. when the phase
space&lt;br/&gt;is a compact Kahler manifold or the cotangent bundle of
a&lt;br/&gt;configuration space).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The relationship between
mathematics and physics is profoundly&lt;br/&gt;important for both the theory
and applications of these subjects.&lt;br/&gt;In one direction, mathematics is
the language of physics and its&lt;br/&gt;methods can have powerful
applications; in the other, physical&lt;br/&gt;problems often give rise to new
mathematical problems that can be&lt;br/&gt;extremely fruitful. The proposed
research will study problems at&lt;br/&gt;the interface between quantum
mechanics and geometry. The&lt;br/&gt;problems are generally of two kinds:
spectral, meaning related to&lt;br/&gt;the energy of a quantum system, and
dynamical, comparing the&lt;br/&gt;evolution of a quantum system with its
classical counterpart.&lt;br/&gt;The spectral problems seek to understand the
relationship between&lt;br/&gt;the possible energy levels of a quantum system
and the geometry&lt;br/&gt;of the corresponding classical system. The dynamic
problems&lt;br/&gt;should result in a better understanding of the underpinnings
of&lt;br/&gt;some popular computational methods in quantum chemistry.