* 0805877
* Complex Analysis and Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2013
* Daniel Burns, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2013
* USD 157,866.00

Complex Analysis and Geometry&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research proposed deals
with several areas on the interface of complex analysis and algebraic or
symplectic geometry. The main project outlined seeks to develop a Delzant theory
to classify completely integrable systems on compact manifolds with real
algebraic type singularities of their action variables. These are meant to
include the systems arising from spherical varieties (Gelfand-Cetlin examples)
and those from quiver varieties at a minimum. The key tool would be Bohr-
Sommerfeld level sets and their interplay with the geometry of the moment map in
Hamiltonian dynamics. Other topics to be treated include regularity of exterior
Monge-Ampere solutions and their relation to pluripotential theory; asymptotic
geometry at infinity of complex manifolds, and renormalized Chern classes on
them; some cases of the Hodge conjecture related to special Hodge-classes on
higher dimensional complex manifolds derived from K3 surfaces, and the
algebraicization of certain Grauert tubes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Philosophically,
the first project is based on an idea going back to the beginning of quantum
mechanics: the Bohr-Sommerfeld levels of a mechanical system, the set of
configurations of a classical mechanical system which would contribute
significantly to a quantum mechanical understanding of the system, as in, e.g.,
spectral lines of atoms. There was a later dual description of mechanics in
terms of wave functions, and relating the two has been a source of great insight
in physics and mathematics. What we suspect we have found, and are trying to
prove, is that this Bohr-Sommerfeld correspondence underlies certain
classification questions in classical mechanical&lt;br/&gt;systems: how many
integrable systems are there? The Bohr-Sommerfeld levels are related directly to
classical loci on the underlying space of the mechanical system, while the
corresponding wave functions allow one to read off the algebraic geometry of the
system. The main problem proposed is to make this "correspondence" rigorous, to
the point where the systems can be classified by the combinatorial relations
among the Bohr-Sommerfeld loci, and some global algebraic geometric
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;