* 0805793
* Complex Stochastic Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Thomas Kurtz, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2012
* USD 180,001.00

Technical description. Tools for specifying models and understanding the
relationship between different formulations of a model are critical for model
development and analysis. The first part of this project focuses on the
relationship between specifying a model as a solution of a stochastic equation
and the more abstract approach of specifying the model as a solution of a
martingale problem. Each approach has its strengths providing different
intuitive insight and different methods of analysis. Verifying the equivalence
of these two approaches assures the validity of methods drawn from each applied
to the other. Together, the two approaches provide powerful methodology for
insuring that the models are uniquely determined and for deriving computational
techniques and model simplifications. The second part of the project will
develop new methods of representing processes in terms of large aggregations of
?particles.? These particle representations provide powerful tools for analyzing
and approximating the associated models. One goal of the project will be to make
these tools more readily available to the nonexpert by providing more intuitive
approaches to the construction of the representations and clearer identification
of the building blocks used in the construction. The third part of the proposal
considers stochastic control problems with delay. Controlled random systems
arise in essentially every area of application as do systems with delayed
response to control. This part of the project is concerned with extending tools
well understood in systems without delay to systems with delay.

Non-technical description. The study of stochastic processes is concerned with
mathematical descriptions of natural phenomena governed by "random" or "chance"
mechanisms. Mathematical models of such phenomena may attempt to describe
variation in time, in space, or both. The research to be performed is concerned
with developing methods for specifying these mathematical models, approximating
complex models by simpler ones, and constructing models addressing specific
scientific applications. The proposal addresses specific applications in biology
and the theory and methodology to be developed have applications in other areas
such as computer science and finance. The project will also provide a fertile
training ground for graduate students and postdoctoral researchers. In
particular, there is a high demand for well-trained mathematical scientists with
the interest and expertise necessary to contribute to the solution of problems
arising in all areas of biology.