* 0805096
* New Paths in Advanced Solar Hydrogen Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Michael Raftery, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 07/31/2011
* USD 260,000.00

This award by the Solid State Materials Chemistry program in the Division of
Materials Research to Purdue University is to design and develop advanced
photocatalytic materials based on anion-doped semiconductor metal-oxides of
Indium and Tungsten for solar hydrogen production from water. Nanoparticles and
thin films of these doped semiconductor metal-oxides will be synthesized and
characterized by the following three experimental protocols: a) spray pyrolysis
in which molecular precursors are mixed and cured in situ on an electrode
surface, allowing a wide variety of molecular precursors; b) sol-gel process
that will allow in situ analysis by liquid state NMR and UV/Vis to obtain
detailed information on the bonding and coordination of the metal-ion and dopant
species complexes; and c) electrochemical methods. Solid-state characterization
methods including solid-state NMR, ESR, XPS, XRD and UV-Vis will be used to
characterize the chemical and electronic environment of the hosts and dopant
species in the nanoparticle and thin film materials. Evaluation of the doped
metal oxides using photoelectrochemical methods will probe the size of
activation barriers to water splitting, and measure the efficiency of the
materials. The results from these experiments will provide vitally needed
information on the electronic, structural, morphological, and kinetic parameters
important for improving semiconductor nanoparticles for water splitting.

The development of new materials for an efficient solar hydrogen production from
water for energy use could have far-reaching societal impact. The proposal also
seeks to train students ? high school, undergraduate and graduate - in a unique
combination of advanced instruments and characterization methods such as solid
state NMR, ESR, XPS, XRD, UV-vis, and other materials chemistry protocols.
Graduate and undergraduate students involved in this research will gain a broad
education working in this effort to understand important issues in materials and
surface chemistry. Finally, the proposed research will impact the PI?s teaching
efforts in General Chemistry where he is introducing a new thematic approach to
the subject over the course of the semester. Results will also be disseminated
to smaller universities and colleges, and general public.

