* 0805357
* The Synthesis and Characterization of Ultra-Incompressible, Superhard Borides
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Richard Kaner, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 09/30/2012
* USD 725,000.00

This award to University of California-Los Angeles by the Solid State Materials
Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research is to grow single
crystals of Rhenium diboride (ReB2) and to measure the physical properties of
ReB2 as a function of crystallographic orientation. The hardness of ReB2 will
then be enhanced by forming solid solutions and synthesizing dense
nanocrystalline composites. In other studies, rhenium will be replaced
completely with other transition metals such as Titanium while maintaining the
ReB2 structure type. These approaches may enable to construct new ultra-
incompressible, superhard materials using less expensive metals. The search for
new ultra-incompressible, superhard materials holds both scientific and
practical interest. The proposed design plan is to combine high valence electron
density transition metals with small main group elements to replace the weak
metallic bonds with strong covalent bonds. Using this approach, it is possible
to convert relatively soft rhenium metal into an extremely hard Rhenium
diboride, which has many exciting physical properties including low
incompressibility, high hardness, and the ability to scratch diamond. Synthesis
and testing of coatings will be carried out in conjunction with a local company
that specializes in developing ultra-hard coatings. Hardness, fracture toughness
and Young?s modulus will be determined by indentation techniques. Radial
diffraction experiments will also be used to determine the mechanical properties
of these materials. As part of this project, an outreach program be developed
entitled ?It?s a Material World? that is suitable for both undergraduate
students and general audiences. This course will be offered to UCLA
undergraduates each year to enhance their interest in materials chemistry. In
addition, materials developed for this course will be used for interactive
seminars with both high school and middle school students.

The main thrust of the proposal is to synthesize crystals of Rhenium Diboride
and other structurally related borides of transition metals such as Titanium.
Using this approach, it is possible to convert relatively soft metals into
extremely hard materials, which are harder than diamond. The search for new
ultra-incompressible, superhard materials holds both scientific and practical
interest in a number of applications. An outreach program will be developed
entitled ?It?s a Material World? that is suitable for both undergraduate
students at the campus and general audiences. This program offered to non-
science undergraduate students is to enhance their interest in science in
general and materials science in particular. In addition, materials developed
for this course will be used for interactive seminars with both high school and
middle school students.