* 0805950
* AMC-SS: Markovian Embeddings for the Analysis and Computation of Patterns in non-Markovian Random Sequences
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2013
* Manuel Lladser, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2013
* USD 180,000.00

The PI aims to develop new tools for the systematic analysis of patterns in
random sequences with an arbitrary correlation structure. The project considers
theoretical and computational aspects associated with possibly non-regular
patterns in non-Markovian sequences. Previous work by the PI has shown the
existence and uniqueness of optimal Markovian structures to keep track of the
number of matches with a given pattern in a random sequence. At a theoretical
level, the project aims to identify ergodic Markovian structures in embeddings
that result in non-ergodic behavior due to small perturbations, and to use these
ergodic structures to characterize the asymptotic distribution of the number of
matches with a pattern in a non-Markovian sequence. It also compares the entropy
of the optimal Markovian embedding of a non-Markovian sequence with that of the
original sequence. At a computational level, the PI aims to apply generating
function techniques in conjunction with Markovian embeddings to characterize the
joint asymptotic distribution of the number of matches with several patterns.
The PI also aims to quantify the error in approximating the number of matches
with a pattern in a sequence of a moderate size with that of a Binomial
distribution. A secondary goal of the project is to develop a method for the
symbolic specification of branching processes that will represent the solutions
of non-linear o.d.e.'s probabilistically and to explore new connections between
these and the analysis of patterns in non-Markovian
sequences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The analysis of patterns in random sequences
lies at the core of several emerging fields such as computational biology,
security systems, speech recognition and text mining. Random sequences of
characters are used to model diverse phenomena ranging from written text to
genomic sequences to audit files. In these, exceptional patterns, i.e., over- or
under-represented words, may provide a great deal of insight or knowledge. For
instance, a widely used heuristic is that overrepresented patterns in DNA may be
key for gene expression whereas underrepresented patterns may interfere with
this process. As another example, hackers leave traces of their intrusions into
secured databases in audit files and unusual patterns may be used to warn of
potential security breaches. However, one cannot assess how truly exceptional a
pattern is without a bona fide statistical model of the text in which it is
immersed. The prevalent models cannot accommodate the long-range correlations
present in most types of text. For example, the characters occurring in written
text or audit files follow syntax rules and, in RNA sequences, palindromic
structures induced by base-pairing convey genome-wide correlations.
Unfortunately, the available techniques to assess how exceptional a pattern is,
cannot systematically handle the more realistic models. Furthermore, the PI has
recently shown that the widely used paradigm that the number of matches with a
pattern in a long text is approximately Gaussian distributed does not
necessarily apply when long-range correlations are present. Due to these
considerations the PI aims to develop new qualitative and quantitative tools to
address systematically the occurrence of highly complex patterns under more
realistic statistical models of text.&lt;br/&gt;