* 0805625
* NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for FY2008
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Jason Slot, Slot Jason C
* Fellowship
* Carter Kimsey
* 08/31/2010
* USD 123,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2008. The fellowship supports a research and training plan entitled "Dynamics
and ecological significance of the origins, order and inheritance of fungal gene
clusters" for Jason C. Slot. The host institution for this research is
Vanderbilt University, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Antonis Rokas.

The location of genes in a genome may play a role in the gene's overall function
and evolution and the ecology of the organism. For example, in fungi, genes that
work together are often located side-by-side in the genome seemingly to make it
easier to coordinate the genes' functions. This is important because the
functions of these genes relate to how a fungus functions or causes diseases of
plants and animals, including humans. The evolution of such closely linked
genes, called "gene clusters", is not well understood. Sometimes gene clusters
can be transferred from one fungus to another unrelated fungus, which then gains
the ability to cause disease or move to a new ecological niche. This research is
investigating how gene clusters arise and evolve in fungi and how often they are
transferred between unrelated fungi.

The training goals include developing the skills in biological programming and
genome exploration to address such fundamental, yet under-studied, questions of
fungal genome evolution. Broader impacts include new scientific knowledge and
educational activities. The bioinformatics tools being developed will be broadly
applicable to other organisms as their genomes are studied; and the specific
findings of this research will contribute to improved strategies of managing
fungal diseases, especially in forest ecosystems.