* 0806859
* Materials World Network: "New Functionalized Hybrid Systems for Biosensing and drug Delivery"
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Michael Sailor, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* David A. Brant
* 06/30/2011
* USD 399,000.00

The ability of molecules to navigate between membranes is key to many biological
processes. For example, the transport of drugs across cell membranes often
determines their efficacy. The objective of this project is to build artificial
nanostructures to enable the study of the motion and concentration of molecules
across interfaces, and to develop means to trap and release drug molecules
within a nanostructure. The project investigates parameters that allow for the
loading and the slow release of drugs under appropriate physiological
conditions. The work encompasses new methods of trapping molecules into porous
nanostructures, and new methods of monitoring the porous nanostructures using
the optical properties of the materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The European
partners in this effort are Drs. Frederique Cunin, Bernard Coq, and Jean-Marie
Devoisselle of the CNRS Institut Charles Gerhardt, in Montpellier, France. The
Montpellier lab has played a major role in the development and commercialization
of liposome-based drug delivery materials in France, and the previous NSF-funded
collaborative project has expanded the breadth of this effort significantly. The
drug delivery and pharmaceutical characterization expertise of the Montpellier
group combines with the nanomaterials design and optics expertise of the Sailor
research group. The project features exchange of students between the two labs
for durations of 2-4 months each year.&lt;br/&gt;