* 0806762
* Modeling, Analysis, Computation and Experiments of Two-Component Bose-Einstein Condensates
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Ricardo Carretero, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

Carretero&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0806762&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The goal of the project is
to shed light on two-component&lt;br/&gt;Bose-Einstein Condensates (BECs) and
how they differ from their&lt;br/&gt;single-component counterparts. The
investigator and his&lt;br/&gt;colleagues aim to redefine the way in which
modeling and analysis&lt;br/&gt;are developed in such systems by introducing
some fundamental&lt;br/&gt;physical processes that were not included in
presently employed&lt;br/&gt;models. More specifically, the team of researchers
plans to:&lt;br/&gt; (a) develop a new model for two-component BECs, by
augmenting&lt;br/&gt;existing models to account for processes such as inter-
atomic&lt;br/&gt;interaction losses and higher-order magnetic (Zeeman)
effects;&lt;br/&gt; (b) benchmark the model, by testing it in a variety
of&lt;br/&gt;situations where the total number of atoms or ratio of
atoms&lt;br/&gt;changes between the two components and comparing it against
the&lt;br/&gt;newly developed partial differential equation model;&lt;br/&gt;
(c) analyze the model mathematically by means of Galerkin&lt;br/&gt;projections
and Lyapunov-Schmidt reductions to study finite&lt;br/&gt;dimensional
approximations of the dynamics, whereby the existence&lt;br/&gt;and stability of
solutions are studied and control strategies are&lt;br/&gt;employed to stabilize
potentially unstable solution&lt;br/&gt;configurations;&lt;br/&gt; (d) produce a
computational platform that enables the study of&lt;br/&gt;existence, stability
and nonlinear dynamics of multi-component,&lt;br/&gt;high-dimensional variants
of the nonlinear Schrodinger equations&lt;br/&gt;that are the key mathematical
ingredient in the modeling of such&lt;br/&gt;atomic systems. In the process,
spatially/temporally adaptive&lt;br/&gt;and/or parallel integrators are produced
for time-stepping&lt;br/&gt;purposes and iterative methods are developed in
order to analyze&lt;br/&gt;the linear stability problem around steady state
solutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project presents a route to
systematically quantify the&lt;br/&gt;quantum dynamics at the lowest
temperatures that arise in the&lt;br/&gt;Universe, namely in the recently
created new form of matter&lt;br/&gt;represented by Bose-Einstein condensates
(whose formation was&lt;br/&gt;awarded with the 2001 Nobel prize in Physics and
whose&lt;br/&gt;properties, such as superfluidity, were intimately connected
to&lt;br/&gt;the Nobel prize in Physics in 2003). The investigator and
his&lt;br/&gt;colleagues form an interdisciplinary team to directly
monitor&lt;br/&gt;this state of matter in the laboratory, to model the system
at&lt;br/&gt;the physical level, to explore the resulting features at
the&lt;br/&gt;mathematical level, and finally to fully visualize
the&lt;br/&gt;three-dimensional dynamics of such complex systems. A
continuous&lt;br/&gt;feedback between all the above stages is intended to
ascertain&lt;br/&gt;not only a qualitative but also a quantitative understanding
of&lt;br/&gt;such atomic physics systems, such as gases of rubidium,
sodium&lt;br/&gt;and other alkali vapors. The multi-species systems under
study&lt;br/&gt;present a wealth of opportunities for future
applications,&lt;br/&gt;ranging from the controllable formation of ultracold
microscopic&lt;br/&gt;patterns (in a form of "quantum lithography") to the
realization&lt;br/&gt;of quantum gates and switches, that, in turn, aim towards
the&lt;br/&gt;longer term goal of enabling quantum computation. &lt;br/&gt;