* 0806846
* Materials World Network: Studies of Quantum Phase Transitions by MuSR in Ambient and Applied Pressure
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2011
* Yasutomo Uemura, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 07/31/2011
* USD 525,000.00

This Materials-World-Network project aims to support studies of quantum phase
transitions (QPTs) by the muon spin relaxation (MuSR) measurements to be
performed at high-intensity accelerator facilities, such as TRIUMF in Vancouver,
Canada and Paul Scherrer Institut (PSI) in Villigen, Switzerland, by an
international team of researchers. The team includes senior and junior
scientists from Columbia University (USA), McMaster University and TRIUMF
(Canada), PSI (Switzerland), Kyoto and Tohoku Universities (Japan), Brazilian
Center for Research in Physics (CBPF, Brazil) and Centro Atomico Bariloche (CAB,
Argentina). For many decades, studies of phase transitions have been performed
exclusively by varying temperatures (thermal phase transitions). Recent
developments of materials and technologies have opened a new window to
investigate quantum evolutions of phases at low temperatures by varying pressure
or composition as a tuning parameter. Many novel concepts and unexplored
features of QPTs are being revealed in studies of heavy-fermion systems,
frustrated / low-dimensional magnets and exotic superconductors. Taking
advantage of unique capability of MuSR to detect magnetic order of even very
small / random magnetic moments, to estimate volume fraction of magnetically
ordered regions in a situation involving phase separation, and to characterize
dynamic spin fluctuations in a very wide time window complementary to other
techniques, the present project will elucidate magnetic QPT's in frustrated
square-lattice J1-J2 spin systems, doped magnetic semiconductors (Ga,Mn)As and
(Fe,Co)Si, novel ruthenium oxide compounds, quasi one-dimensional spin system
which exhibits Bose Condensation of magnons, as well as UGe2 and other heavy-
fermion systems. Extensive collaboration of leading researchers in materials
development (Kyoto, Tohoku), MuSR measurements (Columbia, McMaster), MuSR
instrumentation (TRIUMF, PSI), Moessbauer effect (CBPF), and heavy-fermion
physics (CAB), at the world's strongest meson facilities (TRIUMF and PSI) with
close involvement of leading theorist team members (Affleck, Maekawa, Millis),
will advance basic understandings of the role of competing states and soft
dynamic modes near quantum phase boundaries. Such progress could contribute to
long-awaited determination of mechanisms for novel superconductors as well as to
development of ideal magnetic semiconductors suitable for application to spin-
sensitive transistors. Involvement of students and postdoctoral researchers from
all participating institutions provides valuable training and international
research experience to young scientists in a challenging area of cutting-edge
research in condensed matter physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses
large accelerator facilities and principles from particle/nuclear physics to
study a variety of materials including novel superconductors to understand
properties related to magnetism and quantum physics not accessible to other
techniques in this research area. An international team of researchers will
conduct the main part of their measurements at TRIUMF, a Canadian accelerator
facility in Vancouver, British Columbia. The research is focused on
understanding novel condensed matter phenomena in a variety of materials systems
including semiconductors and oxide compounds that exhibit interesting magnetic
behavior. Students and junior scientists from the US, Canada, Brazil, Argentina,
Switzerland and Japan work together in this project and gain valuable
international research experience. In addition, web-based courses and seminars
for graduate, undergraduate students are planned to be developed and shared
among all participating institutions using the technology already available at
Columbia University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is jointly funded by the
Division of Materials Research and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in
the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate and by the Office of
International Science and Engineering ?East Asia and pacific
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;