* 0806393
* Observations and Modeling of Ocean - Ice Sheet Interaction in Jakobshavn and Helheim Ice Fjords, Greenland
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* David Holland, New York University
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 08/31/2014
* USD 389,044.00

Over the last decade, satellite observations have shown that the floating ice
tongues in Greenland's fjords have been retreating and that some outlet glaciers
are doubling speed en route to the ocean. The purpose of this project is to
improve the understanding of the role of the ocean in such fast, dynamical
changes at the margin of the Greenland Ice Sheet, and to quantify the potential
for contribution of such change to future global sea level. This will be
achieved by making oceanographic and meteorological observations over a period
of five years at two key fjords: one on the west coast, Jakobshavn, and the
other on the east coast, Helheim. Observations of the hydrography, particularly
water temperature, and bathymetry deep into these fjords are critical elements
in understanding how ocean waters interact with the margin of the Greenland Ice
Sheet. The oceanographic and meteorological observations will be used to develop
and validate a coupled ocean- ice sheet computer model that will enable improved
understanding of processes that contribute to sea level rise. The broader
impacts of the study include the involvement of two graduate students in the
computer modeling and fieldwork. The principal investigator and graduate
students will also give talks in the Greenland settlements where they will be
based, and the PI will continue his collaboration with the Ilullisat Museum near
Jakobshavn Fjord.