* 0806134
* Topics in Computer Experiments
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2012
* Thomas Santner, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2012
* USD 359,979.00

This project will study problems that occur in the design of computer and
physical experiments and the analysis of their output. Physical experiments are
the gold standard for measuring input-output relationships but these
measurements that contain noise and possibly unrecognized sources of bias.
Computer codes that model input-output relationships are used increasingly in
place of, or in conjunction with, physical experiments because of they can
provide decreased lead times in the engineering design of manufactured goods as
well as for the assessment of designs in varying field-use conditions and
varying conditions of fabrication. In general a deeper understanding of product
and process performance can be made by using a combination of computer and
physical experiments. However, computer codes provide a biased measurement of
input-output relationships because of the inevitably inadequate physics or
biology used in their development. This proposal will address the following
problems that arise from the challenges sketched above. 1. To increase the
computational efficiency of screening methodology for identifying the most
important inputs to a computer code. 2. To develop methodology for estimating
the upper (or lower) percentile of a computer code output with respect to the
distributionof the field inputs. 3. To estimate the set of Pareto optimal input
values for multivariate computer output and the corresponding Pareto Frontier of
output vectors corresponding to the Pareto optimal inputs. 4. To develop
statistical methodology for simultaneous determination of calibration parameters
and tuning inputs for computer models, including those with mixed quantitative
and qualitative inputs.

Experimental modeling using computer codes is increasingly prevalent in
engineering, in biomechanics, in the physical sciences, in the life sciences, in
economics, and other areas of natural science such as the assessment of climate
change and cosmology. Over the past twenty years, the use of computer codes as
experimental tools has become increasingly sophisticated due to the fact that
the number of inputs to such codes has steadily increased as well as the level
of detail embodied by the codes. Researchers can now vary both ``engineering''
inputs as well as inputs that describe the operating conditions in the model. In
addition, more detailed mathematical models of the input-output relationship as
well as more accurate numerical solution of these models often produce codes
that require 5-24 hours for a single run. In addition, multiple codes are often
used to describe different aspects of the phenomenon being studied. This project
will study problems that occur in the design of experiments involving such
computer codes including screening the important inputs to such codes to
determine important inputs, the efficient use of code output for optimization
and other problems, and the calibration of corresponding physical experiments to
further improve their prediction accuracy.