* 0806036
* US-Taiwan Workshop on Simulation-Based Engineering and Science (SBE&amp;S) in Enabling Transforming Technology
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2008,12/31/2009
* Wing Liu, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas W. Chapman
* 12/31/2009
* USD 48,000.00

OISE-0806036 (Liu, Wing K, Northwestern University) U.S.-Taiwan Workshop on
Simulation-Based Engineering and Science (SBE&amp;S) in Enabling Transforming
Technology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports a U.S.-Taiwan workshop in Simulation-Based Engineering and Science
(SBES) in Enabling Transforming Technology, with a focus on nano-engineered
biomedicine. Dr. Yonhua Tzeng, Chair Professor of the Institute of
Microelectronics in the Department of Mechanical Engienering, National Cheng-
kung University in Taiwan, will co-organize the workshop, which is scheduled to
take place from February 18-22, 2008 in Tainan, Taiwan. The meeting will address
in an integrated fashion three of the most fundamental engineering challenges in
nanoengineered biomedicine: materials, energy and manufacturing process. U.S.
participation will include 15 researchers and 5 advanced graduate students. The
program includes site visits to academic, government and industrial research
labs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award stems from a May 2006 report of the NSF
Blue Ribbon Panel on Simulation-Based Engineering Science, which among other
conclusions, finds that the U.S. is loosing its leadership in SBES because
competing nations in Asia and Europe have increased their investments in this
area. The workshop in part aims to address this challenge by stimulating new
collaborations with Taiwan, which has targeted nanoengineering and biomedicine
as priority investment areas. The workshop aims in part to establish a common
vision and plan for follow-up collaborative research among participating
scientists. The Directorate for Engineering Division of Civil, Mechanical and
Manufacturing Innovation cofunded this award. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;