* 0806592
* Materials World Network: Nanoscale Structure-Property Relationships in Lead Free Morphotropic Phase Boundary Piezoelectrics
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Jean Toulouse, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2013
* USD 666,997.00

This is a joint project between Virginia Tech and Lehigh University (US team
members) and international partners consisting of the University of Warwick
(UK), the University of Oxford (UK), Novgorod State University (Russia), and the
Shanghai Institute of Ceramics (China). The research addresses the mechanisms
controlling the piezoelectric response in lead free systems by systematically
studying the local domain and crystal structure and their effect on properties.
(Na1/2Bi1/2)TiO3?BaTiO3 (NBT-BT) single crystals of compositions close to
morphotrophic phase boundary (MPB) are used as the representative lead free
system. The nanoscale domain structure and its ferroelectric response are
studied as a function of electric field, pressure and temperature to identify
the phase transformational sequences in the MPB region and to determine the
presence of intermediate bridging phases. Another challenging issue confronted
in this research is formulation of the mechanism of domain engineering in the
lead free materials. Both the local nano-structure and the microstructure of the
lead-free crystals is studied using diffraction and spectroscopic techniques to
delineate the symmetry relations, nature of the dipole moment, long-range
average crystal structure, order/disorder in the atom?s local environment, and
orientation of polarization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These studies enable the
understanding of the structure-property relations on the nano- and macro- length
scales and are used to identify similarities and differences between MPBs in
lead-free and lead-based systems. Wide dissemination of the results obtained is
done through joint publications in peer-reviewed journals, by developing a
website on lead free materials, and by organizing the symposia on lead ? free
piezoelectrics at future annual scientific meetings. A US ? UK, US ? Russia, and
US-China student exchange program is implemented to expose the graduate students
working on the project to an international research environment. A website will
be launched in the second year of this effort posting all the developments,
achievements, publications, and power point presentations. A pilot education
program will be initiated with Montgomery County School (Blacksburg, VA), with
focus on incorporating lead-free piezo-actuators and sensors into their robotics
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the NSF Office of
International Science and Engineering (OISE) and the MPS Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA).&lt;br/&gt;