* 0806668
* Descartes Scholars Program
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2014
* Barbara Christie, Loyola Marymount University
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 07/31/2014
* USD 551,780.00

The Descartes Scholars Program (DSP) is providing twelve students majoring in
Chemistry, Computer Science, Engineering, Mathematics, and Physics four-year
renewable, need-based scholarships. The Scholars come from the greater Los
Angeles area, a region that has a high concentration of underrepresented ethnic
minorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The DSP's retention plan includes direct
classroom interaction with project faculty, workshops, social support services,
academic counseling, and the availability of tutors for technical and writing
courses. Furthermore, Descartes Scholars have the opportunity to participate in
year-round activities such as a study abroad program; undergraduate research and
conferences; and one-on-one internship, career and graduate school advising.
Program activities change yearly to accommodate students' educational progress.
The program's Management Team is tracking, documenting and assessing the
Scholars' educational progress during their entire tenure at LMU.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's objective is to ensure that the twelve
Descartes Scholars earn bachelor's degrees in STEM fields. Upon graduation the
Scholars are expected to be prepared for graduate studies in a technical field
and have some of the skills necessary to allow them to assume leadership roles
later in their careers.