* 0806137
* Construction and Analysis of Nonregular and Supersaturated Designs
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2008,12/31/2011
* Hongquan Xu, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Gabor J. Szekely
* 12/31/2011
* USD 120,000.00

Nonregular and supersaturated designs are commonly used in screening experiments
where the goal is to identify a few dominant factors among a large number of
candidate factors. The objectives of this proposal are to construct efficient
nonregular and supersaturated designs and to develop new methodology for
analyzing data from such experiments. A general method is introduced for
constructing nonregular designs from linear codes over a finite ring. These
nonregular designs have better statistical properties than the existing designs
in the literature in terms of aberration, resolution and projectivity. The
concept of constant weight codes in coding theory is used for studying
supersaturated designs. Linear programming technique is used to establish new
upper bounds on the number of columns in a supersaturated design. New algorithms
are developed for constructing efficient nonregular and supersaturated designs
for practical use. A graphical procedure and an automatic procedure are proposed
for screening active effects for nonregular and supersaturated designs.
Simulation shows that this method performs well compared to existing methods in
the literature and is more efficient at estimating the model size.

Statistical design and analysis of experiments have been widely used in
scientific and industrial research and development. As science and technology
have advanced to a higher level, investigators are becoming more interested in
and capable of studying large-scale systems via computer simulations and high-
performance computing. Two fundamental questions are how to design an efficient
experiment and how to analyze the data properly from the experiment. This
proposed research aims at developing novel methods for constructing optimal
designs and for analyzing such experiments. New efficient nonregular and
supersaturated designs are constructed and will be made available online for
broad and quick dissemination. The results of the proposed research can be
quickly assimilated into graduate courses on design and analysis of experiments.
This proposal employs a combination of mathematical and computational tools and
emphasizes an important interdisciplinary connection between information theory
and design theory. The proposed research will lead to remarkable new advances in
design theory and better practice in data analysis.