* 0806775
* Workshop: Training Issues in Collections-Based Anthropological Research
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Candace Greene, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 06/30/2009
* USD 9,809.00

This award to Dr. Candace S. Greene (Smithsonian Institution) provides support
for a workshop on training students to use anthropological museum collections.
America's extensive museum collections are presently underutilized in
anthropological research. These objects constitute an empirical record of
cultural practices over time, recording behavior in a different way than written
sources. Museum objects carry unique information about the past, whether they
are recent products of societies responding to globalization or ancient
materials from archaeological sites destroyed long ago. However, there is
presently little formal training in the United States in appropriate methods for
use of this body of information. Few universities offer coursework and few
students have access to collections of sufficient depth and breadth to learn
through experience.

The Department of Anthropology of the National Museum of Natural History,
Smithsonian Institution, is developing plans for a graduate summer training
program in research methods for the use of anthropological museum collections.
The program will utilize the Smithsonian's extensive collections to train
students from throughout the nation in collection-based research methods. The
overall objective of the training program is to improve science education and to
promote better use of anthropological collections held in public museums. NSF
funding will advance development of this program by helping to support a
planning workshop that will bring together scholars of diverse backgrounds,
including museum experts, to advise on curriculum design.