* 0806558
* Dwarf Galaxies, Abundance Distributions and the Physics of Galaxy Formation
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Mordecai-Mark Mac Low, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas S. Statler
* 06/30/2012
* USD 382,061.00

Dr. Johnston and her co-investigators will perform a comprehensive set of
simulations to follow the chemical and dynamical evolution of dwarf galaxies,
the most common type of galaxy in our local Universe. The simulations will
include a broad range of relevant physics including the buildup of chemical
elements heavier than helium, which are produced by nuclear reactions in stars
and released to the interstellar gas as the stars end their lives. The team will
first identify where a dwarf galaxy forms within a large-scale cosmological
simulation, and then re-run that patch of the simulation at much higher
resolution with the hydrodynamic code ENZO. This code, largely developed by co-
investigator Bryan, provides a higher-fidelity treatment of interstellar gas
dynamics and mixing than competing methods. The group will include a new and
computationally efficient method to calculate the gas cooling caused by elements
with atomic numbers up to Z=30. At its highest resolution, the ENZO code will
follow gas dynamics on a scale of 3-4 light years, and can include enough
stellar particles to follow all individual stars with at least half the Sun's
mass. Dwarf galaxies are normally found close to more luminous galaxies, which
can affect their formation and evolution; the team will use their simulations to
examine these processes.

A graduate student and a postdoctoral fellow will be trained by their
involvement in the research. Dr. Johnston and her co-investigators will produce
visualizations from this project, to be shown to the public at the American
Museum of Natural History, where Dr. Mac Low is a tenured curator. Dr. Johnston
also chairs the Vice Provost's Taskforce for Diversity in Science and
Engineering at Columbia, and is active in outreach to schoolgirls.