* 0806836
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Coexistence or extinction: The coevolutionary dynamics of mutualists and exploiters
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2010
* Regis Ferriere, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 05/31/2010
* USD 11,829.00

Mutualisms, the exchange of resources or services between species for a mutual
net benefit, play a critical role in the survival and reproduction of many
species. However, the very existence of mutualisms is puzzling, since these
interactions are often exploited by other, non-rewarding species. In this
research project, computer simulations will be used to address the question of
how mutualist and exploiter species can coexist as each species evolves. The
focus will be on analyzing whether mutualists can restrict the costs of
exploitation and even select for less harmful exploiters by increasing the
strength of competition for rewards. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The evolution and
persistence of cooperation, especially between species, is one of the largest
mysteries in biology. This work will advance our understanding of the
persistence of cooperation between species, by investigating its ecological and
evolutionary dynamics and testing an intriguing mechanism that has been proposed
to prevent exploitation from extinguishing cooperation. Furthermore, analysis of
the sensitivity of simulation results to different environmental conditions will
generate predictions about the effects of factors such as environmental change
and species invasion on mutualism persistence. The project provides training at
the interface of biology, mathematics, and computer science for graduate and
undergraduate students, and fosters collaboration between researchers at the
University of Arizona and Duke University. &lt;br/&gt;