* 0806591
* Mathematics of Emissions Markets: Design, Models, Analysis and Simulations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Rene Carmona, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2012
* USD 234,000.00

The research project is motivated by problems in environmental economics
concerning the use of market mechanisms to control green-house gas emissions. It
concentrates on the design and the analysis of cap and trade schemes, and uses
as starting point, the failure of the first phases of the California RECLAIM
program and the European Union ETS to reduce emissions. Some of the technical
issues raised by this research involve new mathematical models in environmental
economics, very general competitive equilibrium problems, large scale stochastic
control problems, and ill-posed inverse problems. They all lead to new
mathematical challenges in optimization, especially in infinite dimensional
spaces, parameter sensitivity analysis and robustness, and stochastic numerics,
including multi-scale asymptotic approximations and Monte Carlo simulations. The
work will contribute to the important role that mathematics has to play in major
policy making decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research that will be carried
out with this award is designed to empower policy makers in designing emissions
markets capable to meet emissions target while at the same time, reducing the
overall social costs as well as the obscene windfall profits energy producers
can make when markets are poorly designed. In the area of economics of global
warming, where most of the models and large scale simulation programs are
deterministic, there is still a strong resistance to the introduction of
probabilistic thinking. Poor regulation and a lack of understanding of the
stochasticity of the risks involved, have contributed to embarrassing public
policy faux pas in previous emissions market designs. By developing new tools
and strategies within the realm of stochastic analysis, and by showing how they
can be brought to bear on the regulation of emissions markets, the results of
this research will help educate the future scientists about what financial
markets can and cannot do, and policy makers and regulators about what
equilibrium models can explain and justify. By focusing on stochastic models
which have traditionally remained off the radar screen of practitioners and
policy makers, it will raise the level of awareness for the power of
probabilistic modeling in a wide range of domains.