* 0806024
* Invariant Measures for Random Growth Processes
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Christopher Hoffman, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2012
* USD 220,000.00

In this proposal we will study first-passage percolation, last-passage
percolation and Richardson's growth model. In contrast to the typical manner of
studying these as subadditive processes we will view them as interacting
particle systems. We will consider several ways of turning first-passage
percolation into a Markov process. These processes are new examples of
interacting particle systems. We will study these processes on many graphs
including Z^d and Delaunay triangulations in R^d. For each of these systems we
propose to classify the invariant measures. We feel that studying first passage
percolation in this manner is not only this is interesting in its own right, it
will also lead to the resolution of conjectures about the original first-passage
percolation and Richardson's growth model. These include showing that the number
of infinite geodesics in first-passage percolation is infinite and that the
boundary of the limiting shape has no sharp corners. For the two type
Richardson's model we feel this method will show that coexistence is impossible
when the two infections have different speeds. We will also study the connection
between last-passage percolation on Z^3 and invariant measures for certain
dynamics (called "totally asymmetric hexagon flipping") on lozenge tilings of
the plane. We will analyze the invariant measures for the totally asymmetric
hexagon flipping process and use the invariant measures to study the limiting
shape of last-passage percolation in Z^3.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal
we study several processes which model the growth of different objects in space
and time. These objects may be different species or populations. In the models
we look at the different objects are expanding and competing for territory. Our
models also assume that two different objects cannot occupy the same area at the
same time. We will study under what rules of growth it is possible that more
than one of the objects survive for an arbitrary large time and conversely under
which rules of growth does one object conquer all of the others. In this
proposal will seek to analyze the processes in the framework of interacting
particle systems which was developed in the 1980s and
1990s.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;