* 0806103
* Random, Stochastic, and Self-similar Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Alexander Teplyaev, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2012
* USD 235,693.00

A wide array of mathematical methods will be used to increase the understanding
of the long and short term behavior of processes occurring in self-similar,
fractal and disordered media. The existence and uniqueness of self-similar
Dirichlet forms, Laplacians and diffusions will be proved on a wide class of
fractals, including infinitely ramified generalized Sierpinski carpets and limit
sets of self-similar groups. Gaussian and non-Gaussian heat kernel estimates and
Green's function estimates will be studied on self-similar and random fractals.
The project will contribute to the ergodic theory of products of not necessarily
independent matrices and their relation to local properties of processes on
fractals. Asymptotic formulas for Lyapunov exponents of differential and
difference equations with small random perturbations, and estimates of the
Lyapunov exponents of stochastic differential equations will be obtained, and
related to the spectral problems for stochastic differential equations. Work
will be done to investigate such questions as functional spaces, partial
differential equations, and various notions of differential geometry and
topology on fractals. The project contributes to better understand the analysis
on Julia sets, limit sets of self-similar groups and finite automata, quantum
graphs, products of matrices and ergodic theory, non-commutative calculus and
geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project contributes to the study of processes
in disordered media (fractals), which have many applications in physics,
chemistry, biological sciences and engineering. Diffusion processes in
percolation clusters, vibrations of fractal objects, signal propagating in
channels with random obstacles, electro-magnetic waves in fractal antennae,
Rossby waves in oceanography, models of financial markets are just a few of many
examples of such processes. The project includes various activities that
integrate research and education. The broader impacts of the project include
contribution to the development of human resources in science and engineering,
expanding participation of underrepresented groups, and enhancing infrastructure
for research and education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;