* 0806076
* Collaborative Research: Fence Methods for Complex Model Selection Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2008,10/31/2011
* Jonnagadda Rao, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 10/31/2011
* USD 44,946.00

Many model search strategies involve trading off model fit with model
&lt;br/&gt;complexity in a penalized goodness of fit measure. Asymptotic
properties &lt;br/&gt;for these types of procedures in some conventional
situations, such as &lt;br/&gt;regression and ARMA time series have been
studied. Yet, such strategies &lt;br/&gt;do not always translate into good
finite sample performance. Furthermore, &lt;br/&gt;such standard model selection
procedures encounter difficulties for &lt;br/&gt;nonconventional model selection
problems as well. This project aims at &lt;br/&gt;developments of a new model
selection strategy, called fence methods, in &lt;br/&gt;following four major
areas of methodology research and applications: (i) &lt;br/&gt;development of
adaptive fence methods for high dimensional and complex &lt;br/&gt;model
selection problems using the idea of restricted maximum likelihood;
&lt;br/&gt;(ii) development of data adaptive fence methods for nonparametric
model &lt;br/&gt;selection problems such as penalized smoothing spline
estimation; (iii) &lt;br/&gt;development of fence methods for quantitative trait
loci (QTL) mapping; &lt;br/&gt;and (iv) development of user-friendly standalone
software for implementing &lt;br/&gt;the fence methods.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fence idea is generally based on building a
statistical fence, or &lt;br/&gt;barrier, to carefully eliminate incorrect
models. This is done by &lt;br/&gt;determining which models are within variation
of a goodness-of-fit &lt;br/&gt;measure of an anchor model. Once the fence is
constructed, the optimal &lt;br/&gt;model is selected from amongst those within
the fence according to &lt;br/&gt;a criterion which can be made flexible. For
example, the criterion can &lt;br/&gt;incorporate scientific or economic
concerns. The adaptive fence method &lt;br/&gt;may be viewed as comparing
signals with noises to come out with an optimal &lt;br/&gt;decision supported by
the data. Given such a wide spectrum of models that &lt;br/&gt;can be handled,
the range of applications seems enormous. Of particular &lt;br/&gt;interests are
applications in human genetics, medical research and surveys. &lt;br/&gt;To
facilitate such translational research, the investigators plan to freely
&lt;br/&gt;disseminate available computer software to implement the fence
methods. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;