* 0806924
* Materials World Network: Static and Dynamic Properties of Curved Multilayer Nanomagnets on Self-Assembled Particles
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Holger Schmidt, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Taleff
* 07/31/2012
* USD 324,000.00

Nanomagnets have a wide range of potential applications, including next
generation high-density magnetic data storage, spintronic devices, and magnetic
biosensing. Essential for all applications is an understanding of the underlying
material properties and the capability to design and optimize these properties
for the purpose at hand. In this collaborative effort between UC Santa Cruz and
the Magnetic Nanostructures group of Manfred Albrecht (Chemnitz University of
Technology, Germany), patterned nanomagnetic materials are fabricated and
characterized to obtain a complete understanding of the material properties of
curved metallic multilayer nanomagnets (?nanocaps?) for use in high-speed, high
density magnetic data storage. Different metallic multilayer compositions are
investigated and compared to more conventional flat nanomagnets. A complete
picture of the dynamic properties of the magnetic nanocaps is obtained using
time-resolved magneto-optical studies of single, isolated magnets and
nanomagnets within an array. This comprehensive comparison results in a
quantitative understanding of the influence of the magnetic environment on the
dynamics of a single nanomagnet.

Broader impact of this research results from the straightforward application of
the results of this project to other growing areas of nanomagnetic research such
as magnetic memory, spintronics, or biosensors. In addition, joint educational
activities between the participating groups take full advantage of the
international nature of the collaboration. These include mutual, extended visits
of students at different levels to the partner laboratory to gain experience in
the complementary expertise of their colleagues. This experience improves the
students? understanding of different cultures, research environments, and
languages, and gives them a competitive edge in this highly international field.