* 0806199
* Functional Models for Complex and High-Dimensional Data
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2011
* Hans-Georg Mueller, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2011
* USD 180,015.00

Innovative methodology for Functional Data Analysis facilitates improved data
analysis for longitudinal studies, e-commerce online bidding, genomic studies,
(bio)demography and many other areas of the social, biological and physical
sciences problems. The proposed functional approaches provide highly flexible
ways to characterize such data, and especially to study their time-dynamic
aspects. The investigator extends the applicability of Functional Data Analysis
to data structures that have not been widely considered within this framework.
This includes point processes, high-dimensional (large p, small n) data and
sparsely observed stochastic processes as they occur in longitudinal and
repeated measurements data. Especially for high-dimensional non-functional and
point process data, Functional Data Analysis approaches have the potential to
lead to transformative rather than merely incremental improvements. The
investigator develops flexible functional and varying-coefficient models for
functional regression and correlation. Current modeling approaches are too
restrictive to be of broad applicability and more general models are needed.
Similarly, the subarea of curve warping has seen much development lately but
there remain many important open questions to be investigated. The investigator
combines theoretical analysis, simulations, and data applications to conduct
this research and applies the methods to data from e-commerce, biodemography,
longitudinal studies and gene expression.

The investigator develops statistical methodology that is immediately useful for
the analysis of large and complex data in genomics, demography and
biodemography. These new analysis tools, which fall into the field of Functional
Data Analysis, are geared towards gaining a better understanding of time-
dependent processes. These include a variety of commonly observed phenomena such
as growth, aging, bidding during an online auction, or repeated observations of
a recurring incident such as an asthma attack. The methods developed by the
investigator elucidate the underlying dynamics of such phenomena. Application of
these methods in particular enables insights into the mechanisms of aging and
longevity, the dynamics of on-line auctions, and other instances of e-commerce.
The investigator extends the scope of these methods further such that for
example improved prediction of specific risks becomes feasible, based on a
recording of a subject's gene expression profile.