* 0806333
* Materials World Network: Infrared Glass and Glass-Ceramics with New Optical and Mechanical Functionalities.
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Pierre Lucas, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 06/30/2011
* USD 378,000.00

An international research team of students and faculty in the Materials Science
Department at the University of Arizona and the Chemistry Department at the
University of Rennes, France, develops high-efficiency luminescent glass-
ceramics by incorporating active rare-earth ions within a very low phonon
nanocrystalline environment. Low phonon environments are known to strongly
reduce electron-phonon coupling which results in high radiative-emission rates
and high fluorescence intensity. Chalcogenide glass-ceramics systems offer the
possibility of tuning the environment of active rare-earth ions by incorporating
them into a range of heavy alkali-halide or metal-halide nanocrystalline
environments. The project builds upon joint expertise in the US and France in
the chemistry and thermodynamics of these systems to synthesize and characterize
nano-composite materials with high-efficiency fluorescent properties. Another
notable advantage of these glass-ceramic is the ability to optimize the optical
properties while retaining the formability of the glassy matrix in order to
produce fibers. Chalcogenide glass-ceramics posses an extensive transparency
over the infrared domain which opens the way for many applications such as
telecom amplifiers and mid-infrared laser sources. The chalcogenide glass matrix
is then selected such as to offer optimal transparency in the range of rare-
earth emission considered for specific applications in the near- and mid-
infrared.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has the potential to induce a leap
forward in infrared photonic technology. High-efficiency luminescent materials
open the possibility to develop miniature laser source for lab-on-chip
applications or amplifiers for fiber-to-the-home telecom delivery. In
particular, with the recent development of OH-free SiO2, the telecom band has
opened up from 1.2 to 1.7 microns and consequently requires a wider range of
rare-earth emission wavelengths than the conventional Er3+. However, most rare-
earth emitters in that critical range such as Pr3+, Tm3+ and Dy3+ are highly
inefficient in oxide glasses. Hence the development of low phonon matrixes for
these ions will permit to widely improve the capacity of information-carrying
telecommunication networks. In addition, this research effort is fully
integrated with an international educational program designed to benefit PhD
students. Graduates students perform course work and research activities
alternately at both universities and obtain a double PhD diploma.&lt;br/&gt;