* 0806874
* SGER:  Benchmarking Urban and Structural Vulnerability in the Aftermath of the 2007 California Wildfires, Using Advanced Technology-based Data Collection
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2008,12/31/2008
* Beverley Adams, ImageCat, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 12/31/2008
* USD 40,203.00

The purpose of this Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) project is to
collect a benchmark post-disaster dataset perishable wildfire damage signatures
and vulnerability factors, in order to support research investigating: (1) the
efficacy of wildfire mitigation strategies; and (2) methods for measuring,
monitoring and evaluating characteristics of post-wildfire recovery. Most
research on wildfires has focused on modeling wildfire in natural settings
rather than the urban environment. Research is urgently needed to better
understand the importance of environmental mitigation factors such as fire
breaks and planned intervention strategies including "shelter in place" for
enhancing the resilience of fire-prone communities. The recent California
wildfires present a unique opportunity to investigate and quantify elements that
influence recovery patterns and resilience. Advanced technologies, internet
resources and responder interviews will be used to develop time-critical post-
disaster datasets, documenting damage characteristics and potential factors
affecting urban and structural vulnerability. These data will be used to
investigate how the performance of urban areas, neighborhoods and individual
structures varies within the wildfire zones, the influence of mitigation factors
on vulnerability of urban areas and structures to wildfire devastation and the
integration of mitigation practices into the recovery process. This research
employs a novel spatially-tiered approach to compile and archive perishable data
characterizing wildfire damage and vulnerability factors, employing a unique
methodology involving underutilized advanced
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technology-driven methods that will be
investigated through this SGER, together with the findings from subsequent
research activities, have immense potential for improving the resilience of
fire-prone communities. Enhancing the knowledge of how the performance of urban
areas, neighborhoods and individual structures varies within wildfire zones and
the factors that affect their long term resilience to wildfire devastation, will
bring many practical societal benefits. Governments, policy makers, and local
organizations can apply findings to examine existing wildfire mitigation
strategies, refine plans for and actions supporting future response efforts,
improve their decisions during events, and plan recovery strategies. Further, by
augmenting existing understanding of wildfire vulnerability, the project will
advance the state-of-the-art in wildfire studies.