* 0806987
* Scholarships and Support Equal Academic Achievement (SSEAA)
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2013
* Junae Bitter, Maricopa County Community College District
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 06/30/2013
* USD 533,607.00

The goal of the Glendale Community College (GCC) Scholarships and Support Equal
Academic Achievement (SSEAA) Project is to promote participation and persistence
among students in computer science, computer technology, engineering,
engineering technology, biological science, physical science, or mathematics
degree programs. To achieve this goal, the project is designed to accomplish the
following objectives: &lt;br/&gt;(a) Recruit and enroll eligible students based
on a recruitment/selection strategy designed to attract students who are most
likely to persist through completion of an associate degree or transfer to a
four-year degree program.&lt;br/&gt;(b) Provide academic support and monitoring
to promote academic achievement. &lt;br/&gt;(c) Provide student support services
including general activities and career development. &lt;br/&gt;(d) Provide at
least 50% of scholarships to underrepresented minorities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The SSEAA project uses the structures
developed by a successful NSF funded CSEMS program. The project includes student
support systems to monitor, intervene, promote and foster academic achievement
and successful completion of a degree and transfer. Individual education plans
provide a foundation for continually assessing student progress, which provides
a support mechanism to help students persist towards achieving their degree.
Assistance in solving problems is being provided by mentors, staff and college
services. A referral process is used to connect students with outside agencies
that provide no-cost services to low-income individuals and their families.
Students interact with peers, faculty members, university faculty and industrial
representatives through the STEM Club and Biotech Club created and staffed by
students. Activities such as Engineering Day, Science Olympiad, and DNA Day are
supported by technology companies such as Honeywell, TGen, and Medtronic. These
same companies provide monthly speakers and field trip opportunities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Implications: Engineering, high-tech, and science
companies in the Phoenix area continue to need highly qualified workers. The
project helps fill this hiring gap and provides students with the opportunity to
obtain high paying jobs. Combined with the fact that 50% of the students are
from underrepresented minorities in the STEM disciplines, this project increases
the number of women and minorities working in STEM careers.