* 0806128
* Statistical Analysis for Models involving Riemannian Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Debashis Paul, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2010
* USD 59,991.00

This application is motivated by real life problems whose modeling and analysis
involve non-Euclidean Riemannian manifolds. In particular, it is motivated by
problems arising from analyzing diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) data and
longitudinal data analysis, with both having important implications in various
scientific fields such as neuroscience. Although, there has been a considerable
amount of theoretical developments for statistical models involving manifolds,
as well as developments of computational tools for special manifolds, there are
still many gaps that need to be bridged both in terms of theory and computation.
For instance, there is a pressing need to develop new and sophisticated
statistical techniques when data lie on a manifold. There is also a scope to
extend available computational tools to complex statistical models. In this
application, the investigators address the issues of computation, estimation as
well statistical inference in a unified manner in the models involving
manifolds. In particular, the investigators 1) develop a framework for non-
parametric smoothing when data lie on a special manifold; and study the
asymptotic properties of the resulting estimators; 2) develop computational
algorithms and softwares for parameter estimation, non-parametric smoothing as
well as model selection; 3) develop a general framework for statistical
inference when the parameter space is a special manifold; 4) apply the
analytical and computational tools to problems in areas including (but not
limited to), cognitive neuroscience, longitudinal studies and psychometry.
Together, this work enhances understanding of the role of geometry in
statistical modeling and analysis for a broad range of problems. It also
contributes to the development of computational tools for various fields as
mentioned above.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this application, the investigators
develop quantitative tools in areas such as cognitive neuroscience, where the
problems have specific geometric structures. They aim to extract important
features of the data by explicitly utilizing these structures. These
investigators address the issues of computation, estimation and prediction for
such problems under a unified statistical modeling framework. This application
is partly motivated by studies in discovering the structure and functionality of
brain tissues through images generated by technologies such as diffusion tensor
imaging (DTI). The fundamental problems associated with the cognitive function
of brains become a rich and extremely important field of study. The implication
of ongoing research in this field is tremendous in terms of understanding and
treating complex brain disorders such as Alzheimer's disease and autism.
Moreover, this application results in developments of open source softwares and
quantitative techniques that can be extended to a broader range of complex
scientific problems, including longitudinal studies and psychometry. Hence, the
understanding of many problems in the field of biology, health and medicine is
also likely to be benefited from this application. This application also has a
broader educational impact through interdisciplinary research between
statisticians and neuroscientists.