* 0806935
* Materials World Network: Local Structure, Function and the Exotic Iroperties of Transition Metal Perovskites
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2014
* Carlo Segre, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 09/30/2014
* USD 360,000.00

This project is designed to develop a long-term international collaborative
research and education effort among research teams at Illinois Institute of
Technology (IIT), Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science (IACS) and
S.N. Bose National Center for Basic Sciences, in Kolkota, India. The research
focuses on investigating the influence of local structure on the physical
properties of complex oxides. This class of materials exhibit many interesting
phenomena, for example, coupled structural transitions and collective electronic
effects such as metal-insulator transitions, phase separation at low
temperatures, and multiferroic behavior. This research collaboration intends to
address the important issue of sample quality, which often leads to
contradictory results; controlling sample quality is important to understand the
manifestly different physical behavior. The specific objectives of the project
include: synthesis and characterization of high quality samples of these complex
oxides in both the US and Indian laboratories; determination of the electronic
properties using photoelectron spectroscopies; measurement of local structure
using x-ray diffraction and absorption spectroscopy with synchrotron radiation
at the Advanced Photon Source at Argonne National Laboratory; and generation of
high impact scientific and technological results along with an understanding of
many-body interactions using theoretical tools. The results of these studies are
expected to resolve several outstanding questions in this field and contribute
to a better understanding of the fundamental properties of these materials,
which are promising candidates for potential applications in data manipulation
and storage. Furthermore, the complementary expertise of the collaborating
research groups provides an ideal opportunity to train graduate students and
junior researchers through extended visits to the collaborating laboratories.
The students and junior researchers who participate in these exchanges will gain
technical expertise and will develop international collaborations, which will
benefit their careers. Training gained by junior Indian researchers at the
Materials Research Collaborative Access Team beamline of the Advanced Photon
Source, will prepare them to take leadership roles in the development and use of
the synchrotron source in India. Inclusion of summer IIT undergraduate student
interns in the project is designed to provide hands-on scientific research
experience in an international setting and expose them to career opportunities
through graduate studies. This award is jointly funded by the Division of
Materials Research in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate and the
Office of International Science and Engineering ?Africa, Near East &amp; South
Asia Program.