* 0806906
* Materials World Network: Multi-Scale Study of Chemical Vapor Infiltrated Carbon/Carbon Composites
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Todd Gross, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2012
* USD 384,000.00

The objective of this research is to enhance fundamental understanding of the
correlation between complex hierarchical microstructure and the mechanical
behavior of carbon/carbon composites. This is done by utilizing a multiscale
model based on microstructural and mechanical characterization at nano to macro
length scales. The model is validated by measuring the mechanical properties on
all length scales. Participating investigators correlate microstructure and the
mechanical properties with chemical vapor infiltration parameters. Stress
concentrations and fracture induced by nanotexture of pyrolytic carbon and by
thermal treatment of the composite are also investigated. The project is
conducted in close collaboration by researchers from the University of New
Hampshire (UNH) and the University of Karlsruhe (UKA), Germany. Material
specimens are produced at UKA under controlled processing conditions. The micro
and nanostructure of these specimens is characterized at UKA and UNH using
various microscopies. Measurements of the micro-constituent mechanical behavior
is performed at UNH using nanoindentation methods. Researchers incorporate this
information in a unified predictive model of the overall mechanical response of
the composite. Finally, macro-mechanical characterization of the material is
conducted at UNH and at UKA using standard testing methods to validate the
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will result in improvements in
manufacturing of carbon/carbon composites that will benefit society mainly
through technological advances in aeronautics and aerospace industries, although
potential impact is also anticipated in emerging areas of applications of the
composites such as biomedical devices, heating elements, and hardware for metal
forming and glass making. The characterization and modeling approaches developed
in this research will also be relevant to a wide class of composite and
heterogeneous materials having complex nanostructures, including high
performance ceramic coatings, nanostructured electromagnetic interference
shielding materials, and composites consisting of carbon fibers coated by
pyrolytic carbon placed in a different ceramic matrix (e.g. SiC). Five graduate
students from the US and Germany and two-to-four undergraduate students from UNH
are educated in a collaborative, international setting. Each of them will impact
their peers and colleagues with their experience.