* 0806295
* Collaborative Research: The Role of Microbial Food Webs in Carbon Fluxes and Shelf-Basin Exchange in the Arctic Ocean
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2008,01/31/2012
* David Kirchman, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 01/31/2012
* USD 266,139.00

&lt;br/&gt;The Shelf-Basin Interaction (SBI) program and other large, multi-
disciplinary projects have recently completed field work to examine carbon
cycling in the Arctic Ocean. These programs included measurements of microbial
standing stocks and production because of the fundamental importance of microbes
in structuring marine food webs and in modulating fluxes of inorganic and
organic carbon in the oceans. It has been hypothesized that heterotrophic
bacteria and the rest of the microbial loop process less primary production in
high latitude oceans than in most oceanic regimes because perennially cold water
inhibits microbial activity. Some of the data from the SBI program indicate that
the flux of carbon through the microbial loop is lower in the western Arctic
than in warmer marine systems, whereas other data indicate organic carbon
degradation exceeds rates of primary production. These observations have major
implications for our understanding of carbon export and exchange between
productive shelf waters and organic carbon-poor basins of the Arctic. However,
several unresolved issues remain about the validity and interpretation of the
data, the generality of the SBI findings, and the impact of microbial processes
on the Arctic carbon system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address these issues, this
effort will examine the following questions:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. What is the
structure of energy flow through the microbial loop in various regions of the
Arctic Ocean?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All data on microbes and related
biogeochemical parameters from SBI and other Arctic studies will be analyzed in
order to compose a pan-Arctic synthesis and to identify possible linkages
between regions of the Arctic Ocean ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. What is
the impact of microbial activity on the carbon system in the western
Arctic?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microbial rates will be compared with rates of net
community production and DOM export as estimated from temporal and spatial
variations in DIC and DOC in the western Arctic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. What is
the role of transport in decoupling the production and degradation of organic
matter in the Arctic Ocean?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An explicit, three dimensional
model of Arctic Ocean circulation and biogeochemistry will be used to evaluate
the role of transport in the spatial and temporal decoupling of production and
respiration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will help maximize use of the
datasets collected by SBI and other programs, of which much has not been
thoroughly analyzed and synthesized. In addition, the data synthesis and
modeling efforts will provide a framework in which to consider how climate
change may affect carbon fluxes and food web dynamics in the Arctic. This
synthesis will be an essential mile post for gauging the trajectory of potential
changes in this important ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;