* 0806343
* Role of histone H3 phosphorylation in transcription and chromatin structure
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2007,08/31/2011
* Victor Corces, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2011
* USD 416,847.00

Covalent modification of histone amino-terminal tails is an important mechanism
used to modulate chromatin structure and regulate transcription. In particular,
acetylation and methylation of Lys residues in the tails of histones H3 and H4
appear to establish a code that serves to recruit other proteins and alter
chromatin structure. The role of histone H3 phosphorylation in Ser10 has been
less studied and the mechanisms by which it alters chromatin structure are not
understood. This modification appears to be a signal for either chromosome
condensation during mitosis or transcription activation during interphase, but
the basis for these apparently divergent roles is not known. Also unknown are
the extent to which this modification is used to regulate gene expression, the
aspects of transcription affected by H3 phosphorylation and the enzymatic or
regulatory activities involved in controlling the levels of Ser10-phosphorylated
H3. Proposed experiments address the question of how H3 phosphorylation is
regulated and what its role is in the control of transcription and chromatin
structure in Drosophila. The level of H3 Ser10 phosphorylation appears to be a
determinant of transcription activity. The amount of phosphorylated H3 should
depend on the activities of protein kinases and protein phosphatases acting on
this histone. Preliminary results point to the JIL-1 kinase and PP2A phosphatase
as two critical enzymes involved in this process. Experiments will attempt to
confirm the involvement of these two enzymes and/or identify additional
phosphatases involved in H3 phosphorylation. The proteins SET and pp32 have been
shown to regulate PP2A activity in vitro, as well as to inhibit H3 acetylation.
Therefore, these two proteins may be part of a switch that controls the
interplay between histone H3 phosphorylation and acetylation. A combination of
genetic and molecular approaches will be used to characterize these two proteins
and study their in vivo function in the control of covalent histone
modification. Finally, a genetic screen for modifiers of the JIL-1 mutant
phenotype will be carried out in order to identify other factors involved in the
control of H3 phosphorylation and chromatin
condensation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will serve as the
educational basis for an instructional program aimed at educating Baltimore
public high school students in biomedical science careers. A series of
educational activities will be carried out with two objectives: increasing the
number of undergraduate students from underprivileged backgrounds at Johns
Hopkins and training and mentoring these students while in high school and at
Hopkins in cutting edge biological research through experiential learning in the
laboratory.