* 0806175
* Monte Carlo Methods for Complex Problems: From Data Augmentation to Likelihood Free Inference
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Yuguo Chen, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2011
* USD 259,888.00

Highly complex stochastic models arise frequently in scientific applications.
They often lead to statistical inference problems with analytically or
computationally intractable likelihood functions. Such problems lie beyond the
limit of current Monte Carlo methods. The goal of this proposal is to develop
efficient Monte Carlo algorithms for statistical inference problems with
intractable likelihoods. Proposed research considers two categories of problems
without likelihoods. In the first category, the likelihood is available in
analytical forms if the problem is put into an appropriate augmented space. For
such problems, a new data augmentation scheme is proposed which leads to a more
efficient Markov chain Monte Carlo algorithm. In the second category, the model
is a "black box" and only a generating stochastic mechanism is available to
simulate data from the model. For such problems, several likelihood-free Monte
Carlo algorithms are proposed which extend the power of current Monte Carlo
methods. The proposed methods are applied to inference problems in population
genetics, panel studies, and hydrological models.

The proposed research addresses the urgent need to develop innovative Monte
Carlo methodology for problems with intractable likelihood functions. This is of
fundamental importance in statistics. It allows researchers to concentrate on
scientifically plausible statistical models without worrying about mathematical
intractability. Applications of the proposed methods include statistical
inference in molecular population genetics which can help locating genes that
are responsible for genetic diseases, and Bayesian calibration of hydrological
models which can be used to predict ground-water flow. The proposed research has
significant impact on education through involvement of graduate and
undergraduate students directly in the proposed research, incorporation of
proposed algorithms into related courses, and dissemination of research results
to the scientific communities.