* 0806022
* Transforming Organizations to Maximize Engineering Student Learning across the Texas A&amp;M University System
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2010
* George Bennett, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Alan Cheville
* 06/30/2010
* USD 150,000.00

The objective of this engineering education research project is to develop
models for acceleration of cross institutional adoption of best practices
resulting from engineering education research efforts. The PIs propose to
develop and analyze qualitative evidence on the effectiveness of three
innovative organizational change strategies. Strategic opportunities for
improvement would be identified at the eight participating institutions,
exceptional practices and programs at each institution would be identified for
propagation to the other institutions, and the application of Positive
Organizational Scholarship to educational systems would be used as the model for
research-to-practice transfer. Positive Organizational Scholarship from the
organizational behavior research literature has been applied to the for-profit
sector, and this research will be one of a few novel applications to the complex
organizational structures of educational institutions. The PIs will create a
plan for implementation of cross-institutional efforts to improve educational
outcomes such as learning and retention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Increasing the number and diversity of engineering
graduates is a national goal. Successful results of the proposed research would
accelerate the propagation of advances in engineering education research to
other institutions and would improve the quality and productivity of engineering
education on a national scale. Technical publications, which effectively
disseminate engineering and scientific research results, have been less
successful in the timely dissemination of engineering education research
innovations. This proposed research would investigate institutional impediments
to adoption of proven engineering education research successes and discover new
models of propagation of best practices. This would increase the impact of
funded research in engineering education on improving the diversity, and quality
of the engineering workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;