* 0806858
* SBIR Phase I:  AuthorIT: Authoring Adaptive and Configurable Tutoring Systems (A-ACTS)
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2008,12/31/2008
* Joseph Scandura, Intelligent Micro Systems, Ltd.
* Standard Grant
* Ian M. Bennett
* 12/31/2008
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I research project proposes
a fundamentally new approach to knowledge representation and building highly
Adaptive and Configurable Tutoring Systems (ACTS) based thereon. This authoring
system, automates steps in knowledge representation, and eliminates the need to
program pedagogical strategies and otherwise simplifies the process of building
ACTS. An companion application automatically delivers learning as prescribed.
This Phase I research aims to demonstrate the feasibility of: 1) using the
technique to develop commercially-viable ACTS for well-defined STEM content; and
2) to extend the technique to support ACTS that will enable learners to solve
novel problems that they have not been taught how to solve; and 3) to deliver
such content over the web. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Full realization of this
innovation will increase the impact of ACTS in STEM education by increasing
learning efficiency, reducing development costs, improving quality control and
yielding systems that can easily be configured to meet specific educational
needs. If successful, this project will result in ACTS having direct application
in schools as well as open new opportunities in the commercial world. The
application will cut development cost in half, making it commercially feasible
to develop even specialized and highly efficient ACTS, while maintaining quality
control, and has the potential of radically improving the way adaptive tutorial
systems are built as well as the effectiveness of those systems.