* 0806437
* The OASIS-2009 Field Mission: Studies of Photochemistry and Trace Gas Exchange in the Arctic in the Context of a Changing Climate
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Alex Guenther, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2011
* USD 649,725.00

The OASIS (Ocean/Atmosphere/Sea Ice/Snowpack) program aims to determine the
importance of chemical, physical and biological exchange processes on
tropospheric chemistry, the cryosphere, and the marine environment, and their
feedback mechanisms in the context of a changing climate. As part of OASIS 2009,
an integrated suite of instruments will be deployed at Barrow, Alaska, that will
allow for the most comprehensive study to date of exchange processes and their
impact on the overlying atmosphere. The deployment will consist of measurements
of key chemical species active in the Arctic boundary layer photochemistry,
including HOx, NOx/NOy, O3, halocarbons, organics and aerosols, as well as
driving environmental factors such as actinic radiation. The project will result
in a detailed study of the complex photochemical interactions between the
relevant chemical families during background conditions and during periods of
elevated halogen activity, using the most comprehensive set of measurements
obtained to date. The data will also significantly advance the understanding of
the overall oxidative capacity of the Arctic troposphere, of surface ozone
depletion events, and of the nature and importance of aerosol production in this
region. In addition, parameterizations of the emissions of halogens and NOx will
be incorporated into CAM-Chem (a global chemistry-transport model) for studies
of regional- and hemispheric-scale air quality impacts, and the Community
Climate System Model (CCSM) will be used to conduct some of the first studies of
the impact of climate change on OASIS processes. A major initial focus will be
on changing sea ice characteristics, and in particular first-year sea ice which
has been shown to correlate with halogen activation. The Broader Impacts include
the participation of at least one graduate student and one postdoctoral fellow,
and will contribute to the educational experience for other University students
participating in the mission. The project will also fully include two SOARS
(Significant Opportunities in Atmospheric Research and Science) protégés and a
Denver-area high school teacher in the field measurement program, and will take
part in outreach activities in Barrow and nearby communities on the North Slope
of Alaska.