* 0806039
* Direct and inverse problems for reflectance optical tomography and spectroscopy in layered tissues
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Arnold Kim, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2012
* USD 102,528.00

We study light propagation in layered tissues for applications in reflectance
optical tomography and spectroscopy. Light propagation in tissues is governed by
the radiative transport equation. This integral-partial differential equation
takes into account absorption and scattering by inhomogeneities. Layered media
are important tissue models because they take into account the different optical
properties of superficial epithelial tissues (where most precancers form) and
those of deep stromal tissues. A key point throughout this research lies in
understanding how diagnostic information is contained in measurements of
multiply scattered light. In particular, we will study three general problems:
(i) Direct problems of partially polarized light in tissues,&lt;br/&gt;(ii)
Inverse problems for reflectance optical tomography, and (iii) Parameter
identification and estimation for reflectance optical spectroscopy. These three
problems involve a broad variety of mathematics research in numerical analysis
and scientific computing, asymptotic analysis, and inverse problems. A key theme
throughout this research project is extracting the most diagnostic information
from very limited data inherent in reflectance measurements. Through this
applied mathematics research, we hope to develop novel methods that find use in
engineering devices used for the early detection and diagnosis of
cancer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We study light propagation in layered tissues using
analytical and computational methods. We apply our results to biomedical optical
imaging problems in reflectance optical tomography and spectroscopy. Layered
tissue models are necessary to understand the interaction of light with a thin
epithelium (where most precancers form) situated on top of a thick stroma. The
overarching goal of this research is to develop more sophisticated theories to
predict and interpret diagnostic data. In particular, we are working to develop
methods for detecting and diagnosing early stages of cancer in epithelial
tissues. The key to developing theory that translates directly to the laboratory
is developing methods that extract the most information out of the inherently
limited data in reflectance measurements. By doing so, we hope to develop
methods for the early detection and diagnosis of cancer.&lt;br/&gt;