* 0806629
* Materials World Network: Nearly Two Dimensional 3He- A New Model Quantum System
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Jeevak Parpia, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 06/30/2011
* USD 540,000.00

Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This Materials World Network award by the Division
of Materials Research supports a three-year experimental program to investigate
how reducing the dimensionality of 3He leads to novel p-wave order parameters
when this unconventionally paired superfluid is confined to a length comparable
to the coherence length. In contrast to metallic systems, 3He has a spherical
Fermi surface; yet anisotropic paired states emerge from the isotropic normal
liquid. Confinement of 3He in small geometries is expected to modify this
behavior. It has been theoretically predicted that confined superfluid 3He will
exhibit broken translational symmetry en route to the destruction of
superfluidity. Dimensional constraints might also promote the stability of
competing phases that are not manifest in the bulk. The technology to fabricate
confining geometries with well characterized surfaces that can be patterned to
achieve specified roughness has been developed at Cornell University. The
roughness will affect the resulting phases via their stability and response to
disorder ? an important feature that has implications for the broader relevance
of this work to Condensed Matter Physics. Patterning to introduce periodicity
and test the robustness of emerging phases of confined 3He against periodicity
is also planned. We will also construct and use high precision flow cells to
examine flow of 4He, 3He doped 4He films and eventually superfluid 3He in
nanoporous media. These demanding experiments, which require development of new
techniques, provide a challenging environment where graduate and undergraduate
students acquire skills (the ability to innovate, initiate, design and carry
out) as well as become familiar with analytic and display tools to prepare them
for careers in the Nation's scientific and technological infrastructure. The
research program will be integrated with partner programs at Royal Holloway
University of London and Manchester University. Graduate students will have the
opportunity to work with their counterparts by spending a semester in the UK and
by hosting counterparts at Cornell. The research program will also incorporate
an undergraduate student throughout the award period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-
Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Helium (unlike all other elements) is inherently
quantum-mechanical and does not solidify (unless compressed) even down to
absolute zero temperature. It is one of the purest materials that can be
prepared by any means, since at these temperatures, impurities simply freeze out
during the procedures required to obtain the liquid state. Eventually 3He
attains a highly ordered state: superfluidity, which is different from that
attained in most superconductors and its sister isotope 4He. The magnetism of
the superfluid atoms means that the atoms pair up together and undergo orbital
motion exhibiting different phases. These behaviors are affected by confining
3He within precisely characterized geometries that effectively alter the
dimensionality of the 3He. By carrying out precise measurements on these systems
the research will add to our understanding of the role of confinement under less
extreme conditions. The program will also prepare graduate students for an
increasingly international scientific and technological environment by embedding
them in (and allowing them to host students from) counterpart laboratories that
use different techniques to probe the same systems. Besides adding to the
understanding of quantum systems, this research provides a demanding
experimental environment that educates and trains graduate and undergraduate
students for successful careers in the Nation's scientific and technological
infrastructure. In addition, this research program will also create a positive
impact on future science and technology workforce by involving a science teacher
in this research during summer.&lt;br/&gt;