* 0806860
* Materials World Network:  Creating Optoelectronic Materials and Devices Inside Microstructured Optical Fibers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2013
* John Badding, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 06/30/2013
* USD 615,000.00

Active optical fiber devices for which the fiber serves not merely as a passive
waveguide, but as a medium to directly modulate, generate, or otherwise
manipulate light have played a major role in the telecommunications revolution
and are now impacting many other fields from remote sensing to biomedicine.
Materials for current active fiber devices are largely limited to those that are
compatible with the fiber drawing process. This multidisciplinary and
collaborative project between Penn State University and the University of
Southampton Optoelectronics Research Centre in the UK focuses on incorporating
new materials into optical fibers to allow for new types of active fiber
devices. Semiconductors and metals are deposited into the micro- to nano-scale
voids of microstructured optical fibers over distances of up to meters via a
unique high pressure chemical fluid deposition technique. Thus, the rich
optoelectronic functionality of both amorphous and crystalline semiconductors
and metals can integrated with the flexible light guiding capabilities of
fibers. Lasers, modulators, guides, and detectors should then become possible in
a geometry that allows for interactions of semiconductors and metals with
waveguided electromagnetic radiation over much longer length scales than can be
realized in typical planar device geometries.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of the research included strengthening ties across disciplines and
between UK and US research efforts, fostering outreach to K-12 students and
underrepresented minorities, and a new approach to optoelectronic integration.