* 0806009
* Statistical Theory for Astrophysical Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Larry Wasserman, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2011
* USD 189,624.00

Nonparametric inference has become an essential tool for studying the
cosmos.&lt;br/&gt;This project consists of two intertwined components: (a)
development of new theoretical tools and nonparametric methodologies that are
inspired by problems in astrophysics but apply more broadly, and (b) application
of these tools to two important astrophysical problems, which will frame the
need for and guide the development of new statistical theory. Specifically, the
investigators will focus on inference for the dark energy equation of state and
on identifying filamentary structures from point process data such as that
produced by galaxy surveys. The first problem gives rise to a challenging
nonlinear inverse problem and demands a nonparametric approach, given what
little is known about the dark energy equation of state. The investigators will
develop new theory for nonlinear inverse problems that allow for accurate
estimates and sharp confidence statements about the unknown function. These
techniques will then be applied to Type Ia supernova data, possibly combined
with other data sources, to make inferences about dark energy. The second
problem gives rise to challenging spatial and inference problems. Current theory
in the statistical literature applies to a single filament only, and techniques
in the astronomical literature are not supported by theory. The investigators on
this project will close that gap, developing theory for defining, identifying,
and making inferences about the filamentary structures. The investigators will
test this technique and apply it to galaxy survey data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One
of the most important problems in cosmology is understanding dark
energy.&lt;br/&gt;The relationship between observable quantities and dark energy
produces a challenging nonlinear inverse problem. With very little strong a
priori information about the nature of dark energy, parametric approaches to the
problem are limited and suboptimal. And with the promise of much larger data
sets in the near future, there will be need and opportunity to extract fine-
scale features of the dark energy equation of state. The investigators will
develop new theory of inference for such problems, with a focus on estimation
under shape constraints, sharp hypothesis testing, and accurate confidence sets.
The goal is a substantial improvement in accuracy over the current best
techniques. In particular, the investigators will focus on the problem of
understanding dark energy and on identifying filamentary structures in
distribution of matter. The former is one of the central problems in modern
cosmology and demands state of the art statistical techniques to get the most
from the data. The investigators will develop new statistical theory and
methodologies that substantially improve the precision with which features of
dark energy can be estimated from supernova data and other data sources. The
latter problem is central to understanding the distribution of matter in the
universe. Current statistical theory only applies to a limited version of the
problem, and current astronomical methodologies do not have strong theoretical
support. The investigators will close that gap and develop a method and
corresponding theory that can handle realistic versions of the problem and give
optimal or near-optimal performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;