* 0806254
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:   Spatial and Temporal Influences of Thermokarst Features
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* George Kling, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 08/31/2012
* USD 335,981.00

Recent summaries of international research clearly document the past and future
extent of climate warming in the Arctic. These summaries suggest that in the
future, rising temperatures will be accompanied by increased precipitation,
mostly as rain: 20% more over the Arctic as a whole and up to 30% more in
coastal areas during the winter and autumn. These climate changes will have
important impacts on Arctic Systems. Of direct interest to this research is the
likelihood that warming will promote permafrost degradation and thaw. Formerly
frozen soils may be further destabilized by increased precipitation, leading to
hillslope thermokarst failures. Recent work has documented that thermokarst
failures are abundant and appear to have become more numerous around Toolik Lake
on the eastern North Slope and in the western Noatak River basin in Alaska. A
widespread and long-term increase in the incidence of thermokarst failures may
have important impacts on the structure and function of arctic headwater
landscapes. This research will use a systems approach to address hypotheses
about how thermokarst failures influence the structure and function of the
arctic landscape. It will focus on the composition of vegetation, the
distribution and processing of soil nutrients, and exports of sediments and
nutrients to stream and lake ecosystems. Results obtained at this hillslope
scale will be linked to patterns observed at the landscape scale to test
hypotheses about the spatial distribution of thermokarst failures in the arctic
foothills. It is important to understand these interactions because perhaps the
greatest potential impacts of changing land surface processes and formation of
thermokarst failures are feedbacks to the climate system through energy, albedo,
water, and trace gas exchange.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is designed to
quantify linkages among climatology, hillslope hydrology, geomorphology,
geocryology, community ecology of vegetation, soil nutrient dynamics, microbial
ecology, trace gas dynamics, and aquatic ecology. It will employ a combination
of field experimentation, remote sensing, and simulation modeling as a means to
quantify these relationships.&lt;br/&gt;