* 0806786
* GALFACTS Full-Stokes Studies of SNRs and HII Regions
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Charles Kerton, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Katharina Lodders
* 06/30/2011
* USD 176,605.00

GALFACTS, the Galactic Arecibo L-Band Feed Array (ALFA) Continuum Transit
Survey, is a full-Stokes 1.4 GHz radio continuum survey of the entire sky
visible from the Arecibo Observatory that began observations in early 2008. The
international collaborative group of Drs. Charles Kerton (Iowa State
University), Chris Salter (National Astronomy and Ionosphere Center/Arecibo
Observatory), Roland Kothes (National Research Council - Canada), and Tyler
Foster (Brandon University) will utilize GALFACTS to study supernova remnants
(SNRs), HII regions and the large radio continuum loops and spurs found in our
Galaxy. Both HII regions and SNRs play a vital role in the chemical and physical
evolution of the interstellar medium, constantly reshaping the Galactic disk via
ultraviolet radiation, stellar winds, explosive motions, and shocks. Detailed
understanding of the properties of both SNRs and HII regions - their sizes,
energies, global statistics - is thus of great importance in understanding the
physical structure and evolution of the Galaxy, and by extension other more
distant galaxies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GALFACTS will provide the highest
resolution view ever of some of the large continuum loops and spur structures
extending from the Galactic plane and provide important constraints on models of
these objects which probably represent major structures in the local
interstellar medium. The scientific return from the GALFACTS survey is expected
to be extremely high and its data products will be of interest to a large
community of researchers. Dr. Kerton's group plans to produce a catalog of
extended continuum emission sources that will provide the definitive summary of
the radio continuum sky as seen from Arecibo and will shape future studies by
both his group and the wider astronomy community. In addition, the project will
provide a research and training opportunity for both graduate and undergraduate
students in Galactic astronomy with an emphasis on radio astronomy techniques
and the handling and interpretation of large multi-wavelength data sets.
Outreach activities are planned for both the general public and schools through
the observatory visitor center at Arecibo, the planetarium at Iowa State
University, and in cooperation with the Science Center of Iowa.