* 0806867
* Materials World Network: Growth, Kinetics, and Morphology of Multi-Layered Organic Thin Films via Low-Energy Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Max Shtein, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 07/31/2012
* USD 600,000.00

This project is based on a partnership between three research groups, one at the
Science and Analysis of Materials (SAM) Department at the G. Lippmann Research
Center in Luxembourg and two at the Materials Science Department of the
University of Michigan (UM). This partnership merges resources that are not
available to each participant individually. The purpose of this research is to
investigate the shape, compositional definition, and energetics of interfaces in
vapor-deposited multi-layer organic semiconductor thin films and devices
fabricated by one of the UM groups. The increasing sophistication of
optoelectronic devices requires molecular-level dimensional control in the
fabrication of multi-layered structures with specifically engineered interfaces.
However, the effectiveness of growth and doping strategies devised to achieve
the desired device structures oftentimes remains unverified due to the lack
adequate characterization techniques. This is particularly true for devices
based on conjugated organic compounds, which find increasing use in energy
applications (e.g. organic light-emitting diodes and organic photovoltaic cells,
etc.). The buried interfaces are simply inaccessible or suffer damage when using
conventional characterization techniques. Low-energy secondary ion mass
spectrometry (LE-SIMS), a specialty of the SAM group, provides a promising
avenue for the analysis of organic-based thin-film layered structures, because
sub-keV impact energies of the primary ions result in reduced fragmentation of
molecular species at the specimen surface. The physics of the collision cascades
and the processes that lead to the ejection of secondary ions at low energies is
still poorly understood, and a unified formalism for the identification of
ejected species does not yet exist. Pursuing this knowledge, the other UM group
combines large-scale molecular dynamics (MD) simulations with first-principles
density functional theory (DFT) calculations to study the detailed atomic
trajectories in collision cascades and predict the nature of ejected molecular
fragments. This computational framework serves to interpret experimental data
obtained from LE-SIMS, thereby improving the depth resolution of the technique
and its ability to reliably identify organic molecular species, thus further
establishing LE-SIMS as a technique for depth-profiling organic thin film
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to establish the
relationship between growth conditions, structure, and properties of multi-layer
thin film organic semiconductors with unprecedented precision. Fundamental
insights for the advancement of organic electronic device design and fabrication
techniques are anticipated. The project serves as the basis for three Ph.D.
theses. Students benefit from a diverse educational experience through exchange
visits to partner institutions, remote interactions between researchers, sharing
of data, and the use of cyber infrastructure for the dissemination of findings
through. Undergraduate students are involved directly at an academic level, and
K-12 students through new outreach initiatives at UM.