* 0806266
* SGER: A new approach to the decomposition of complex chemical kinetics
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2008,05/31/2011
* Jianshu Cao, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 05/31/2011
* USD 200,000.00

Jianshu Cao of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology is supported by a Small
Grant for Exploratory Research from the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry
program for research to develop a method to decompose complex chemical reactions
into irreducible schemes that provide the generic structures for a class of
reactions and are invariant to changes made to the sub-schemes. The concept of
irreducible generic schemes is helpful in the analysis and classification of
dynamic behavior and facilitates the interpretation of experimental
measurements. The work consists of three stages. 1. A first-order kinetic
network is decomposed by identifying two kinetic motifs, i.e., sequential chain
reactions and branching reactions. Systematically concatenating chain reactions
and side-branches, the investigators can then reduce a complex reaction to its
generic form, each link of which represents a sub-scheme associated with a
complex waiting time distribution function. When a kinetic step is altered
within a sub-scheme, the waiting time distribution function changes accordingly,
but the overall generic scheme and related dynamic quantities will remain the
same functional forms. 2. A high-order kinetic network is then expanded around
its steady state solution to the rate equation, which retains the full non-
linearity in the dynamic behavior of average concentration. The correlations and
fluctuations near the steady state are approximated by a linear form for the
solution, an approach directly related to stability analysis methods for dynamic
behavior and response measurements. In linearized networks, the feed-back or
feed-forward mechanism defines a third motif, which introduces non-locality into
linear kinetics and is central for understanding multi-stability and
oscillations. 3. In the last part of the research, a hierarchical treatment of
non-linear kinetic networks with a full account of number statistics relevant to
single cell experiments is being developed. The projection operator is being
explored as a formal technique to systematically reduce a complex kinetic
network to a generic scheme with non-linear couplings.

The work is having a broader impact through application of the resulting methods
to complx reaction networks of interets in biology. Student training is also
being positively impacted and Cao is making an effort to further disseminate the
results of his research through a course he is developing for the Telluride
Workshop.