* 0806553
* Mechanisms of Convection-Wave Interactions
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Stefan Tulich, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 06/30/2012
* USD 352,674.00

This project seeks to improve understanding of convection-wave interactions in
the Tropics, with an emphasis on zonally-propagating, inertia-gravity wave
disturbances with periods less than 2.5 days. Such disturbances are of interest
owing to their strong ties to the diurnal cycle and potential role in the
genesis of severe tropical storms, such as Hurricane Andrew 1992. Furthermore,
space-time spectra of high-resolution satellite data show a dramatic westward
bias in the propagation direction of these high-frequency wave modes, begging
explanation and perhaps holding critical clues about wave-convection modulation
mechanisms. A suite of carefully designed nested cloud-resolving model
experiments on a uniform equatorial beta-plane will be performed using the
Weather-Research Forecast (WRF) model system, to test hypotheses about what
causes this asymmetry. Further insights will be gleaned from detailed diagnostic
analyses, using techniques developed in previous work. These analyses will be
applied to data from the idealized WRF model runs, as well as from other, much
larger, realistic-boundary-condition model runs; and from observations. To
assess the realism of the simulated wave structures, detailed comparisons will
be made against composite radiosonde observations of temperature, moisture, and
winds. Such observational composites already exist for low-frequency waves, but
will be extended to diurnal and higher frequencies. The previously identified
self-similarity of tropical convective wave life cycles across scales is
expected to extend to these relatively short/fast waves, but with systematic
differences across frequencies suggesting clues about the relative roles of
temperature and moisture in wave dynamics. An important novelty of the
observational component will be to bring in vertically-resolved cloud structure
observations from CloudSat, which was launched in
2006.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific results of this work are expected to have
broad impact in the atmospheric sciences by usefully informing efforts at
improving convective parameterizations used in general-purpose regional and
global models. Some of the modeling and diagnostic techniques will be packaged
and offered as enhancements to the WRF model's "out-of-the-box" capabilities, as
a service to the broader regional modeling community. This project will also
contribute to the training and mentorship of a graduate student.