* 0806030
* Variable Selection in High Dimensional Feature Space with Applications to Covariance Matrix Estimation and Functional Data Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2011
* Jinchi Lv, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2011
* USD 80,270.00

Variable selection plays an important role in high dimensional statistical
modeling which nowadays arises in many scientific investigations. The
investigator studies variable selection techniques built upon the machinery of
regularization for high dimensional statistical modeling, develops new
approaches to variable screening for high dimensional feature space, and
explores the applications of these techniques to high dimensional sparse
inference. Three interrelated research topics are proposed for investigation.
First, the investigator studies a unified approach to variable selection with
penalized likelihood which simultaneously selects significant variables and
estimates their regression coefficients, and develops sure screening techniques
applicable to ultra-high dimensional feature space. Second, factor models are
proposed to estimate large scale covariance matrices while variable selection
techniques are invoked to construct the factors, and covariance selection is
also investigated. Third, the investigator studies the applications of variable
selection techniques to functional data analysis where the regression
coefficient functions exhibit various kinds of
sparsity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The analysis of vast data sets now commonly
arising in many scientific disciplines and engineering problems poses numerous
challenges to statistical theory and methodology that are not present in smaller
scale studies. A major goal of this proposal is to make methodological and
theoretical contributions to the important and challenging topic of high
dimensional variable selection. These new developments provide further
understanding of various regularization methods in high dimensions, and allow
scientists to analyze high dimensional data with efficient dimension reduction
and increased interpretability. The challenges of high dimensionality arise from
diverse fields of sciences and humanities ranging from genomics and health
sciences to economics and finance. The proposed work on variable selection in
high dimensions will not only help better identify factors that are important
to, for instance, public health or market risk, but also benefit a broad range
of scientists and researchers in various fields.&lt;br/&gt;