* 0806756
* Dynamics, Stability and Stochastic Analysis of Astrophysical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2013
* Fred Adams, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2013
* USD 219,044.00

This proposal seeks to develop several important new techniques and tools to
further our understanding of stochastic dynamics and classical orbital dynamics.
The specific problems are motivated by several key issues in astrophysics, in
particular, the analysis of the dynamics of dark matter halos, galactic bulges,
and extra-solar planetary systems. At the same time, this project will undertake
new research directions concerning several classic problems of current interest
in applied mathematics, including the analysis of the stochastically forced
Hill's equation, analysis of the asymptotics of the eigenvalues of random
matrices, and the dynamics of particles in non-Newtonian potentials. The
proposal consists of three interrelated parts. The first pertains to the
analysis of orbital instabilities that arise in the dynamics of test particles
in extended mass distributions such as dark matter halos. Our analysis leads to
a stochastically forced Hill's equation which can be studied by analyzing
infinite products of random matrices. The second part discusses the role of
turbulence in extra-solar planetary systems and leads to the study of stochastic
pendulum problems. The long term dynamics of these systems can also be described
by a discrete map with random parameters. The final part considers the
phenomenon of tidal stripping in dark matter halos. This work involves the study
of orbits of small halos as they fall into larger ones, including dynamical
friction and its effects on orbital dynamics. Here, the overarching goal is to
understand the nearly universal form found for the matter density profiles, and
in particular how they are affected by smaller halos being assimilated into
larger structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field of astrophysics has
experienced an unprecedented number of observational discoveries and theoretical
breakthroughs in the past decade. These discoveries include super-massive black
holes in galactic centers, the accelerating universe, measurement of the
fluctuations in the cosmic microwave background, extra-solar planets, and brown
dwarfs. The observational progress has been made possible through technological
innovations, including detectors, telescopes, and spacecraft. Much of the
theoretical progress has taken place through numerical simulations, which in
turn have benefited from the ever-growing capabilities of computers.
Unfortunately, however, the third pillar of this science --- the analytic
understanding of these newly discovered astronomical objects and physical
phenomena --- is lagging behind. One of the difficulties associated with
analytic work in this area is the enormous complexity of the astrophysical
systems under study. In particular, chaotic dynamics and sensitive dependence on
initial conditions arise in many contexts and render it difficult to make
progress through the traditional analytic methods used by astrophysicists.
However, the development and application of new mathematical tools, as proposed
herein, will facilitate progress on these astrophysical issues, and will be
useful in many additional applications. This project will have educational
impacts on several fronts, including the training of graduate students, the
education of graduates and undergraduates, and reaching out to the general
population through public lectures.&lt;br/&gt;