* 0806511
* Materials World Network: Microscopic Models of Cross-Linked Active Gels
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Cristina Marchetti, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2012
* USD 314,000.00

This award supports an international collaboration for research and education
among Syracuse University in the USA, Bristol University in the United Kingdom,
and the University of Stellenbosch in South Africa. This collaboration is for
theoretical studies that will dramatically improve our understanding of the
structure and mechanical properties of networks of cytoskeletal filaments and
associated motor proteins, under both in vitro and in vivo conditions. An
important outcome will be the identification of the relative importance of
physical and biochemical mechanisms in controlling many cell functions, such as
motility, force generation and division. The success of the proposed research
relies crucially on the complementary expertise of the collaborating research
teams in hydrodynamics and nonequilibrium physics (USA), in semiflexible polymer
physics (UK) and on theories of polymer gels (South Africa). The first part of
the research builds on work by the US and UK groups on purified (in vitro) cell
extracts of cytoskeletal filaments and motor proteins (active liquids). By
working closely with experimentalists in the US, UK and Germany, the researchers
will focus on understanding how filament flexibility and microscopic properties
of the motile elements (e.g., motor stiffness, dynamical properties and
processivity) affect the macroscopic behavior of the active fluid. The second
and major part of the proposal considers the new area of active solids: the cell
cytoskeleton (in vivo) and in vitro gels of cytoskeletal filaments linked by
both active (motor proteins) and passive crosslinkers. The proposed research
will lead to an understanding of the fascinating linear viscoelastic behavior of
active gels. Regular student exchange visits planned during this award period
will provide mechanisms for close collaboration among the three groups and
exceptional educational opportunities and international research
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The achievement of the scientific goals will be
closely linked with a number of more general benefits. First, the research will
provide significant scientific progress in areas relevant to physics, biology
and biological and biomimetic materials. A better understanding of the processes
controlling the complex mechanical properties of the cytoskeleton, the internal
framework of a cell, can lead to important advances for the design of a new
generation of smart materials at the nanoscale. The collaboration will also open
the door, through visits to the African Institute for Mathematical Sciences
(AIMS) located near Cape Town, to the establishment of contacts with gifted
students in the mathematical sciences from throughout the African continent.
Finally, student and postdoctoral researcher exchange among the collaborating
groups will expose all team members, including undergraduate students, to
research in an international setting. The relationships developed during these
exchanges will serve as the foundation for continued collaborations, while
promoting long-term International networking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
jointly funded by the Division of Materials Research in the Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Directorate and the Office of International Science and
Engineering. &lt;br/&gt;