* 0806561
* DREAMS-II --- A novel program to recruit and educate underrepresented students in geosciences (Collaborative Proposal)
* GEO,GEO
* 06/15/2008,05/31/2011
* Kam Tang, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Continuing Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 05/31/2011
* USD 44,707.00

Diversity in Research in Environmental And Marine Science (DREAMS-II) combines
the strengths of two leading HBCUs, Hampton University and Elizabeth City State
University, and two top-notch research institutions, Virginia Institute of
Marine Science and University of South Carolina, to form a strong regional
consortium in the mid-Atlantic coast for promoting geosciences among
underrepresented students across all education levels. DREAMS-II goals are to
raise the awareness and interests in geosciences among underrepresented groups;
to recruit underrepresented pre-college students into geosciences; to retain and
prepare underrepresented undergraduate students for graduate study or work in
geosciences; to cultivate the next generation of leaders among underrepresented
students in geosciences. The program puts equal emphasis on academic training,
career training, as well as life-skills training, and the activities will
revolve around the theme Coastal Environmental Challenges in the 21st Century.
Geoscience seminars, summer immersion courses, technical and life skill
workshops will equip participating undergraduate students with the necessary
knowledge to navigate through challenges in school and in life. DREAMS-II
undergraduate students and project investigators will aggressively reach out to
pre-college students and parents that are underrepresented in the geosciences.
GeoTrek outdoor adventures, after school activities, special recruitment
brochures and campus tours will allow these pre-college students and their
parents to experience the excitement and to understand the importance of
geosciences. This program ultimately seeks to present participants with a strong
and clear message that they can achieve a successful career in geosciences.