* 0806707
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The influence of parasite load on glucocorticoid hormone levels: An experimental assessment in a natural setting
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Ryan Monello, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Richard S. Inouye
* 06/30/2009
* USD 11,490.00

Stress hormones (glucocorticoids) are of great interest to ecologists because
they impact animal fitness and survival and provide a direct, quantifiable index
of sublethal stress. Baseline glucocorticoid levels are known to be correlated
with age, sex, and social rank of vertebrates. However, few causal relationships
have been established between glucocorticoid levels and factors intrinsic to
free-ranging animals and their environment. Interactions between stress hormones
and parasites are predicted to exist because glucocorticoids can enhance or
depress the immune system. This study will determine the nature of the
relationship between macroparasites and stress, using glucocorticoid levels as
an indicator of stress, in a common, free-ranging mammal. Objectives of this
research are to quantify baseline fecal glucocorticoid levels and correlate
those with animal characteristics (e.g., age, sex) and parasite burden,
experimentally reduce ectoparasites and helminths to test causal relationships
between glucocorticoid levels and parasite burden, and determine if
glucocorticoid levels of parasite-reduced individuals influence subsequent
parasite acquisition. Glucocorticoid concentrations in animals are increasingly
being used to evaluate wildlife health, responses to their environment, and
influence management decisions. For such decisions to be most effective it is
imperative that we identify factors important to baseline stress values. This
study will determine the influence of common parasites on the endocrine system
and if baseline glucocorticoid levels predispose individuals to infection.
Evaluating such interactions in an experimental context will enhance our ability
to understand animal stress and make informed management decisions when disease
and stress are issues of concern. Broader impacts include the training and
education of students. All elements of this project will be incorporated into a
wildlife disease ecology course for undergraduates. Students will participate in
experiential learning exercises that involve them in all aspects of the project
during lab and field sessions.