* 0806694
* Microbial Genome Sequencing: Phage Genome Sequencing for Student Biotech Training
* BIO,EF
* 10/24/2007,07/31/2010
* James Nolan, Georgia Gwinnett College
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 07/31/2010
* USD 50,188.00

The primary objectives of the project are first, to understand the mechanisms of
viral genome evolution and second, to give undergraduate students laboratory
experience and training for careers in biotechnology. Viruses that infect
bacteria (bacteriophages) represent a substantial proportion of the genome mass
on earth and can exert profound effects on genome evolution of living organisms
by transferring genes from host to host or from host to virus. Previous sequence
results from T4-like bacteriophages demonstrated the existence of large numbers
of novel potential protein-coding open reading frames (ORFs), the majority of
which have no significant matches to known protein sequences. The complete
nucleotide sequence of two bacteriophages closely related to bacteriophages T4
and RB69 will be determined in this project. The new genome sequences will be
compared to known genomes to investigate the mechanism by which ORFs are gained
and lost in these viruses. The mechanism of genome evolution in T4-like
bacteriophages will be compared to genome evolution of other systems to provide
new insights into the global processes of gene evolution and gene transfer. Most
of the preparation of DNA, sequence determination, and analysis will be
performed by undergraduate and Master's students of the University of New
Orleans. Through participation in this project, students will learn the tools of
bioinformatics research and increase their laboratory skills. This educational
outreach will impact about 50 students per year, including minority students
underrepresented in the sciences. This outreach project will positively impact
science in the local area, both through greater productivity of research
laboratories that hire trainees and through increased interest in scientific
careers among local students.