* 0806507
* Materials World Network: Designed Preparation, Characterization, Magnetic Properties and Quantum Chemical Calculations of New Complex Itinerant Magnets, Ti(8-x)M(3+x)Ru(18-y)Rh(y)B
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Gordon Miller, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2012
* USD 228,000.00

This project combines experiment and theory towards the designed preparation and
subsequent characterization and thorough understanding of new intermetallic
ferromagnets and antiferromagnets. It is based on collaboration between Iowa
State University and RWTH Aachen in Germany. The primary concept involves using
a complex 4d metal-boride framework with magnetic 3d elements, e.g., Cr, Mn, Fe,
Co and Ni, inserted in voids to create magnetic structures with potentially low-
dimensional character. The metal-boride framework provides a structurally strong
and electronically robust network for insertion of magnetic metals into
channels. Furthermore, the metal-boride structure is intrinsically metallic,
which provides a mechanism for magnetic exchange between adjacent magnetic metal
atoms via the spins on the conduction electrons. Specifically, these materials
are studied by X-ray and neutron diffraction as well as magnetization
experiments to determine atomic and magnetic structures. Theoretical
determination of the electronic structures on various models of these structures
provides feedback toward further synthetic efforts of atomic substitutions to
create new compounds with targeted magnetic behavior. At present, chemists and
materials scientists have no general, yet simple, rules for targeting and
tailoring ferromagnetic, intermetallics compounds, i.e., metallic compounds with
permanent magnetic behaviour. This effort allows chemists to study an evolution
of magnetic behaviour within a single structural family to identify trends in
magnetic behavior as various chemical and physical parameters change in
systematic ways. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A project such as this, that combines
experiment and theory for condensed matter systems, provides students a truly
interdisciplinary problem - these students learn how different scientific
subjects and models impact other scientific areas. The student participants in
this project in Aachen, Germany and Ames, Iowa have opportunities for exchange,
and they learn both experimental and theoretical components of research in
solid-state chemistry. Furthermore, through this systematic study of a
structural family, a set of rules will be generated for targeting metallic,
permanent magnets, which have numerous technological applications. The real
challenge will be to identify the temperature range where such targeted
materials will show permanent magnetic behavior. In summary, this effort
represents a strong, synergistic coupling of experiment and theory that targets
new magnetic materials, and may lead to new materials with unusual bulk magnetic
properties due to the potential one-dimensional character of the magnetic
exchange.