* 0806950
* The NSF S-STEM Program for Computer Science Recruitment, Retention and Research
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2014
* Huiming Anna Yu, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Chan Hilton
* 07/31/2014
* USD 600,000.00

The S-STEM Program for Computer Science Recruitment, Retention and Research
(CS3R) recruits and provides scholarships for 16 undergraduate students and 12
graduate students who are academically talented and financially needy. Through a
wide range of support structures and resources, as well as the leadership of an
experienced management team, the project is ensuring that scholarship recipients
receive all crucial support necessary to achieve success in the computer science
discipline. The S-STEM CS3R project recruits S-STEM student candidates using a
variety of approaches targeting underrepresented African American students. To
help the S-STEM scholars to succeed, comprehensive mentoring services are
provided, including faculty mentors, peer mentors, and alumni mentors. The
educational plans and academic performance of the S-STEM scholars are closely
monitored in order to retain them in the scholarship program. The S-STEM CS3R
project also involves the S-STEM scholars in the various research programs in
the department to integrate research into education, and to develop the
students' research capabilities. To build the S-STEM community, the project
includes such activities as welcome receptions, monthly seminars and an end-of-
semester picnic. The S-STEM CS3R project increases the industrial experience
opportunities for the scholarship recipients and increases their leadership
potential through fostering habits of involvement.