* 0806323
* Materials World Network: Processing-Structure-Property Relationships in Ultra-Fine Grained and Nanostructured Bulk Cu and Cu-Zn Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2008,02/29/2012
* Carl Koch, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Taleff
* 02/29/2012
* USD 511,000.00

This research is based on collaboration among North Carolina State University
(NCSU), the University of Vienna, Austria (UV), and IFW-Dresden, Germany
(IFW-D). The scientific objectives of the research are to exploit a range of
processing and characterization techniques and expertise to investigate the
mechanical behavior of metals and alloys as a function of their grain size and
stacking fault energy. In particular, Cu and Cu-Zn alloys are prepared by
processing techniques at the various institutions that, when combined, produce
artifact-free bulk samples with a grain size range from ultra-fine (< 1000 nm)
down to the finest achievable at the nanoscale (~ 10 nm).

The combined effort and facilities at NCSU, UV, and IFW-D are needed to achieve
the processing objectives. The critical mechanical properties are determined by
tensile, shear and nanoindentation tests at NCSU, compression, tensile and
torsion tests at IFW-D, and fatigue and fracture toughness at UV. The
deformation mechanisms that are operative at the various grain sizes and
stacking fault energies are probed by in situ x-ray diffraction line broadening
studies under stress at UV and NCSU with collaborators. In situ transmission
electron microscopy (TEM) straining studies are done by IFW-D and NCSU, and in
situ scanning electron microscopy (SEM) is done at IFW-D. An extensive set of
density functional theory (DFT) calculations and large-scale molecular dynamics
(MD) simulations are also done at NCSU, while mechanism-based and related
modeling is done at NCSU, UV, and IFW-D. The exchange of graduate students and
the faculty interactions among NCSU, UV and IFW-D constitute a major part of the
project.