* 0806070
* Non-negative curvature and group actions
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Wolfgang Ziller, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2012
* USD 438,045.00

Abstract-DMS-0806070

The overall description of the proposal is to study manifolds with positive or
more generally nonnegative sectional curvature under the assumption of a large
isometry group. In past proposals the principal investigator has used this
approach to produce many new examples of nonnegative curvature, including some
on exotic spheres. The present proposal studies a specific class of manifolds
that admit an isometric group action with one dimensional quotient and which he
considers to be excellent candidates for new examples with positive curvature.
These candidates were obtained in a previous proposal as part of a
classification theorem. The principal investigator plans to study a concrete
class of metrics on these manifolds and has obtained considerable expertise in
their curvature properties already. This project is extremely difficult and is
expected to require a long term time investment. There are many questions of a
more general nature within this subject of ``\nnc\ with large isometry groups"
that the principal investigator plans to study, and which promise a much quicker
return. Finally, as was done in past proposals with success, studying
topological properties of new and known examples can be very difficult but also
very rewarding.

Manifolds with positive sectional curvaturecan be defined by the property that
the sum of the 3 angles in any triangle is larger than 180 degrees, i.e. their
geometry is similar to that of the round sphere. Global Riemannian geometry can
be described as relating local invariants like curvature to global topological
invariants. Since the beginning of global Riemannian geometry, manifolds with
positive or more generally non-negative curvature have been an important part of
this subject. A basic unsolved question is whether exotic spheres, i.e.
manifolds that look like spheres but on which ordinary calculus is quite
different, can carry positively curved metrics. Symmetries are an important
aspect of many geometric questions and the principal investigator plans to study
manifolds with positive or more generally non-negative curvature under the
presence of a large symmetry group. One of the goals of this investigation is
the search for new examples.

