* 0806721
* Improvement of Mid-Latitude Atmospheric Predictions Using Coherent Tropical Convective Phenomena
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2012
* Richard Kleeman, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 05/31/2012
* USD 338,807.00

The depiction of mid-latitude variability in the present generation of numerical
weather prediction models is very good; there remain, however, significant
problems in the depiction of tropical variability due to the need to
parameterize convection. Through global atmospheric teleconnections, the tropics
can significantly influence the mid-latitudes. It is reasonable, therefore, to
expect that improvements in the depiction of long time-scale coherent phenomena
within the tropics may benefit mid-latitude predictions. This follows because
such variability has large spatial scales and long decorrelation times. It can
induce a significant and long lasting influence on the higher latitudes and thus
can affect long-range weather forecasts. In recent years, the availability of
high quality tropical data has revealed that the depiction of such coherent
variability is less than satisfactory in many numerical weather prediction and
climate models. There are thus strong grounds for optimism that better
simulation of tropical coherent phenomena may lead to improved mid-latitude
forecasts.

Motivated by these considerations, a stochastic model of the more important
aspects of tropical convection will be developed. This model will be capable of
reproducing well most of the important observed spectral features of convection
in wave-number and frequency space and the horizontal and vertical spatial
structures associated with coherent tropical variability. The stochastic model
will be embedded within a (dry) primitive equation model, and the influence on
mid-latitude predictions will be explored using a theoretical ensemble approach
and by examining the influence on historical forecast skill. These
predictability results will be compared with a primitive equation model that
uses a conventional convection scheme.

The theoretical study will address the following questions: 1. Which remote
regions predictability are most strongly influenced by various tropical
coherencies and why? 2. What is the principal dynamical mechanism in the
atmosphere for causing shifts in predictability?

The practical forecast study will address the following questions 1. How much
gain in forecast skill might we expect in various regions with a better
representation of tropical coherent variability? 2. How should effort be
concentrated in improving convection representation to obtain the greatest
payoff in increased prediction skill?

Broader impacts of this work are educational and operational: Graduate students
at the Courant Institute of New York University will be trained in important
aspects of predictability research. Secondly this work will provide concrete
information to operational weather prediction modelers as to what features of
convective behavior should be addressed in order to obtain significant gains in
forecast skill.

