* 0806929
* IDIC: Increasing Diversity in Computing
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2013
* Susan Vrbsky, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Susan Finger
* 07/31/2013
* USD 586,000.00

This S-STEM project increases diversity in computing in two related majors,
computer science and management information systems. To achieve this increase in
diversity, the program emphasizes participation by students from
underrepresented groups, such as women and minority students, first-generation
college students and students from economically challenged areas of Alabama. The
project 1) recruits qualified students, 2) provides a support infrastructure to
enhance success as students and later as working professionals, and 3) provides
financial assistance for students who have demonstrated a commitment to their
studies in these fields. Students within Computer Science and Management
Information Systems are part of a single cohort. These majors share four common
required courses and significant overlap in student experience, including
student organizations, services such as resume building, and student-led and
conducted mentoring sessions. The project provides scholarships for 24
undergraduates, with 12 scholarships for the Computer Science Department and 12
for the Management Information Systems Department. Providing the scholarships
alleviates some of the financial risks for students in these fields. The project
establishes a formal structure for assessing and assisting involved students
during their academic careers, including regular meetings with faculty and
student mentors, and involvement of higher-level undergraduate students in
research programs for elective course credit. Finally, the program introduces
the participating undergraduate students to the possibility of academic careers.