* 0806430
* Studies of the Structure, Evolution and Dynamics of Lower Stratospheric Frontal Zones Associated with Upper-level Jet/Front Systems and their Influence on Tropopause Deformation
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2008,05/31/2012
* Jonathan Martin, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 05/31/2012
* USD 314,448.00

Deformation of the tropopause plays a fundamental role in the development of a
variety of weather systems. Among the physical and structural mechanisms known
to promote local deformation and steepening of the tropopause are the
development of upper-level jet/front systems (ULJFs), the superposition of polar
and subtropical ULJFs, and, more recently, the encroachment of coherent
tropopause disturbances (CTDs) upon pre-existing polar or subtropical gradients
of potential temperature on the dynamic tropopause. When viewed from any of
these perspectives, tropopause steepening necessarily involves structural and
dynamical evolution of the lower stratospheric frontal zone above the jet core.
It is hypothesized that such changes have consequences for the local deformation
of the tropopause and, accordingly, for the development of lower tropospheric
weather systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conjecture, coupled with a nearly
complete absence of prior research focus on these features, motivates the
research in which the structure, evolution, and life cycle of the lower
stratospheric frontal zones associated with upper-level jet/front systems
(ULJFs), as well as their influence on local tropopause deformation,
extratropical development, stratosphere/troposphere exchange and their
relationship to coherent tropopause disturbances (CTDs) will be examined. The
investigation will employ both synoptic-climatological and case study approaches
using the National Center for Environmental Prediction's Global Final Analysis
(FNL) data as well as output from fine-scale numerical simulations of selected
events performed using the National Center for Atmospheric Research's Weather
Research and Forecasting (WRF) model. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The FNL analysis
will be used to both examine the relationship between extreme surface
cyclogenesis and tropopause steepness as well as to investigate the vertical
structure of strong and extreme CTDs which is hypothesized to have an important
influence on lower stratospheric frontal structure and tropopause slope.
Employing output from fine-scale WRF simulations of selected cases of ULJF life
cycles, the influence of lower stratospheric frontal circulations on local
deformation of the tropopause above the jet core will be examined. This analysis
will be augmented by a piecewise potential vorticity (PV) inversion, performed
using the same model output, that will be used to examine the circulations
associated with the perturbation PV of the upper tropospheric and lower
stratospheric frontal zones of the ULJF, respectively. Isolation of these
separate circulations will lend insight into the nature of the separate frontal
developments, the influence each evolving structure has on the other, on
tropopause deformation above and below the jet core, as well as on surface
cyclogenesis. The WRF-Chemsitry model will be used to examine the influence of
varying lower stratospheric frontal structures and their associated circulations
on the degree of stratosphere/troposphere exchange. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By
involving both graduate and undergraduate students, the research will advance
discovery, learning, teaching, training and diversity within this subfield. The
results of the research will be disseminated widely through scholarly
publications and theses. The resulting increased understanding of the structure,
evolution and dynamics of the lower stratospheric frontal zones associated with
ULJFs will provide new insights into the role of lower stratospheric processes
in deforming the tropopause and, consequently, in driving the sensible weather
in the mid-latitudes. Thus, the research represents first steps towards
understanding of an understudied problem with direct impacts on the life cycles
of extratropical cyclones. As such, its pursuit potentially will provide a
benefit to society by enhancing the ability to forecast weather that is directly
and indirectly associated with these disturbances.