* 0806468
* Expanding Participation in Computing (EPIC)
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2014
* Maureen Sevigny, Oregon Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Joyce B. Evans
* 06/30/2014
* USD 596,025.00

The Expanding Participation in Computing through Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (EPIC) program is designed to motivate
and enable low-income and academically talented students; especially women,
members of minority populations, students with disabilities, first-generation
college students and those from rural communities; to earn baccalaureate degrees
in computer engineering technology, software engineering technology, and
information technology. Within this population, women are special focus for
recruitment because while women continue to be underrepresented in many science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields, the problem is greatest
in computing fields. Computer fields are the only STEM fields to see a steady
decrease in the percentage of bachelor's degrees granted to women over the last
two decades.

Scholarships up to $6100 per year are being provided to underrepresented
students to enable full-time study in computing majors. Freshmen and transfer
students are eligible, and scholarships are renewable for up to four years. EPIC
builds on the success of CSEMS program at the institution. Activities include
having students participate in a three-term learning community, collaborating
with student services, faculty mentoring, and community-building activities.
Professional internships with regional partners are available to students
preparing to enter their junior and senior years. Students are required to join
the student chapter of a related professional organization with the dues paid by
EPIC.

Intellectual Merit: EPIC is building a cohort of students in closely related
majors, enabling them to develop social networks along with their academic
skills as they prepare to become computing professionals. By providing a year-
long learning community which links a career and personal growth seminar with
courses in mathematics, communication, and computing, EPIC is increasing the
retention and satisfaction levels of computing majors. The learning community is
a model for other institutions that have lower-than-desired retention and
graduation rates in challenging majors. Broader Impacts: EPIC is enabling a
diverse population of students to pursue and achieve baccalaureate degrees in
computing. This helps to address the increasing shortage of new graduates needed
in the computing industry while providing significant opportunities for the
students to grow personally, financially, and professionally. EPIC students are
role models, opening the door for other underrepresented students to pursue
higher education. By targeting students from rural communities, EPIC helps
economically disadvantaged regions diversify their future employment as
graduates return to their home communities. These graduates enable local
employers to be more successful in the "information age" and help develop
opportunities for new firms to start up or relocate to these communities. As
rural communities have higher unemployment rates and lower per capita income
than urban or suburban areas, this provides an opportunity for greater social
and economic equity.