* 0806748
* Netzel Scholars:  Opportunity in Chemistry and Biology
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2015
* William Fritz, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* John Krupczak
* 08/31/2015
* USD 599,474.00

The goal of this project is to provide support for the highest achieving
entering students at the university declaring majors in chemistry and biology.
Many of these students have significant financial need and thus balance
university life, significant work hours, and commuting as they live at home
during their university career. These responsibilities make it difficult for
them to realize their scholarly potential. S-STEM funds provide need-based
scholarships so that the students can live on campus and participate fully in
the intellectual and research life of the university. Recruiting efforts include
direct mail, web resources and on-campus recruiting fairs to promote the S-STEM
Scholarships to prospective students in Georgia. Selection is based on multiple
academic criteria, financial need, and an interview.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: New activities include (a) a new
Freshman Learning Community, (b) a new course, HON1001, (c) a program for
freshman to participate in research group seminars, (d) peer-led honors
tutorials, (e) a new honors biochemistry course, (f) biochemistry concentrations
in both chemistry and biology, (g) a new course in career planning, (h)
increased support for undergraduate research opportunities, (i) student
presentations at local and regional conferences, (j) support for summer research
programs, (k) support to develop leadership in chemistry and biology student
clubs and (l) opportunities for the students to teach in supplemental
instruction and the Writing Across the Curriculum courses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: About 60 students are receiving S-STEM
funding (approximately 20 each for three consecutive entering classes). The new
programs benefit the other chemistry and biology students (approximately 300 and
1400, respectively). Scholarships from the S-STEM program enable the Netzel
Scholars to live up to their considerable promise as scientific leaders.