* 0806711
* Building a Sustainable Science and Mathematics Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2013
* Jon Piper, Bethel College
* Standard Grant
* Gul Kremer
* 07/31/2013
* USD 257,600.00

The Science and Mathematics Scholarship Program at Bethel College attracts
academically qualified students to the study of Biology, Chemistry, Computer
Science, Mathematics, and Physics. The program provides scholarships, renewable
for up to four years, to financially needy students with a focus on Hispanics
and women. The S-STEM program is built upon a science and mathematics
scholarship program that began in 2000, largely with seed money from Bethel
alumni, involving College faculty and the Offices of Development and Financial
Aid. Specific S-STEM program objectives are to:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; (1)
attract underrepresented students to STEM programs while increasing the number
of STEM majors,&lt;br/&gt; (2) improve retention to graduation by developing
awardees into a cohesive learning community, and&lt;br/&gt; (3) provide bridges
to graduate programs and careers &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To recruit students,
Bethel STEM faculty and students, assisted by the Admissions Office, reach out
to high school students through (a) a one-week Summer Science Institute, (b) an
on-line Science Collaborataory, (c) Explore Science visiting days to expose
prospective students, such as those in a nearby Upward Bound program, to
research at Bethel, and (d) presentations in K-12 classrooms. To help smooth the
transition to college, matriculating scholarship recipients take part in a day-
long event during freshman orientation that enables the students to become
familiar with science and mathematics faculty and their research while also
piquing the students' interest in the research that is underway and in career
opportunities in the STEM fields. The key strategy to retain students is their
participation in a cohesive learning community that provides a focused, unified
and integrative experience, emphasizing career and personal counseling, academic
assistance, and peer-mentoring. Scholarship recipients are mentored by Bethel
STEM faculty, including role models who come from the targeted demographic
groups. Additionally, scholarship recipients actively contribute to an
interdisciplinary STEM seminar that involves interactions with invited speakers,
collaborative group research projects, and discussion of such topics as
scientific ethics, "classic" papers, the nature and history of science, and the
interplay between scientific discovery and societal development. Helping to
provide the bridge to careers in the STEM fields are tours of industries and
research laboratories, career panels, STEM-related on-campus employment,
research experiences (both in Bethel laboratories and off-campus), and
internships organized by Bethel STEM alumni.