* 0806098
* "Collaborative Research: Regression Problems in Functional Data Analysis"
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2012
* Tailen Hsing, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2012
* USD 90,000.00

Modern data collection methods are now frequently returning observations that
could be viewed as the results of digitized recording or sampling from random
functions. This project investigates regression problems for which the response
is scalar but some of the predictors are functional. The general goal is to gain
understanding on the inference of the models based on partially observed and
error-contaminated functional data. Distinctions will be made between dense
functional data, usually obtained from images, and sparse functional data,
usually obtained from longitudinal studies. The specific topics include the
consideration of (i) a functional generalized linear model for dense functional
data using a penalized likelihood approach, (ii) dimension reduction
methodologies based on sliced inverse regression and sliced average variance
estimation, and (iii) a functional generalized linear model for sparse
functional data using an approximated quasi-likelihood approach. New approaches
will be proposed in the consideration of these problems, and asymptotic theories
will be proved to validate the approaches. The sparse functional generalized
linear model will be considered in a framework of joint modeling between a
longitudinal life style profile and an endpoint health outcome. This involves
the study of a new type of error-in-variable problem, which is expected to
extend the horizon of longitudinal-data modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An
important current focal point of statistical research is the so-called high-
dimensional data analysis. Indeed, high-dimensional data are a fact of life.
This is evidenced by our increasing need for larger storage devices on our
computers. Roughly speaking, functional data are high-dimensional data which can
be approximated by smooth curves or functions. Such data are abundant in
scientific investigations, and it is of crucial importance to be able to
effectively analyze such data. The PI will investigate approaches that will
fundamentally contribute to the practice of functional data analysis. Direct
applications of the research can be found in areas including image analysis,
bioinformatics, and medicine. Research-level classes on functional data analysis
based on this research will be offered at both University of Georgia and
University of Michigan.