* 0806755
* Materials World Network:  Quantum Semiconductor Structures for High-Efficiency Photovoltaics
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2008,10/31/2010
* Edward Yu, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 10/31/2010
* USD 384,000.00

This project is directed toward the synthesis, processing, and characterization
of GaAs/GaInAs/GaInNAs quantum-well and quantum-dot p-i-n heterostructure
materials for application in high-efficiency photovoltaic devices. Fundamental
issues in optimization of epitaxial heterojunction interface quality and
controlled formation of self-assembled quantum dot structures by molecular-beam
epitaxy are explored in the context of photovoltaic devices but with broad-
ranging material and device implications. In addition, the basic physics and
performance potential of quantum-well/dot and related photovoltaic device
concepts is examined and employed as a driver for exploration of specific
materials issues. Integration of metal and dielectric nanostructures with
semiconductor heterostructures, which is expected to enable key advances in
engineering of photon propagation behavior in semiconductor heterostructures, is
also investigated. Ultimately, it is anticipated that the advances in materials
physics enabled by the project will contribute substantially to the development
of highly efficient quantum-well and quantum-dot based solar cells, which have
been predicted theoretically to enable power conversion efficiencies well in
excess of those attainable using more conventional solar cell technologies. This
work entails an international collaborative effort between researchers at the
University of California, San Diego (UCSD) and at the University of Karlsruhe in
Germany. Researchers at Karlsruhe, led by Dr. Daniel Schaadt, focus on epitaxial
material growth and optimization, while UCSD researchers focus on materials
processing, characterization, and eventual incorporation into photovoltaic
device structures.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This Materials World Network project
enables collaboration between researchers in the Unites States and Germany that
is expected to provide invaluable experience for graduate student and
postdoctoral researchers in different cultural and scientific environments, and
to help seed future international collaborations and connections between rapidly
growing research and commercial activities in solar energy and solid-state
nanostructures generally. Germany is a particularly appropriate partner in this
regard, in light of its strong commitment to and activity in solar energy
technologies. The technological and economic impact of high-efficiency solar
energy conversion that could be enabled by the materials advances emerging from
this project is potentially dramatic. In addition, the project makes use of
facilities and expertise associated with major research centers at each
institution ? the California Institute for Telecommunications and Information
Technology (CalIT2) at UCSD and the DFG-Center for Functional Nanostructures
(CFN) at Karlsruhe. UCSD researchers visiting Karlsruhe benefit from the
availability of extensive facilities for materials synthesis and
characterization, and from exposure to the broad range of research at CFN on
nanostructured materials for electronics, photonics, and biology. Researchers
from Karlsruhe visiting UCSD gain exposure to the broad, multidisciplinary
research environment that engages issues in basic materials, devices, and
systems for telecommunications and information technology, and will benefit from
the availability of state-of-the-art experimental materials processing and
nanofabrication facilities at CalIT2.