* 0806157
* Collaborative Research: Cool Robot to support Greenland science campaigns
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2010,09/30/2014
* Laura Ray, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Peter West
* 09/30/2014
* USD 491,431.00

The proposed project will refine the Cool Robot, an autonomous solar-powered
mobile robot, and demonstrate its potential to conduct significant scientific
observations in Greenland over vast distances. Two field deployments, a week-
long circuit around Summit Camp in year two and a 1,500-km traverse from Summit
to NEEM and back in year three, will collect data on snow-surface
characteristics and elevations as ground truth for satellite data and air
samples to assess spatial and temporal variations in atmospheric chemistry near
the snow surface. Ground-based data collection is crucial to furthering our
understanding of glaciology and environmental sciences in Greenland. This
collaborative project among Dartmouth College, UNH and CRREL builds on a
successful Small Grant for Exploratory Research, a student-based pilot study
that designed, fabricated, and field-tested the simple four-wheel drive, solar-
powered Cool Robot. This project will provide critical performance data on robot
mobility, power systems, navigation and communications over a vast polar
snowfield and thus forge a path to expand the use of mobile robots to support
science and logistics operations in the Greenland. Potential uses of the Cool
Robot are traverses to collect glaciological data, snow characterization to
study climate change, biological sampling, atmospheric and snow chemistry and
photochemistry surveys, micrometeorite sampling and site inspections for
meteorite fields, crevasse detection in advance of manned traverses, airfield
geophysical surveys, and routine snow-road surveys. Arrays of mobile robots
would allow scientific instruments to be dynamically positioned based on
preliminary data or to respond to specific events. Array-based campaigns could
include study of the polar atmosphere, magnetosphere, troposphere, and sub-
glacial geology using a diverse set of instruments: magnetometers, GPS
receivers, snow property measurement, and ground penetrating radar. The project
supports instrument development and deployment, increased logistics capability
and reduced costs using the Cool Robot, and is an opportunity to train students
in engineering and arctic research. View the Cool Robots website
http://engineering.dartmouth.edu/crobots/.