* 0806703
* Some mesoscale issues for applied mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2015
* David Kinderlehrer, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/2015
* USD 843,579.00

Kinderlehrer&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0806703&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Mesoscale phenomena in
physical and biological systems&lt;br/&gt;assume prominence when an intermediate
length or time scale is&lt;br/&gt;required to assess gross system behavior or
when the finer active&lt;br/&gt;scales cannot be directly interrogated. These
systems are&lt;br/&gt;frequently metastable. Two broad areas for investigation
have&lt;br/&gt;been identified directly from potential application:
texture&lt;br/&gt;development dependent on interfacial properties of
polycrystals&lt;br/&gt;and diffusion mediated transport with application to
ensembles of&lt;br/&gt;molecular motors. A central materials science problem is
to&lt;br/&gt;engineer a microstructure to attain a desired set
of&lt;br/&gt;characteristics. The group of the investigator has discovered
a&lt;br/&gt;new characterization of material texture, the description of
a&lt;br/&gt;polycrystal in terms of its geometry and crystallography,
called&lt;br/&gt;the grain boundary character distribution, which is found to
be&lt;br/&gt;correlated to interfacial energy. A main objective of
this&lt;br/&gt;project is to explain this characterization employing large
scale&lt;br/&gt;simulation and analysis and stochastic analysis.
Geometric&lt;br/&gt;coarsening is also studied. The goal of the second part of
the&lt;br/&gt;project is to develop appropriate modeling and analytical
methods&lt;br/&gt;to understand how molecular motors function in
various&lt;br/&gt;circumstances, and in particular, to examine
various&lt;br/&gt;transformation pathways and transduction scenarios.
This&lt;br/&gt;involves mass transport theory among other new directions
in&lt;br/&gt;nonlinear analysis. Understanding the predictive character
of&lt;br/&gt;large scale simulations of metastable systems used to
interrogate&lt;br/&gt;and model physical and biological systems is an
emerging&lt;br/&gt;fundamental challenge for mathematical/computational science.
It&lt;br/&gt;is a coarse graining or upscaling question at the
informational&lt;br/&gt;level. The goal of this project is to address this
challenge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project has two related parts. Most
engineered&lt;br/&gt;materials arise as polycrystalline microstructures,
composed of a&lt;br/&gt;myriad of small crystallites, called grains, separated
by&lt;br/&gt;interfaces, called grain boundaries. The energetics
and&lt;br/&gt;connectivity of this network of boundaries are implicated in
many&lt;br/&gt;properties across all scales of use, from nanoscale medicine
and&lt;br/&gt;electronics to aircraft structures. A new characterization
of&lt;br/&gt;material texture is now available, the grain boundary
character&lt;br/&gt;distribution, discovered very recently in the group of
the&lt;br/&gt;investigator. It is as if each material leaves a
unique&lt;br/&gt;footprint in the microscope. A project objective is to
explain&lt;br/&gt;this distribution by simulation and innovative
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;analysis in order to provide materials engineers with
a&lt;br/&gt;predictive tool. Eukaryotic intracellular traffic owes to
a&lt;br/&gt;network of molecular motors moving on cytoskeletal or
actin&lt;br/&gt;filaments. This is the second part. The ability to
successfully&lt;br/&gt;transduce chemical energy to motion owes to functional
elements&lt;br/&gt;and relations in the system. These are modeled and analyzed.
&lt;br/&gt;The opportunity to discover the interplay between chemistry
and&lt;br/&gt;mechanics and to elaborate the implications of
metastability&lt;br/&gt;could not offer a more exciting venue.