* 0806205
* Dissertation Research: FUNCTIONAL CONSEQUENCES OF ADAPTIVE VARIATION AT CHROMATIN REMODELING GENES
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* David Begun, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 06/30/2009
* USD 12,000.00

The dynamic nature of chromatin (i.e., DNA complexed with its protein packaging)
is associated with dynamic gene expression across the genome. Chromatin dynamics
are environment-sensitive, yet the contribution of chromatin remodelers
(proteins that modulate these dynamics) to adaptation to novel environmental
conditions is unknown. Preliminary work described several chromatin remodeling
genes that bear the signature of local adaptation in the commonly studied fruit
fly Drosophila melanogaster. This project will characterize the roles of the
alternative chromatin remodeling gene variants by measuring patterns of gene
expression, and to describe natural variation in chromatin state (static or
dynamic) in response to environmental variation. These questions will be
addressed using technology that enables gene expression and protein-DNA
interactions to be studied within entire genomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will shed light on a novel role for chromatin remodeling proteins. It
will also describe novel gene variants that may reveal novel gene function.
Recent studies demonstrate a link between mutations in chromatin remodeling and
aberrant gene expression profiles associated with many human diseases, including
cancer. Natural variation associated with environmental variation, specifically
environmental stress, documented in Drosophila may shed light on human disease
variation associated with chromatin biology.&lt;br/&gt;