* 0806401
* AMC-SS: Transition Pathways and Free Energy Calculations in Complex Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Weiqing Ren, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2011
* USD 138,515.00

Ren&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0806401&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; In this project, the
investigator develops numerical methods&lt;br/&gt;for the study of complex
energy landscapes and barrier-crossing&lt;br/&gt;events (rare events) as well as
free energy calculations in&lt;br/&gt;multiple-dimensional spaces. In the past
few years, he and his&lt;br/&gt;collaborators developed a theoretical framework
and numerical&lt;br/&gt;methods (the string method) for dealing with barrier-
crossing&lt;br/&gt;events in complex systems. In the first part of the project,
he&lt;br/&gt;applies the string method to problems arising from
material&lt;br/&gt;sciences. In particular, the dislocation motions and the
energy&lt;br/&gt;landscapes of silicon will be studied at the atomistic scale.
&lt;br/&gt;The minimum energy paths at low temperature and the minimum
free&lt;br/&gt;energy paths at finite temperature are investigated. In
the&lt;br/&gt;second part of the project, the investigator studies the
problem&lt;br/&gt;of mapping free energy landscapes in multiple-dimensional
spaces. &lt;br/&gt;For problems arising from theoretical chemistry and
structural&lt;br/&gt;biology, very often the interesting dynamics can be
characterized&lt;br/&gt;by a number of collective variables. For example,
conformation&lt;br/&gt;changes of bio-molecules are usually characterized by
several&lt;br/&gt;torsion angles or distances between different chemical groups.
&lt;br/&gt;The computation of the free energy associated with
these&lt;br/&gt;collective variables is of great practical interest.
&lt;br/&gt;Unfortunately such a calculation has been limited to
situations&lt;br/&gt;when there are only a few collective variables (typically
no more&lt;br/&gt;than 3), mainly due to the enormous number of grid points or
bins&lt;br/&gt;involved in the calculation based on a regular grid. In
this&lt;br/&gt;project, the investigator uses a sparse representation for
the&lt;br/&gt;free energy function based on sparse grids. This to a
certain&lt;br/&gt;extent overcomes the difficulty and allows the mapping of
the&lt;br/&gt;free energy landscape in spaces up to about 30 dimensions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Many problems from structural biology,
theoretical&lt;br/&gt;chemistry, and material sciences can be abstractly
formulated as&lt;br/&gt;a system navigating over a complex energy landscape. The
system&lt;br/&gt;spends most of time in metastable states (the local minima of
the&lt;br/&gt;energy landscape), with thermally activated transitions from
one&lt;br/&gt;metastable state to another. The questions of interest are
the&lt;br/&gt;mechanism of such transition and the transition rates.
These&lt;br/&gt;transitions happen on a time scale specified by Arrhenius'
law,&lt;br/&gt;which is much longer than the intrinsic time scale of
the&lt;br/&gt;dynamical system. For example, the individual atoms in
a&lt;br/&gt;bio-molecule vibrate on the scale of femtoseconds (1e-15 s);
in&lt;br/&gt;contrast, conformation changes of the molecule (which is
the&lt;br/&gt;interesting event) typically happen on the scale of
milliseconds&lt;br/&gt;(1e-3 s -- a trillion times longer than a femtosecond) or
even&lt;br/&gt;longer. The disparity in the time scale makes
traditional&lt;br/&gt;approaches (e.g. the direct simulation of molecular
dynamics or&lt;br/&gt;Langevin dynamics) prohibitively expensive. In this
project, the&lt;br/&gt;investigator develops efficient numerical tools (the
string&lt;br/&gt;method) for the study of such transition events and
the&lt;br/&gt;associated energetics. The numerical method is applied
to&lt;br/&gt;investigate the dislocation motions in crystalline solids at
the&lt;br/&gt;atomistic scale. The mapping of free energy landscapes
of&lt;br/&gt;biological systems in multiple dimensions using
sparse&lt;br/&gt;representations is studied as well.