* 0806610
* Materials World Network: Collaborative Research: Transition Metal Oxide Nanoarchitectures for Photoelectrochemical Hydrogen Generation
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Raymond Adomaitis, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2012
* USD 540,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;The conversion of solar energy into solar fuels provides long-term
storage and transport of the world?s most abundant but intermittent source of
energy. In the transition from fossil fuels to hydrogen as an energy carrier,
materials science will play an unprecedented role. Significant materials
challenges exist in the production and storage of hydrogen related to
development of renewable hydrogen energy based technologies. This joint effort
between the University of Maryland and the Dayalbagh Educational Institute in
Agra, India, implements a systematic study focusing on design, synthesis and
evaluation of inexpensive, abundant and stable transition metal oxide
semiconductor materials, hematite, titania and copper oxide, with end
applications in photoelectrochemical production of hydrogen. The team brings
together expertise in nanomaterials synthesis and characterization (US/India),
and photoelectrochemistry (India). The objective is to improve the state-of-the-
art for this class of photoactive materials through careful integration of
synthesis, characterization, and simulation, and to use this basis for
substantial fundamental advances in materials
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through scientific exchange, as well as exchanges
of personnel, the team develops significant intellectual infrastructure for
materials research, as well as optimizes use of instruments and facilities at
each of the partner institutions in this international collaboration. Beyond the
laboratory, recognizing that advances in materials science will not be
translated into improved quality of life without a well-trained scientific and
engineering workforce, the multidisciplinary and multinational team and the
timely topic of materials for hydrogen generation will attract and retain more
students in the science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
pipeline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the NSF Office of
International Science and Engineering.