* 0806682
* Materials World Network: Nonlinear Optical Metamaterials-Fabrication, Characterization, Theory
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2008,11/30/2012
* Richard Osgood, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 11/30/2012
* USD 313,668.00

This project conducts research into a new class of artificial nonlinear
nanophotonic materials, which makes use of the investigators ability to use
nanofabrication in conjunction with intrinsic materials properties to tailor the
optical response of those metamaterials. The main challenges towards a
comprehensive understanding and experimental realization of nonlinear optical
properties of metamaterials are that a theory of surface and bulk nonlinear
optics of metamaterials is yet to be developed, and a practical means to
fabricate and test such a theory is missing as well. The central rationale for
this collaboration is that it matches a strong UK group at University College
London with demonstrated theoretical capabilities in nonlinear optics and
focused-ion-based fabrication capabilities, with a US group at Columbia
University with a demonstrated record of integrated and plasmonic fabrication,
optical testing, and materials preparation. Interactions with the Brookhaven
National Laboratory (BNL) Nanocenter as well as that with the London Centre for
Nanotechnology are also important for fabrication. The materials of interest
include periodic nanostructures in ferroelectrics and in plasmonic metals.
Several nanophotonic structures are examined, including photonic crystals,
negative index metamaterials, and tuning of these materials using electrooptical
effects in thin membranes. New theoretical aspects are also examined, including
nonlinear effects in plasmonic scattering and plasmonic enhancement of optical
absorption in thin films.

The research undertaken here has several areas of broad impact. First, it
fosters an interdisciplinary examination of the fundamental materials science of
artificial nonlinear metamaterials, including fabrication and growth, materials
physics, optical physics, and theory. Second, it enables two groups in the US
and the UK, with a strong history of interactions and complementary expertise
and capabilities, to collaborate. This work involves the opportunity for both
graduate and undergraduate students to collaborate and travel in an
international setting. Third, the project has concrete plans and procedures to
seek out recruitment of diverse student collaborators via four outreach talks to
undergraduates at Columbia University and one outreach talk at University
College London, UK. It also enables active participation of students in the
undergraduate research opportunities program (UROP) at Columbia. Fourth, the
project enables students to collaborate via extended visits and shorter trips
with a major US National Laboratory, i.e. Brookhaven, in their new Nanocenter,
as well as the London Centre for Nanotechnology.