* 0806509
* Collaborative Research: NYC International Polar Weekend 2008-2009
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2008,01/31/2011
* Stephanie Pfirman, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter West
* 01/31/2011
* USD 40,218.00

The New York City Polar Science Weekend Symposia in 2008 and 2009 share the
excitement of polar research and the International Polar Year 2007 with a broad
public audience. Each weekend event will consist of performances and
presentations for families and school groups, a lecture series tailored for more
adult audiences, and an interactive Polar Fair of researchers working with
visitors to understand research questions in the polar regions. This program
design deliberately allows and encourages people to learn in several different
ways: listening and viewing as well as interaction with scientists through one-
on-one question and answer, demonstrations, and personal participation. The
symposia convey the critical role of the poles in global climate and the
dramatic changes that are already underway and they promote an understanding of
what can be done to mitigate and adapt to global warming and an appreciation for
careers in science and education. The main goal of this project is to enhance
public understanding of science through a focus on the polar regions. As many as
5,000 people, families, individuals and school groups, are anticipated to
participate during each two-day experience. At least 30% of museum visitors are
members of under-served communities. These symposia will reach a diverse
population, of visitors and presenters and through partnering with New York?s
Urban Advantage program for middle schools and New Visions for high schools, to
serve economically, linguistically, and culturally diverse families. This
project will be integrated with other AMNH programming and, through evaluation,
examine how the event influences visitors and presenters. While the main goal is
engaging the public in understanding and appreciating polar environments and
culture, by involving ca. 50 local scientists and other scholars in developing
general presentations, activities and resources, we will also build the capacity
of these academics to become active and articulate spokespeople throughout the
duration of the IPY and beyond. Performers and presenters in 2008 and 2009 will
represent a wide variety of institutions including the American Museum of
Natural History, Barnard College, Columbia University, Lamont-Doherty Earth
Observatory, the Explorers Club, Wings World Quest, New York Times, New York
University, NASA, the Central Park Zoo, Anne Aghion Films, the Cold Regions
Research and Engineering Laboratory in New Hampshire, the Inuit throat singers
from Canada and other international partners.