* 0806720
* Constraining Double Degenerate Mergers
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Francis Timmes, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Womack
* 08/31/2012
* USD 501,260.00

By virtue of their use as standard candles, Type Ia supernovae are key tools in
our quest to measure cosmological parameters, to probe the nature of dark
energy, to understand the origin of matter, and to unravel the final fate of the
universe. However, despite their adoption as distance indicators, questions of
possible systematic effects remain open. Observations of individual Type Ia
supernova explosions, double white dwarf binary systems, and Type Ia supernova
rates in galaxies suggest that they may originate from different progenitor
systems and may depend on the population of the host
galaxy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Here, a comprehensive theoretical analysis will be
undertaken that will examine merging white dwarfs as a pathway for producing
Type Ia supernova. The hope is to better understand possible systematic effects
and thereby improve the fidelity of future cosmological observations. The work
is expected to lead to an understanding of the Type Ia supernova features
produced from double-degenerate mergers based on first-principles physics that
can be tested against current and future observations conducted by instruments
such as the Supernovae Ia Progenitor Survey (SPY), Large Synoptic Survey
Telescope (LSST) and Joint Dark Energy Mission (JDEM). The analysis includes
developing a variety of double white dwarf Type Ia supernova progenitor systems,
multi-dimensional simulations of the dynamical merger event with better mass
resolution and input physics than previous studies, and statistical tools to
generate a set of models that are in the best agreement with the observations of
double white dwarf binary systems and double-degenerate Type Ia supernova
candidates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will also impact a variety of
other areas including cosmology, numerical methods, stellar evolution, massively
parallel simulations, and galaxy evolution. This research will also promote
national and international partnerships, specifically the LSST consortium and
the JDEM enterprise. The project will serve as trans-disciplinary platform for
training young scientific talent through the support of a postdoctoral research
fellow and the results will be integrated into large classes for undergraduate
non-science majors that are intrinsically diverse. Through writing, teaching and
public lectures, the team will also broadly disseminate their results to the
public. The codes developed here, including software for stellar evolution,
nuclear reaction networks, equations of state, thermal conductivities,
deflagrations, detonation, numerical methods and hydrodynamics will continue to
be added to and release to the public throughout the research.