* 0806094
* Extremes: Short and Long-Range Dependence; Modeling and Inference with Applications to Computer Networks and Risk Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2012
* George Michailidis, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2012
* USD 345,300.00

This research program addresses problems arising in the modeling and analysis of
computer network, insurance and financial risk data. Specifically, it develops
global network models and also deals with clustering of extreme values. A number
of associated statistical issues, such as network-wide prediction,
identifiability of parameters of interest and efficient estimation of the Hurst,
tail and extremal indices are also investigated. The proposed global network
models are based on a physically interpretable 'bottom-up' approach, where first
a low level model is constructed for each source-destination pair of network
nodes and subsequently the trafficis aggregated. Under certain limiting regimes,
when the number of users grows and with appropriate rescaling of time, a limit
approximation of the fluctuations of the network-wide traffic is obtained that
is based on functional fractional Brownian motion, a novel class of Gaussian
processes. The limit process captures traffic dependencies induced by the
topology of the network. In a related direction, the study of clustering of
extreme values is undertaken and a number of new estimators for the key
parameter of the extremal index are investigated. This provides a new
perspective in the study of burstiness in network traffic. Further, a flexible
non-asymptotic model of the times between extremes is proposed, which allows
better prediction of the frequency at which extreme values
occur.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current work is motivated by problems in modern
computer networks, where there is a lot of interest in characterizing traffic
fluctuations and burstiness, in order to identify bottleneck links and detect
network failures in the form of routing faults or malicious activities. The
proposed global network-wide models that take into consideration the network
topology together with the temporal dependence in a principled manner allow one
to achieve these goals. Further, the development of new methodology for the
clustering-of-extremes phenomenon will prove useful in assessing the presence
and impact of burstiness in network traffic. The understanding and insight
gained as a result of the proposed research will lead to a core of basic
principles for network traffic analysis. Understanding better and quantifying
the clustering-of-extreme phenomenon will have a broad impact on measuring risk,
by incorporating the temporal dependence in extreme financial losses. Finally,
the proposed models and techniques will be integrated into open source tools.