* 0806915
* Project SOAR: Scholarships, Opportunities, Achievements, and Results
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2014
* Diana McGill, Northern Kentucky University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 07/31/2014
* USD 599,960.00

Project SOAR: Scholarships, Opportunities, Achievements, and Results at Northern
Kentucky University (NKU) is recruiting, retaining, and graduating financially
needy and academically talented students - SOAR scholars - who will enter the
workforce in a STEM-related profession or enter graduate school in a STEM
discipline. Towards these ends, Project SOAR is awarding scholarships to three
cohorts of 19 freshmen matriculating at NKU and providing each student with a
four-year scholarship, the first two years being paid from grant funds and the
last two paid by the university. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific Project SOAR
objectives are to: &lt;br/&gt;(a) increase the enrollment in STEM majors of
undergraduates who are from groups underrepresented in STEM, including women in
the physical sciences, technology, mathematics, and computer science, and first-
generation students, ethnic minorities, and students with disabilities in all
STEM fields;&lt;br/&gt;(b) provide improved educational opportunities and
student support programs in the STEM fields so that SOAR scholars can achieve
their best academic performance;&lt;br/&gt;(c) increase the retention and
graduation rates for SOAR scholars compared to similar populations in both the
STEM disciplines and the university as a whole;&lt;br/&gt;(d) reduce the time to
graduation for SOAR scholars compared to similar populations of STEM majors
attending NKU at the same time;&lt;br/&gt;(e) increase the number of STEM
graduates who enter and remain in the workforce in a STEM-related professional
job or enter graduate school in a STEM discipline; and&lt;br/&gt;(f) contribute
to the economic development goals of northern Kentucky by preparing well
educated STEM graduates who enter the workforce in a STEM-related
profession.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is a collaboration of five academic
departments - biological sciences, chemistry, physics &amp; geology,
mathematics, and computer science - and is housed in NKU's Center for
Integrative Natural Sciences and Mathematics. To attract high school students to
the scholarship opportunities, Project SOAR's leadership team plus NKU faculty
and admissions personnel are aggressively recruiting students who are
underrepresented in STEM disciplines by focusing on urban schools with large
ethnic minority populations and low-income students, and rural schools with very
low college-going rates. SOAR scholars have access to all existing support
services at the university plus extensive additional support designed to ensure
that they excel academically. Key elements of Project SOAR include: faculty
mentors, a year-long freshman seminar; a year-long learning community; an
opportunity for residential students to live together; high quality enrichment
activities; opportunities for research, internships, and co-op experiences; and
academic support services such as peer mentoring and tutoring.