* 0806789
* Variational Methods for Some Problems in Materials Science
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Marian Bocea, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2011
* USD 66,500.00

Bocea&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0806789&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The project is motivated by
several questions in two&lt;br/&gt;distinct areas of materials science. The
first part of the&lt;br/&gt;project undertakes the development of a general
theory that&lt;br/&gt;allows for efficient characterizations of the yield set of
a&lt;br/&gt;polycrystal by means of suitable variational principles
in&lt;br/&gt;L-infinity. A new variational formalism leads naturally
to&lt;br/&gt;several problems in the emerging area of calculus of
variations&lt;br/&gt;in L-infinity for the case where the functionals to be
optimized&lt;br/&gt;are the essential supremum of some expression
involving&lt;br/&gt;divergence-free fields. Here the natural approach is to
minimize&lt;br/&gt;the maximum of certain relevant quantities instead of
their&lt;br/&gt;average. The investigator studies selected issues in
this&lt;br/&gt;direction, with an emphasis on those that can have an impact
on&lt;br/&gt;our understanding of plasticity. Among these, the study of
the&lt;br/&gt;systems of partial differential equations that arise as
Aronsson&lt;br/&gt;equations associated to the new variational principles
in&lt;br/&gt;L-infinity is of particular interest. The second part of
the&lt;br/&gt;project deals with the derivation of nonlinear membrane
theories&lt;br/&gt;from three-dimensional elasticity, seeking to better
understand&lt;br/&gt;the formation of interfaces in thin films of
martensitic&lt;br/&gt;materials. The project sheds light on the structure of
the&lt;br/&gt;minimizers for a new effective thin film energy, and
indicates&lt;br/&gt;appropriate minimizing sequences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The
project aims to set on rigorous mathematical grounds&lt;br/&gt;some of the
traditional models used by engineers and material&lt;br/&gt;scientists and, on
the other hand, to explore new variational&lt;br/&gt;principles in the case
where one wants to know how big some&lt;br/&gt;quantity can be at its maximum
value, not merely on average. &lt;br/&gt;This question arises in many areas of
science and engineering and&lt;br/&gt;is of fundamental importance in such
applications as elasticity,&lt;br/&gt;image processing, damage and fracture
mechanics, and plasticity. &lt;br/&gt;The investigator studies this question in
the first part of the&lt;br/&gt;project. In the second part he deals with the
derivation of&lt;br/&gt;nonlinear membrane theories from three-dimensional
elasticity. &lt;br/&gt;This is motivated in part by the need, originating from
important&lt;br/&gt;technological applications, to better understand and predict
the&lt;br/&gt;formation of interfaces in thin films of martensitic materials.
&lt;br/&gt;The project sheds light on the structure of the minimizers for
a&lt;br/&gt;new effective thin film energy recently proposed by
the&lt;br/&gt;investigator, and indicates appropriate minimizing sequences
that&lt;br/&gt;are expected to provide some insight into the design
of&lt;br/&gt;technologically useful active material structures, more
complex&lt;br/&gt;than those suggested by existing thin film theories.