* 0806753
* Materials World Network:  NSF-Germany (DFG) Materials Collaboration:  LIGA Ni-base Superalloys for MEMS Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Kevin Hemker, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Taleff
* 07/31/2012
* USD 363,000.00

This project establishes a science-based protocol for optimizing processing and
heat treatment routes to produce a new class of materials (electrodeposited Ni-
base superalloys) that will dramatically improve the functionality of
electrodeposited LIGA materials. An international research team from Johns
Hopkins University (JHU) and the Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT)
collaborate on this task. Overarching scientific issues addressed by this team
include: (i) control and optimization of electrodeposition parameters to
uniformly entrain Al nano-particles in electrodeposited Ni micro-components,
(ii) development of heat treat schedules required to transform the as-deposited
green composites into ?×?{?×¡¦ superalloy microstructures, and (iii)
characterization of the resultant microstructures and attendant mechanical
properties. Close interaction of the research groups allows for optimization of
the process flow and result in the creation of novel high temperature LIGA
electrodeposited Ni-base superalloys for MEMS
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technological motivation for this
collaboration is derived from the opportunity to expand the temperature
capability of current MEMS materials. To date, the majority of commercial MEMS
devices have been thin film sensors manufactured using chemical and vapor
deposition processes. The availability of LIGA Ni-base superalloys would greatly
expand the design space for next generation MEMS devices. Development of a
process flow for electrodeposition of Ni-base superalloys will also lay the
foundation for electrodeposition repair strategies that would provide tremendous
technological and economic advantage in the repair of turbine blades for both
jet propulsion and power generation. International exchanges of graduate
students and senior personnel fuel and enable this collaboration and provide a
unique educational experience for all participants. Moreover, the proposed
inclusion of Baltimore city high school students through mentoring at JHU and a
foreign visit to KIT will greatly expand their academic and cultural horizons.