* 0806155
* Learning about the Tail of the Probability Density Function for Equilibrium Climate Sensitivity
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2012
* Michael Schlesinger, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 05/31/2012
* USD 555,348.00

The importance of human-induced climate change depends critically on the
equilibrium climate sensitivity (referred to as climate sensitivity hereafter,
i.e., the change in global surface air temperature resulting from a doubling of
the pre industrial atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration). The
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) historically assessed the
climate sensitivity at a range from 1.5 to 4.5 degrees Celsius. The PIs document
that there is a significant likelihood that the climate sensitivity lies outside
this range, with probability density functions (pdfs) that have a thick upper
tail. The most recent IPCC report presents a number of pdfs for the sensitivity,
all of which have a thick upper tail. This research focuses on the thick upper
tail. Testing whether or not the real climate system is located in this thick
upper tail is not just a tantalizing scientific puzzle, but can also provide
large economic value, as it can inform the design of improved climate policies.
A recent economic analysis shows that the thick upper tail of current climate
sensitivity estimates can dominate the ranking of proposed climate-change
strategies in terms of their benefit/cost ratio. The intuition behind this is
that a decision maker may give considerable weight to the very costly outcomes
of different climate change strategies that are associated with the cases where
the thick upper tail of current climate sensitivity estimates is revealed to be
the true state of the system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will use their simple
climate model and updated observational data to test five hypotheses: (1) The
inclusion of the additional near-surface air temperature observations since 1998
will reduce the 90% confidence interval of climate sensitivity; (2) The
inclusion of non-sulfate aerosol radiative forcing will increase the 90%
confidence interval of climate sensitivity, this because the resulting negative
radiative forcing will be greater than that for sulfate aerosol alone; (3) The
inclusion of oceanic heat-content data will reduce the 90% confidence interval
of climate sensitivity; (4) The combined effect of these three datasets will be
a reduction of the 90% confidence interval of climate sensitivity; (5) The
uncertainty in climate sensitivity due to climatic noise can be reduced by
learning about climate sensitivity overtime. In addition, the PIs will examine
how climate variability and paleoclimatic information influence the estimation
of the pdf of climate sensitivity. The Bayesian averaging method that they will
use will allow them to learn about different radiative forcing models and
incorporate their associated hindcast abilities into the estimation of the
distribution of climate sensitivity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of the research is that it will produce improved estimates of climate
sensitivity from both the Frequency and Bayesian points of view using additional
observations: updated surface air temperatures, ocean heat content,
paleoclimatic data, and radiative forcing from non-sulfate aerosols. This
knowledge will inform decision-makers about the magnitude and rate of reductions
in the anthropogenic emission of greenhouse gases that are needed to "...prevent
dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system", as required by
Article 2 of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change. This is also the
most important broader impact of the research. The second broader impact will be
the use of the results by other scientists to study the impacts and policy
implications of human-induced climatic change. The third broader impact will be
public outreach and communication. The PI will continue this via his lectures to
the public, business leaders and policymakers.&lt;br/&gt;