* 0806780
* Attacking the Gathering Storm in Computer Sciences and Mathematics (STORM)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2015
* Scott King, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 08/31/2015
* USD 599,599.00

This project is awarding scholarships to talented students to increase the
quantity and diversity of students who complete undergraduate degrees in
computer science or mathematics. Students are recruited from both local
secondary schools and community colleges, with twelve scholarships offered
annually. A number of project components that are designed to increase academic
success contribute to the intellectual merit of this effort. These include:
combining appropriate-level classes in mathematics to create cohort groups of
computer science and mathematics students; providing student-student, faculty-
student, and industry-student mentoring programs and workshops; and motivating
students through opportunities for research projects and internships. A diverse
management team is also in place including department faculty leaders in the two
departments, the Director of Financial Services, and the Dean of the College
housing the computer science and mathematics departments. Additional student
support services units on campus are also involved. In terms of broader impacts
the project is promoting increased participation of talented Hispanics in the
fields of computer science and mathematics through its financial, academic, and
practical support. This is leading to an increase in the talent base and
diversity of newly graduated persons entering either the workforce or pursuing
advanced degrees.