* 0806821
* Topological Characterization and Optimization of Mixing
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Jean-Luc Thiffeault, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2012
* USD 200,000.00

Many industrial applications require the mixing or blending of ingredients and
reagents, often at great energetic costs. Examples include food processing,
polymer processing, and microfluidics. Stirring and mixing are also crucial
ingredients for quantifying climate change. Most approaches to these problems
involve direct solution of the underlying differential equations. In this
proposal we advocate a complementary viewpoint that focuses on the topology of
stirring. For the case of stirring with rods, topology refers to the orbits that
the rods follow, and how these orbits interlock. Our two broad aims are the
characterization and optimization of stirring devices from a topological
viewpoint. To characterize means to describe existing devices or stirring
configurations using a topological approach, in order to learn as much as
possible about the device without necessarily solving the full governing fluid
equations. A thorough characterization allows us to then optimize devices to
maximize their topological mixing characteristics. Our research applies a
powerful body of existing mathematics -- the Thurston-Nielsen theory of surface
transformations -- to fluid-dynamical problems. This theory has not yet been
fully exploited in practical situations. Since the topological approach does not
use differential equations directly, many of the results are independent of the
specific fluid involved. One example of the type of optimization made possible
is a class of rod-stirring devices we call the silver mixers: their "topological
entropy" is a multiple of the silver ratio, the golden ratio's lesser-known
cousin. Silver mixers are optimal in the sense that there is no motion of rods
that can "stretch" so-called material lines at a faster rate.

Many industrial applications require the mixing or blending of ingredients and
reagents, often at great energetic costs. Examples include food processing,
polymer processing, and microfluidics -- the emerging science of manipulating
fluids at microscopic and nanoscales. Stirring and mixing are also crucial
ingredients for quantifying climate change, for example to estimate the rate of
absorption of greenhouse gases by the ocean. In all cases, it is important to
understand the nature of the mixing process in order to improve it, thereby
increasing quality or yield. Most approaches to these problems involve direct
solution of the underlying equations, a formidable task even with today's
computers. We advocate a complementary viewpoint that focuses on geometrical
features of stirring -- or "topological" in mathematical language. For the case
of stirring with rods, topology refers to the orbits that the rods follow, and
how these orbits interlock. Recent developments in mathematics provide us with
novel tools to study this problem. Our two broad aims are the characterization
and optimization of stirring devices from a topological viewpoint. To
characterize means to describe existing devices or stirring configurations using
a topological approach, in order to learn as much as possible about the device
without necessarily solving the full equations. A thorough characterization
allows us to then optimize devices to maximize their topological mixing
characteristics. For example, given a small number of rods constrained to move
on gears, a typical situation in the food industry, we have devised a device
that leads to optimal mixing merely by tweaking the trajectory of individual
rods.