* 0806521
* Materials World Network: Chemical Vapor Deposition of Nanostructured Carbon Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,11/30/2013
* Yogesh Vohra, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 11/30/2013
* USD 416,014.00

This project between the University of Alabama at Birmingham - Center for
Nanoscale Materials and Biointegration (UAB-CNMB) and the Technical University
of Lodz - Centre of Excellence NANODIAM (TUL-NANODIAM, Poland) addresses
compositionally graded, and multiphase carbon-based materials fabricated in
microwave (MW) at UAB, radio-frequency (RF) and combined RF+MW at TUL, plasma-
assisted chemical vapor deposition (PACVD) processes, as well as the
interdisciplinary training of globally engaged students and young scientists in
physics and chemistry of materials, nanoscience, and biomedical engineering
technology. The scientific goals of the project are to advance the fundamental
knowledge of the phenomena associated with the nucleation and growth of
nanostructured diamond (NCD)-based materials in MW, RF, and RF+MW PACVD
processes, to develop new approaches to fabricate NCD structures with
predetermined microstructure and surface morphologies, and to further improve
the mechanical properties and physiochemical performance of NCD coatings on
metals, in particular, on biomedical alloys, through the optimization of the
surface morphology of the coatings, smart design of the substrate/coating
interface, and directed surface functionalization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
knowledge will help the advancement of nanostructured NCD materials and devices
with potential innovative applications in biomedical and other fields. The
project provides exciting opportunities for participating students and junior
researchers (at least 3-4 every year from each side) to gain international
research and cultural sensitivity experiences through short- and medium-term
visits to conduct joint experiments and to use complementary instrumentation at
the partner?s institution, and through the participation in international
conferences and seminars. The international education component will be enhanced
by a unique joint virtual learning resource within the topics of the proposed
network program, which will combine two graduate courses of similar content
currently taught at UAB (PH732 ?Growth and Characterization of Thin Films I?)
and TUL (049L8 ?CVD and PVD Methods in Surface Engineering?). In addition,
undergraduate students in the UAB Science and Technology Honors Program and the
UAB REU-Site will be exposed to the international collaborative research
environment through their participation in the network project activities and
through the interaction with visiting TUL researchers and
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the NSF Office of
International Science and Engineering (OISE). &lt;br/&gt;