* 0806807
* Synthesis of Heterocyclic Natural Products
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Steven Weinreb, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2011
* USD 405,000.00

This research program deals with the stereospecific total synthesis of several
complex naturally-occurring molecules having biological and/or structural
significance. In particular, emphasis will be placed upon producing and refining
methodology having potentially broad applicability which will be of practical
use to both organic and medicinal chemists involved in synthesis of
chemotherapeutic agents. Work has been initiated on total syntheses of some of
the challenging, structurally unique polycyclic marine bryozoan alkaloids of the
chartelline/chartellamide/securamine group and these studies will be continued
during the requested grant period. Specifically, total syntheses of chartelline
A and securine A/securamine A will be completed. In addition, studies are
nearing completion on a short enantioselective total synthesis of the unusual
Securinega alkaloid secu?amamine A via a novel tandem multistep process to
construct the unique tetracyclic ring system of the natural product.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry
Program of NSF is supporting the research of Professor Steven M. Weinreb of the
Department of Chemistry at Penn State University. Professor Weinreb's research
efforts revolve primarily around the development of efficient new methodology
for the synthesis of heterocyclic organic compounds, and applications of this
chemistry to the synthesis of important structurally complex natural products.
Successful development of the methodology will have particular impact on
synthesis of intermediates in the pharmaceutical and agricultural industries.
&lt;br/&gt;