* 0806097
* Development of Model Selection for Semiparametric Models in Analysis of High-Dimensional Data
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Hua Liang, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2011
* USD 99,898.00

The investigator proposes a class of variable selection procedures for partially
linear models with measurement errors using non concave penalized likelihood.
The proposed procedures can estimate the coefficients of significant variables
in the model and simultaneously exclude the insignificant ones. The sampling
properties of these estimators will be established. The investigator also
extends the ideas of the penalized least squares approaches to robust partially
linear models with measurement errors, partially linear models for longitudinal
data, and partially linear single index models. The rates of convergence of the
resulting estimators and the oracle properties for the resulting estimators with
proper choice of the tuning parameters will be investigated. Monte Carlo
simulations are to be conducted to examine the finite sample performance of the
proposed procedures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed models and methods are
motivated by the investigator?s study of the role of HIV-1 RNA (viral load),
CD4+ T cell count, and other potentially useful biomarkers in HIV/AIDS clinical
trials. The results of this project will help to identify important markers and
trace the disease progressing in AIDS research. The theoretic results will
contribute to the advancement of the statistical theory on variable selections
and semiparametric inference. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;