* 0806893
* Materials World Network: Mapping Oxide Surface Reactivity Through Spacially-Resolved Atomic Interaction Forces
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Eric Altman, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 06/30/2012
* USD 420,000.00

This is a collaborative research project between Yale University and the
Universidad Autonoma de Madrid in Spain. The goal of the project is to
characterize the chemical reactivity of individual surface atoms on transition
metal oxide surfaces using non-contact atomic force microscopy with
functionalized tips. For this purpose, a new technique capable of mapping the
strengths of chemical interactions on the atomic scale will be developed through
experimentation (carried out in Udo Schwarz' and Eric Altman's groups at Yale
University) guided by theory (performed by Ruben Perez' group at the Universidad
Autonoma de Madrid). The work builds upon recent demonstration of the ability to
experimentally obtain the entire three-dimensional force field acting between a
probe tip and surface in the short-range chemical forces regime with atomic
resolution. Using this method with tips functionalized to expose electrophilic
and nucleophilic head groups allows for the characterization and quantification
of the key properties that govern oxide catalysis for individual cations and
anions on the surface, in specific site geometries. The new method is initially
applied to a comparison of the local chemical properties of Ti cations and O
anions on the rutile (110) and anatase (001) surfaces, which, despite chemical
and structural similarities, behave markedly differently chemically. For a
fundamental understanding of the measured tip-sample interaction, the
experimental program couples with a synergistic multi-scale theoretical effort
that includes a quantum mechanical description of the short-range chemical
forces, a classical description of the longer range dispersion forces, and
molecular dynamics simulations of the influence of the forces on the probing
geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The international collaboration of Yale
University and the Universidad Autonoma de Madrid that is at the heart of this
project provides a unique educational experience for the graduate and
undergraduate students involved in the project. Through extended student
exchanges during each year of the project, students are immersed in state-of-
the-art experimental and theoretical efforts while being exposed to a truly
international research environment. Also, further development of the method as a
robust technique promises to impact other fields that are governed by local
surface interactions including tribology, thin film growth, electronic device
design, and the specific chemical interactions at the center of much of biology.