* 0806991
* Materials World Network: Structure, Dynamics and Critical Phenomena in Biaxial Liquid Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Satyendra Kumar, Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2012
* USD 510,000.00

This international collaboration, between scientists at the University of Hull,
UK and Kent State University having complementary expertise, focuses on
understanding phenomena associated with biaxiality - the spontaneous occurrence
of two distinct optical axes - in the so-called nematic phase of liquid crystals
(LCs). Although it was hypothesized about 38 years ago, biaxial nematics have,
until recently, proven quite elusive in real materials - indeed, virtually all
nematics are optically uniaxial and virtually all applications of LCs have been
restricted to the manipulation of a single optical axis. The biaxial nematic
phase is expected in LCs composed of molecules (or, molecular aggregates) that
are intrinsically biaxial in shape, e.g., plank-like or bent-core (banana-
shaped) molecules. Another important possibility for formation of a biaxial
nematic, which has been the subject of several intense theoretical
investigations, arises in mixtures of disk- and rod-shaped molecules. Depending
on the aspect ratios of these component molecules and on the concentration, one
can expect three nematic phases, two uniaxial and one biaxial, with a specific
topology of the phase diagram and interesting evolution of the nature of phase
transitions. The principal investigator in the UK, Professor Georg Mehl, and his
team have pioneered the synthesis of compatible rod- and disk-like systems,
which form stable solutions and exhibit distinct nematic phases (possibly
including a biaxial phase). The US researchers will probe the structure,
optical, and other physical properties, the dynamics, and critical behavior at
several interesting phase transitions between different nematic phases, both in
systems with biaxial-shaped molecules and in rod-disc mixtures.

The results and the data acquired under this project will help test the validity
of the current theories and provide important insight into the physics and
chemistry of novel LC materials. The researchers will employ state-of-the-art
techniques such as dynamic light scattering, synchrotron x-ray diffraction,
confocal and atomic force microscopies, and electro-optical measurements in
their investigations. The results of this project are likely to have
transformative impact on the industry via the emergence of a new display
technology and other applications of optically biaxial fluids. Undergraduate and
graduate students and postdocs will be trained in an area that has the potential
of impacting the fields of photonics, telecommunications, and cyber
infrastructure. Junior researchers will have opportunities to interact and forge
long-term professional contacts with members of the research group in the UK and
other international scholars at the Advanced Photon Source. US graduate students
and postdocs will be able to diversify their skills and scientific experience
and begin their careers with a profound appreciation for materials development
as well as physical characterization.