* 0806864
* Bridging the gap between local community colleges and engineering at the University of San Diego
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2013
* Ming Huang, University of San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Joyce B. Evans
* 06/30/2013
* USD 413,848.00

The objective of this project is to increase the opportunities for community
college transfer students who are talented but have financial limitations to
earn a baccalaureate degree in engineering at the university. These students are
being provided academic, financial, and personal support necessary to allow them
to earn their B.S. degrees in three years in an academic environment committed
to their needs. The program targets low-income, underrepresented ethnic minority
and women engineering students. The two cohorts of 6 students each are being
supported for three years to complete B.S. degrees in mechanical, electrical, or
industrial and systems engineering. The project builds on a student scholars
program initiated by a previous NSF S-STEM project and current university
programs. It introduces multiple student support activities specifically for
these scholars including: Focused Introduction to Engineering Course, a Peer
Tutoring and Mentoring Program, Professional Society Support, S-STEM Website,
WebCT Cohort Session, Faculty Mentoring, Scholar Workshops for Transfer
Students, and Transfer Scholar Social Events. These activities are designed to
promote a sense of community among the scholars, support the scholars' academic
progress and professional development, and enable them to serve as resources for
each other. The outcome is a set of diverse and talented students who are
graduating and being placed in either graduate programs or industry within 6
months.

Intellectual Merit: The recruitment, retention, and placement of the students
into an integrated cohort for the program promote student success. The addition
of well-prepared and diverse graduates to the workforce is an important
contribution to the intellectual merit of the project. The project is an
excellent opportunity to gain a deeper understanding of the underlying factors
leading to the successful recruitment, enhanced retention, and graduation of
community college transfer students at a private university.

Broader Impacts: Results from this project are being disseminated to the
engineering education community at conferences such as American Society of
Engineering Education (ASEE) and Frontiers in Education (FIE), and publications
in relevant journals such as the Journal of Engineering Education. A website
that document program activities and results is accessible to the scholars and
other institutions. The scholars are helping in outreach efforts to encourage
girls in middle and high school to join science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) fields. The diverse backgrounds of scholars are particularly
valuable for interacting with girls from diverse backgrounds who attend these
programs.