* 0806827
* Collaborative Research: Chemical Weathering and Organic Carbon Export from Arctic Watersheds, North Slope, Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2013
* James McClelland, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 08/31/2013
* USD 264,624.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt;Recent climate change has dramatically impacted the Arctic,
and models suggest that accelerated effects will occur in the future as CO2
continues to accumulate in the atmosphere. Understanding this problem is
important because arctic environmental change could have planetary-scale
repercussions within human timescales. In particular, oxidation of organic
carbon stored in permafrost might create a positive feedback to global warming.
While numerous studies have focused on the relationship between warming and
carbon cycling in the Arctic, specific effects of rising atmospheric CO2 levels
on chemical weathering processes and coupled changes in organic carbon dynamics
have received relatively little attention. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
has two integrated goals: to identify mineral weathering reactions and
hydrologic processes that control how and at what rate the inorganic solute
geochemistry of water evolves during transport within soils and streams and to
establish linkages between chemical weathering phenomena and organic carbon
export. The work will focus on the major ion and isotope geochemistry of
headwater streams and creeks draining the North Slope of Alaska. Based on
preliminary data, the guiding hypothesis of the work is that the ratio of
carbonate to silicate weathering fluctuates in response to seasonal changes in
discharge and permafrost active layer depth, with the highest ratios observed
during base flow conditions and maximum active layer depth and the lowest ratios
observed during peak flow conditions and minimum active layer depth. To test
this hypothesis and its implications for understanding organic carbon export,
the team will: 1) Quantify rates of major cation release, CO2 consumption, and
dissolved organic carbon (DIC) production by carbonate and silicate weathering;
2) Evaluate controls on the Ca, Sr, and C (of DIC) isotope composition of rivers
and soils; and 3) Establish relationships between these tracers and other river
water constituents, including H and O isotopes of water, organic matter
concentrations, and the isotope composition of organic matter (both C and N).
They will collect water, sediment, bedrock, and soil samples. Water sampling
will occur from spring thaw through fall freeze-up. In the laboratory, they will
conduct leaching and digestion experiments to quantify mineral weathering end
members. They will synthesize data using mass-balance modeling, carbonate
equilibria calculations, hydrograph separations, and elemental and isotope
mixing equations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study represents one of the first
integrative efforts to elucidate fundamental linkages between the isotope and
organic geochemistry of Arctic Alaskan rivers. Because warming will likely alter
the ratio of carbonate to silicate weathering via several feedback mechanisms,
this study will establish a novel method for monitoring Arctic environmental
change at the watershed scale. &lt;br/&gt;