* 0806636
* RUI: Waves in Hamiltonian Systems with Applications to Bose-Einstein Condensates
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2008,11/30/2011
* Todd Kapitula, Calvin University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 11/30/2011
* USD 142,969.00

Kapitula&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0806636&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The governing equations for
the wave function of a&lt;br/&gt;Bose-Einstein condensate (BEC) are Hamiltonian;
in particular,&lt;br/&gt;they are a variant of the nonlinear Schrodinger
equation known as&lt;br/&gt;the Gross-Pitaevskii equation. The analysis of this
physical&lt;br/&gt;system leads to several intriguing fundamental
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;problems for Hamiltonian systems which deal with the
existence,&lt;br/&gt;spectral stability, and nonlinear stability of waves. The
major&lt;br/&gt;mathematical problems to be addressed in this proposal
include&lt;br/&gt;(a) the construction and spectral stability of
fully&lt;br/&gt;three-dimensional waves in the presence of a cigar magnetic
trap&lt;br/&gt;via the technique of spatial dynamics, (b) the construction
and&lt;br/&gt;spectral stability of two-dimensional periodic waves in
the&lt;br/&gt;presence of an optical lattice, and (c) a careful study
of&lt;br/&gt;eigenvalues with negative Krein signature. Regarding (c),
there&lt;br/&gt;are two avenues that are to be explored: (1) the determination
of&lt;br/&gt;embedded eigenvalues of negative sign in the case that
the&lt;br/&gt;solitary wave is realized as a limit of a family of
periodic&lt;br/&gt;waves, and (2) the determination of the exact number
of&lt;br/&gt;eigenvalues with negative sign.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Especially
since the 1997 Nobel Prize winning work of S.&lt;br/&gt;Chu, C. Cohen-Tannoudji,
and W. Phillips on the exotic quantum&lt;br/&gt;phenomenon known as BECs, there
has been a great deal of exciting&lt;br/&gt;experimental and theoretical work in
the study of BECs. In order&lt;br/&gt;to form a BEC, it is necessary that the
matter is cooled to&lt;br/&gt;billionths of a degree above absolute zero; hence,
BECs are&lt;br/&gt;extremely fragile, and it is likely to be some time before
any&lt;br/&gt;practical applications are developed. Nevertheless, they
have&lt;br/&gt;proved to be useful in exploring a wide range of questions
in&lt;br/&gt;fundamental physics. Examples include experiments that
have&lt;br/&gt;demonstrated interference between condensates due
to&lt;br/&gt;wave-particle duality, the study of superfluidity and
quantized&lt;br/&gt;vortices, and the slowing of light pulses to very low
speeds. &lt;br/&gt;Vortices in BECs are also currently the subject
of&lt;br/&gt;analogue-gravity research, studying the possibility of
modeling&lt;br/&gt;black holes and their related phenomena in the lab.
The&lt;br/&gt;mathematical results of this proposal will help
both&lt;br/&gt;theoreticians and experimentalists better understand the
dynamics&lt;br/&gt;of not only patterns such as vortices, necklaces, and
solitons in&lt;br/&gt;BECs, but also the dynamics of waves and patterns in
Hamiltonian&lt;br/&gt;systems which are used to model interesting phenomena such
as&lt;br/&gt;waves in fluids and light propagation in optical fibers.
The&lt;br/&gt;inclusion and training of undergraduate students is an
integral&lt;br/&gt;part of this proposal. Introducing students to the
interplay&lt;br/&gt;between applications and experiments, numerics, and formal
and&lt;br/&gt;rigorous analysis, will lead them to being excited about
seeing&lt;br/&gt;the connections between the physical world and the
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;world. This will further lead the participating students
towards&lt;br/&gt;a deeper appreciation for the usefulness of mathematics in
other&lt;br/&gt;disciplines, and perhaps then allow them to be open to the
idea&lt;br/&gt;of doing more serious applied mathematics at the graduate level.
&lt;br/&gt;Calvin College has a history of producing successful
Ph.D.&lt;br/&gt;students in mathematics and statistics. Approximately one-
third&lt;br/&gt;of these students have been women, who are
significantly&lt;br/&gt;underrepresented in the mathematical sciences.
Furthermore,&lt;br/&gt;Calvin has been very successful in the education and
training of&lt;br/&gt;secondary education teachers. As a consequence of this
award,&lt;br/&gt;the investigator will be able to fruitfully support
the&lt;br/&gt;college-wide effort in training future researchers and
educators&lt;br/&gt;in the mathematical sciences.