* 0806664
* Community of Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholars
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2013
* Sylvia Sorkin, Community College of Baltimore County, Essex
* Standard Grant
* Susan Finger
* 07/31/2013
* USD 497,000.00

This project awards 20 scholarships annually and provides multiple support
services to promote full-time enrollment and degree achievement in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) disciplines by eligible
students. Target disciplines are Biology, Chemistry, Computer Science,
Engineering, Environmental Science, Mathematics, and Physics.

Intellectual Merit: Project objectives are to: (1) recruit, graduate, and
transfer increased numbers of STEM students, especially women and
underrepresented minorities; (2) provide awardees with academic, career, and
professional development opportunities for transfer to 4-year institutions or
employment; and (3) strengthen existing informal consortia agreements and
develop such relationships with other four-year institutions to ease awardees'
transfer. Recruitment efforts focus on local public schools and Community
College of Baltimore County (CCBC) students currently enrolled in college
algebra and science courses. Scholarship recipients receive mentoring by STEM
faculty, academic/career advising, a two-day summer career identification
experience, a seminar series with a career lunch featuring a guest speaker each
semester, networking opportunities with employers and prior awardees, Individual
Academic Learning Plans, and optional STEM internships. Recipients are
encouraged to transfer to four-year institutions by designating up to 20% of the
scholarship funds to "follow" awardees who have earned an associate degree or 45
credits in STEM fields when they transfer. The project is guided by the
scholarly literature on student success and builds on the college's success with
prior NSF projects.

Broader Impacts: This project broadens participation of underrepresented groups
and strengthens existing academic partnerships to increase student awareness of,
and preparation for, STEM fields. Scholarships reduce awardees' need to obtain
employment while attending college and allow the students to attend full-time.
Dissemination of results through the project website, conference presentations
and poster sessions, and publication of peer-reviewed articles extends the
project's reach.