* 0806937
* Materials World Network: Rational Material Design usingcorrelated Electron Materials, Enviromentally Friendly Energyand Color.
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Gabriel Kotliar, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2012
* USD 449,000.00

This Materials World Network (MWN) award supports a joint research project
between Rutgers University (RU) and French counterparts in Ecole Polytechnique
(EP) and at Centre de Saclay (CEA) to build a "Lab without walls" for predictive
understanding of correlated electron materials. These are materials, in which
the effects of electron interactions are unusually strong, and as a consequence
they exhibit a range of new and exciting behavior; their remarkable properties,
such as high-temperature superconductivity, colossal magnetoresistance,
anomalous thermoelectricity, and ultrafast optical nonlinearities, continue to
surprise the condensed matter and materials community. The electronic structure
of these materials is not well described by the standard models of solid state
physics. This award will strengthen the existing collaboration between RU, EP
and CEA by building a cyber-lab to advance the frontiers of our understanding of
correlated materials using new computational tools based on Dynamical Mean Field
Theory. The goal of the proposed research is to harness the unique
functionalities of correlated electron materials to demonstrate the premise that
material design using these materials is possible, thus getting closer to the
practical design of materials with useful features. Two test projects will be
pursued, the design of pigments with yellow and blue color based on rare earth
oxides, fluorides and sulfides such as Ce2O3 and the optimization of the
thermoelectric figure of merit in a the class of marcasite transition metals
pnictides such as FeSb2. The first project would help understand the optical
properties of coloring pigments that are environmentally-responsible and the
second project relates to energy conversion potential of an interesting
materials system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Success in rational material design
using strongly correlated materials will have significant implications. Classes
of natural and artificial compounds with desirable properties will be identified
using theory and computation which would help improve currently employed trial
and error procedures that are expensive and time consuming. The concepts and
computational tools generated by this international lab without walls will be
disseminated widely (workshops, web-access to database etc.) so as to have great
impact in the future search for better materials within the class of correlated
electron systems, speeding up material discovery in
general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In parallel with the research efforts, this
project will develop new pedagogical tools for visualizing unique properties of
these materials, and for conceptualizing and teaching the theory behind their
extraordinary functionality. This project includes training of a postdoctoral
researcher as well as graduate and undergraduate students by fully involving
them in the international research and education experience of developing
computational tools for designing new materials with useful physical properties.
This Materials World Network project called "Lab without walls" will, thus,
integrate research and education efforts on correlated electron materials from
different segments of the world community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
jointly funded by the Division of Materials Research in the Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Directorate and the Office of International Science and
Engineering.