* 0806910
* Final Mass Loss on the AGB and Planetary Nebula Formation
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Patrick Huggins, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Womack
* 07/31/2012
* USD 256,305.00

This project addresses an important unsolved problem in the evolution of
ordinary (1 to 8 solar mass) stars in their transition from the asymptotic giant
branch to the planetary nebulae phase: the nature of the final mass loss and the
origin of their jets. Enhanced equatorial mass loss and high-velocity jets
dominate the early development of planetary nebulae and appear to be nearly
ubiquitous, but their origins are unknown. Here, observations of the neutral gas
and dust ejected by the stars will be used to address key aspects of this
evolutionary phase. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) The Geometry of AGB Envelopes: Deep
imaging will be carried out at optical wavelengths to determine the structure of
circumstellar envelopes at the tip of the asymptotic giant branch. The results
will be used to determine the long-term evolution of the mass loss geometry
leading up to the transition, which provides key constraints on possible jet
triggering mechanisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) Jets and Equatorial Tori:
Observations will also be made of newly formed jets and tori in proto/young
planetary nebulae using ultra high resolution (roughly 0.3 arc sec) millimeter
interferometry. Spectro-imaging of the molecular gas will be carried out in
lines of 12CO, 13CO, and other molecular species to determine the geometry,
mass, and dynamics of the jets and tori, and their inter-relations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The observations will be used to provide general
constraints and to test specific scenarios of the final mass loss and jet
formation. The results are expected to substantially improve our understanding
of this key phase of stellar evolution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
impact other fields of astrophysics as planetary nebulae constitute a new class
of objects with jets, whose distinct characteristics may offer novel insights on
how jets can form. This project also involves the education and research
training of graduate and undergraduate students at New York University. It
further fosters international scientific co-operation, and forms the basis for
Professor Huggins' on-going outreach efforts which are broadly centered on
stellar evolution. This includes "Stars in the Curriculum," a collaborative
program with an education specialist and practicing teachers, designed to
enhance the science curriculum in public schools in New York City.