* 0806207
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The neuroethology of ultrasonic communication in anuran amphibians
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2010
* Peter Narins, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 06/30/2010
* USD 11,791.00

Victoria Arch Proposal # IOS-0806207 Title: DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The
neuroethology of ultrasonic communication in anuran amphibians.

Among the vocal vertebrates, anuran amphibians (frogs and toads) have long been
considered the champions of acoustic simplicity. However, recent research
suggests that this tenet of simplicity may not always hold true. Among the most
striking examples is the recent discovery of a frog species, Odorrana tormota,
that communicates ultrasonically (i.e., above the upper limit of human hearing),
making it the first non-mammalian vertebrate shown to communicate with
extraordinarily high-frequencies. Recent recordings of the vocalizations of
another frog species, Huia cavitympanum, imply that anuran ultrasonic
communication is not limited to O. tormota. A subset of H. cavitympanum's high-
frequency calls are entirely ultrasonic, a feature previously undocumented in
amphibians. Whether they use these ultrasonic calls to communicate, however, is
not yet confirmed. The objectives of the proposed research are to 1) determine
whether H. cavitympanum individuals communicate ultrasonically, using both
behavioral and electrophysiological techniques; 2) characterize and compare the
inner ear auditory organs of H. cavitympanum and O. tormota to determine the key
specializations that allow these species to hear ultrasound. This research
represents an opportunity to enhance our understanding of mechanisms used by
lower vertebrates, with relatively simple acoustic behavior and auditory
systems, to exploit an extraordinarily high-frequency communication channel. The
discovery of previously undescribed mechanisms that permit high-frequency
hearing within the distinctive anuran auditory system may provide insight into
the evolutionary foundations of high-frequency hearing in all vertebrate forms,
including humans. In addition, because the focal species of this project, H.
cavitympanum, is found only on the island of Borneo, this research presents a
unique opportunity to develop relationships with Southeast Asian researchers,
and to present the results of this research to a variety of cultural and
socioeconomic groups. This outreach provides a scientific and social bridge
between disparate cultures that can contribute to future collaboration and
student exchange.