* 0806461
* Collaborative Research: Small time behavior of multiscale diffusions motivated by stochastic volatility models
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Jean-Pierre Fouque, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2012
* USD 216,144.00

The well-established theory of large deviations describes the small
probabilities that a diffusion process moves from one point to another part of
the state space in a short time. This is particularly interesting in the context
of financial mathematics in which one is interested in the behavior of the stock
price in a short time. For instance, this will be relevant to option prices at
short maturities, or probabilities to reach a default level in a short time.
Multi-factor stochastic volatility models have been studied intensively in the
past years, and they have been found very useful to describe the observed
smile/skew of implied volatilities. At short maturities the rate functions
appearing in the large deviation estimates will usually not be given in closed
form, and will depend on some details of the models like volatility of
volatility. On the other hand it has been shown that multiscale stochastic
volatility models and their asymptotics are very useful to obtain accurate
approximations of option prices and hedging strategies which can be efficiently
computed with only a few group parameters easy to calibrate to data. It is then
natural to study asymptotic expansions of the rate function in the regime of
separation of volatility time scales. In particular, the regime in which the
maturity is small but large compared to the mean-reversion time of the
stochastic volatility factor turns out to be very interesting and challenging.
The research supported by this award is about deriving and fully justifying such
asymptotic expansion. The problem will be formulated as logarithmic asymptotic
for exponential moments of certain functionals of diffusion processes, which in
turn is connected with homogenization/averaging theory for Hamilton-Jacobi-
Bellman equations. The collaborative nature of the research combines expertise
in the area of multiscale stochastic volatility modeling, in the areas of large
deviation theory, and viscosity solution and homogenization/averaging for HJB
equations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support a multidisciplinary
research effort. It concerns very practical modeling issues in the area of
financial mathematics as well as theoretical convergence results in the theories
of large deviations for diffusion processes and homogenization of nonlinear
partial differential equations. It is expected that the results obtained on
small default probabilities will be very helpful in understanding default
mechanisms in credit markets. This research therefore is very timely. The senior
PI at UCSB is actively involved in organizing conferences, workshops and special
sessions which promote interaction between academic researchers and
practitioners. The research will be given full exposure in the activities of the
newly created Center for Research in Financial Mathematics and Statistics
(CRFMS) at UCSB. The collaborative project will also serve as a training tool
for graduate students and postdoctoral fellows at both institutions, UCSB and
KU.&lt;br/&gt;