* 0806710
* Engage, Connect, and Deliver STEM Scholars
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2015
* Jeffrey Jacobs, Bismarck State College
* Standard Grant
* Lidia C. Yoshida
* 08/31/2015
* USD 597,540.00

The Engage, Connect, and Deliver STEM Scholars is awarding scholarships for
financially needy students who demonstrate academic promise and are enrolled in
a science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) field of study. The
framework for the project is linked to the strategic plan of the college. Four
partners from industry and state government are supporting the project by
providing internships and cooperative education experience. The goals of the
project are to: (a) Increase the number of students enrolling in STEM
disciplines. (b) Increase educational opportunities for underrepresented
students. (c) Utilize articulation relationships to promote seamless transfer
for STEM students. (d) Strengthen internal collaboration within the college to
support successful implementation of the project. (e) Enhance relationships with
employers from STEM-related industries in order to increase the number of
employees who are educated and skilled in "technical areas of national need";
specifically within the following majors: Mathematics and Computer Technologies,
Science and Engineering, Industrial Technology, Energy Technology, and
Agriculture Technology and Natural Resources.

Intellectual Merit: The project advances knowledge and understanding through
student learning in the STEM disciplines. Experience from a prior NSF CSEMS
benefits the project. Enabling students to successfully participate in their
education through a framework of comprehensive enrollment, teaching, learning,
and support structures, the project promotes retention, builds a community of
scholars, and assists students with workforce entry. Benchmark objectives for
project outcomes include an increase in the five-year average rate of retention
through individualized student action plans, a first semester seminar, and other
student-focused strategies. The project is creating an active learning community
of STEM students who persist in completing their education goals.

Broader Impacts: The intended impact of the project is to increase educational
opportunities for students in STEM disciplines and begin to address the
shortfall of workers critically needed in technical areas of national
importance. The in-state demand from employers is significant due to the
expanding economy leading STEM-related industries to hire graduates at placement
rates approaching 100%. In addition, the project is broadening its impact by
reaching minority students through a multicultural recruitment and retention
plan.