* 0806606
* Building the Future: Improving Recruitment and Retention of Underrepresented and Financially Disadvantaged Science and Math Students
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2015
* LaVern Whisenton-Davidson, Millersville University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 07/31/2015
* USD 584,980.00

This project is providing approximately 28 scholarships over five years for
financially disadvantaged and underrepresented students. Selected students
majoring in biology, chemistry, computer science, earth sciences, mathematics or
physics with identified financial need are receiving up to $5,000 of scholarship
support annually. The program is promoting an increase in the number of
underrepresented STEM students, improved retention of students in the STEM
disciplines, and is targeting 90% or better placement of STEM graduates in jobs
and professional or graduate schools. The Management Team includes faculty from
six STEM disciplines plus assistance from support staff in admissions, financial
aid, information technology, and academic learning
services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Support structures for the STEM Scholars include
faculty mentoring, tutoring, peer mentoring, living learning communities, and a
workshop series that develops academic skills, explores career options, and
prepares students for placement after graduation. Co-ops and undergraduate
research offer additional capstone opportunities for the students. Assessment
includes annual analysis of retention data and use of student focus groups and
exit surveys. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recruitment and retention approaches are
being analyzed to identify sustainable strategies that can be applied for all
STEM students at Millersville University and other institutions. Information on
successful program elements is being disseminated via STEM Scholars website and
via presentations at regional and national meetings and
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;