* 0806962
* Enhancing Mathematics and Computer Science Opportunities in a Supportive Liberal Arts Environment
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2014
* Greta Pangborn, Saint Michael's College
* Standard Grant
* Nicole Bennett
* 06/30/2014
* USD 578,500.00

This scholarship program is recruiting and supporting highly promising, but
financially needy, computer science and mathematics students. Students are being
provided a strong technical education in a supportive environment within the
context of a broad liberal arts curriculum. This prepares graduates to enter the
workforce with not only technical proficiency but also the written and oral
communication facility, critical thinking skills, and intellectual flexibility
essential to success in today's rapidly advancing
workplace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Students benefit from
institutionally supported models of teaching-scholarship and joint faculty-
student research. They have opportunities to participate in independent study
and research projects culminating in conference presentations, published papers,
and software packages. Many other students gain experience through industry
internships. These initiatives result in highly competent students with robust
technical backgrounds who are prepared to contribute to industry, government,
and graduate research programs. The program provides individual attention in
classes, one-on-one mentoring, and a supportive collaborative environment. The
program builds on an effective CSEMS award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The project targets rural and first-generation students in recruitment
efforts. The college emphasizes community involvement, a global perspective, and
service activities. These opportunities are important as graduates' professional
decisions are based in part on the humanitarian perspective they develop during
their baccalaureate experience. Thus, the broader impacts of this program
include the nurturing of future members of science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) area industries who are responsible global citizens.