* 0806120
* Collaborative Research: A paradigm for dimension reduction with respect to a general functional
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Xiangrong Yin, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2012
* USD 124,197.00

The proposed research aims to developing a general formulation and the related
methods for sufficient dimension reduction (SDR) where a specific functional (or
parameter) of the conditional distribution is of interest. The past two decades
have seen vigorous development of the SDR methods and have accrued a striking
record of their successful applications. However, to a large extent these
methods treat the conditional distribution as the object of interest, without
discriminating between parameter of interest and nuisance parameter. While there
are methods that target statistical functionals, they are specific to the
parameter in consideration and as such are difficult to apply to other
parameters. The investigators propose a new paradigm for SDR that focuses on a
functional of the conditional distribution, which can be any one in a very wide
class that covers most of applications. In addition, the investigators propose
to develop a coherent collection of associated techniques for estimation,
computation, and asymptotic inference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High throughput
technologies that produce massive amount of complex and high-dimensional data
are increasingly prevalent in such diverse areas as business, government
administration, environmental studies, machine learning, and bioinformatics.
These provide considerable momentum in the Statistics community to develop new
theories and methodologies, and to reformulate the existing ones, that are
capable of discovering critical evidence from high-dimensional and massive data.
SDR is a recent area of statistical research that arose amidst, and has been
propelled by, these new demands. The investigators propose to reformulate the
theories and methodologies of SDR so that they can be specifically tailored to
target to be estimated. This new paradigm not only synthesizes, broadens, and
deepens the recent advances in SDR, but brings the understanding of SDR on a par
with classical statistical inference theory, by following the tradition of
sufficiency, efficiency, information, parameter of interests, and nuisance
parameters, which are the key ideas that has helped to propel classical
inference to its maturity.