* 0806700
* Materials World Network: Collaborative Research:  Exploring Reduced-Dimensional Behavior of Excitations in Tailored Semiconductor Nanowire Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Howard Jackson, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 08/31/2012
* USD 396,000.00

Semiconductor nanowires have emerged as a new class of materials with
significant potential to reveal new fundamental physics and to propel new
applications. This international collaborative research project brings together
research teams from USA (University of Cincinnati, and Miami University) and
Australia (Australian National University and University of Queensland) with
expertise in state-of-the-art semiconductor nanowire heterostructure growth,
high resolution electron microscopy, and high resolution optical spectroscopy,
to advance the understanding of the electronic landscapes of these unique
nanostructures. The overall goal is to understand how nanowire heterostructures
affect the physics of electronic states and their interactions. The synergistic,
collaborative research of this team will explore three significant research
thrusts: (1) Achieving high quality growth of III-V nanowires and radial, axial
and hybrid nanowire heterostructures (2) Understanding the physics of these
novel nanowire heterostructures (3) Measuring and understanding p- and n- type
doping of these structures. These studies are expected to advance the
understanding of the nature of quantum confinement in tailored radial and axial
heterostructures, how quantum confinement affects the localized and continuum
electronic states and their coupling, spins, scattering mechanisms with other
elementary excitations in nanowires, as well as interactions with external
electric and magnetic fields. This research will directly involve the
interaction among and the training of graduate students, postdoctoral fellows
and undergraduate students in multi-disciplinary area in an international
setting. All participants in this research will be involved in an annual
"Saturday International Nano Science and Engineering Day" for area middle school
students where potential young scientists and engineers can explore nanoscience
in an exciting hands-on environment.

The development of a fundamental understanding of the 0- and 1-dimensional
physics of nanowire heterostructures will have strong societal benefits,
influencing the development of new thrusts in optoelectronic device technology
and ultimately making possible new varieties of sensors and other compact
devices. This project will also train our nation?s future workforce in the
critical areas of nanoscience and engineering. The exposure of graduate and
undergraduate students, as well as postdoctoral fellows, to an international
interdisciplinary scientific environment will deepen their understanding of the
science involved and inform a more sophisticated perspective on the challenges
and effectiveness of international collaboration, a signature of successful 21st
research in nanoscience.

This Materials World Network award makes possible a coherent integrated research
and education effort among four universities in the US and Australia, on the
growth and characterization of semiconductor nanowires as well as the
understanding of the physics of their electronic states. This award is jointly
funded by the Division of Materials Research in the Mathematical and Physical
Sciences Directorate and the Office of International Science and Engineering.