* 0806229
* Collaborative Research: The Role of Microbial Food Webs in Carbon Fluxes and Shelf-Basin Exchange in the Arctic Ocean
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Michael Follows, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 07/31/2011
* USD 125,105.00

The Shelf-Basin Interaction (SBI) program and other large, multi-disciplinary
projects have recently completed field work to examine carbon cycling in the
Arctic Ocean. These programs included measurements of microbial standing stocks
and production because of the fundamental importance of microbes in structuring
marine food webs and in modulating fluxes of inorganic and organic carbon in the
oceans. It has been hypothesized that heterotrophic bacteria and the rest of the
microbial loop process less primary production in high latitude oceans than in
most oceanic regimes because perennially cold water inhibits microbial activity.
Some of the data from the SBI program indicate that the flux of carbon through
the microbial loop is lower in the western Arctic than in warmer marine systems,
whereas other data indicate organic carbon degradation exceeds rates of primary
production. These observations have major implications for our understanding of
carbon export and exchange between productive shelf waters and organic carbon-
poor basins of the Arctic. However, several unresolved issues remain about the
validity and interpretation of the data, the generality of the SBI findings, and
the impact of microbial processes on the Arctic carbon system.

To address these issues, this effort will examine the following questions:

1. What is the structure of energy flow through the microbial loop in various
regions of the Arctic Ocean?

All data on microbes and related biogeochemical parameters from SBI and other
Arctic studies will be analyzed in order to compose a pan-Arctic synthesis and
to identify possible linkages between regions of the Arctic Ocean ecosystem.

2. What is the impact of microbial activity on the carbon system in the western
Arctic?

Microbial rates will be compared with rates of net community production and DOM
export as estimated from temporal and spatial variations in DIC and DOC in the
western Arctic.

3. What is the role of transport in decoupling the production and degradation of
organic matter in the Arctic Ocean?

An explicit, three dimensional model of Arctic Ocean circulation and
biogeochemistry will be used to evaluate the role of transport in the spatial
and temporal decoupling of production and respiration.

This work will help maximize use of the datasets collected by SBI and other
programs, of which much has not been thoroughly analyzed and synthesized. In
addition, the data synthesis and modeling efforts will provide a framework in
which to consider how climate change may affect carbon fluxes and food web
dynamics in the Arctic. This synthesis will be an essential mile post for
gauging the trajectory of potential changes in this important ecosystem.

