* 0807205
* Galactic M Dwarf Flare Rates
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2008,12/31/2011
* Suzanne Hawley, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Maria Womack
* 12/31/2011
* USD 235,352.00

The rate at which low mass stars flare is a subject of significant current
interest for understanding magnetic dynamo evolution, the effect of flares on
the evolution of nearby planets, and the transient variability signature of
flares in present and future large time-domain sky surveys. Here, a major
observational program will be undertaken to obtain new data on flare light
curves, frequencies and energies for classes of low mass stars that have been
previously ignored (relatively inactive stars, and very late type stars). A set
of numerical simulations to model M dwarf flares on a Galactic scale will also
be carried out.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With these new data, Dr. Hawley and
collaborators will determine the changes in flare activity that occur as stars
become fully convective, providing insight and empirical constraints on new
turbulent dynamo models for magnetic field production. The flare data will also
be incorporated into models of planetary atmosphere evolution under the
influence of flaring from the parent star. The numerical simulations will
transform the study of individual flares on a few nearby stars into definitive
predictions of the global implications of M dwarf flares on a Galactic
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The observational component of the project will be
fully integrated into the University of Washington's Pre-Major in Astronomy
Program (Pre-MAP) and the advanced undergraduate Capstone observing sequence.
Pre-MAP is focused on increasing diversity by immediately involving freshmen
from under-represented populations in research projects beginning in their first
quarter of study. The Capstone sequence trains advanced undergraduate astronomy
majors in observational techniques, data reduction and analysis using a 1-meter
class telescope at the nearby Manastash Ridge Observatory. Faculty and graduate
students will work with both freshmen and advanced undergraduates, and the
undergraduates will additionally work with each other, building a mentor-ladder
that will benefit the individual students. This project will also support two
graduate students whose thesis material will come from this project.