* 0807639
* Canopy Structure and CO2 Exchange of Arctic Vegetation: Key Constraints on Change and Predictability of the Arctic System
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2013
* Gaius Shaver, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 07/31/2013
* USD 997,872.00

&lt;br/&gt;This research will improve understanding of the broad patterns of
vegetation function across the Arctic through research on the relationships
among arctic vegetation canopy structure, N allocation, and whole-system CO2
fluxes, and ecosystem respiration and its main components, plant and soil
respiration. The research is part of a search for the general characteristics of
vegetation function, resource allocation, and allometry that can be used to
develop large-scale, long-term predictions of vegetation and ecosystem
properties and of the role of arctic ecosystems in the arctic
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sites planned for research include Toolik Lake and
Barrow, Alaska; Cherskii, Siberia; Thule, Greenland; and perhaps sites in
northern Canada. Field research at each site will include measurements of the
light response of CO2 flux in diverse vegetation (Net Ecosystem Exchange, NEE;
Gross Primary Production, GPP; Ecosystem Respiration, RE; Autotrophic
Respiration, RA, Heterotrophic Respiration, RH). The vegetation and soil
variables to be evaluated--canopy photosynthetic area and its N content, NDVI,
soil C and N content, and microclimatic variables like canopy air and soil
temperatures--are all key components of regulation of the feedbacks and
interactions between the terrestrial landscape and the cycles of energy, water,
and elements in the arctic system. The core hypotheses to be tested
are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Over the entire arctic region, canopy N content
will be a better overall predictor of NEE and GPP than leaf area because leaf N
concentrations will increase in higher, colder latitudes, leading to higher GPP
per unit leaf area with latitude but similar GPP per unit leaf
N.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. In the long term RE, RA, and RH must all be related
to GPP and its controls because GPP determines the total C inputs to the
ecosystem. In the short term, RA, and RH will respond differently to
environmental variation: RA will be most closely correlated with relatively
rapid changes in air temperature while RH will change more slowly and in
correlation with more slowly-changing variables like soil temperature and
moisture&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to empirical analysis of results,
modeling of NPP, GPP, and RE will test our ability to extrapolate from one site
to another within the Arctic and will help to determine whether a single model
parameterization can be developed for the entire Arctic. A key product will be a
data base for modeling and extrapolation of vegetation properties and CO2 fluxes
across the arctic region.