* 0807852
* The Utilization of Collaborative, Peer-Assisted, and Web-Enhanced Learning Approaches in an Introductory Psychology Research and Learning Enhancement Laboratory
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2007,08/31/2009
* Jennifer Morrow, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/2009
* USD 27,957.00

Psychology - Biological (71), Psychology - Cognitive (73)

The Research and Learning Enhancement Laboratory (R&LE) project is designed to
enhance introductory-level undergraduate students' comprehension of research and
statistical methods in the psychological sciences. To achieve this goal, the
project is building on the LEARN program, developed at the University of Rhode
Island, to create research and learning enhancement laboratories that
incorporate collaborative, peer-assisted, and web-enhanced pedagogies for
introductory psychology students. Students spend one hour of a three hour
Introduction to Psychology course in an R&LE lab; the other two hours of the
course are spent in a lecture-based classroom. Performance of students in the
experimental R&LE lab course is being compared to students in a control course
that consists only of lecture classes. Performance measures include increases in
students' quantitative skills, knowledge of basic psychological concepts,
research and statistics self-efficacy, motivation, cognitive learning
strategies, and sense of belonging. The results and methods of the project are
being disseminated to STEM faculty at several institutions. Through papers,
manuals and workshops, faculty are learning how to incorporate these methods in
their courses, and how to engage students in collaborative research activities
very early in their educational training.