* 0807427
* The Direct Detection of Giant Extrasolar Planets with the NICI Science Campaign
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Laird Close, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Womack
* 08/31/2011
* USD 206,012.00

Through this award, Dr. Close, his students, and collaborators will support the
very large (500 hour) Near-Infrared Coronagraphic Imager (NICI) Campaign at the
Gemini Observatory (an NSF sponsored astronomical facility). The goal is to
image extrasolar planets in orbit around nearby young stars through a dual-
channel methane-band (differential) imaging technique. It is expected that
several giant planets will be detected among the 150 young stars to be
surveyed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, Dr. Close and his students
will:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Design the high-contrast observing procedure,
drawing on the complex dither/roll/differential imaging procedures used
throughout Dr. Close's previous surveys. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) Optimize the
design of the Campaign, based on different target selections and contrasts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) Help to analyze the commissioning data and plan the
Campaign observing strategy and also help with the analysis and reduction of the
Campaign datasets&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4) Provide unique software tools
developed in this project to allow the automatic detection of faint planets in
NICI datasets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These activities will support and train
some of the next generation of large telescope observers, adaptive
optics/coronagraphy experts, and cutting-edge observational astronomers and
planet hunters. Through this project there will be significant graduate student
presence at Gemini-South taking and reducing NICI data in nearly "real-time"
over the next 3 years. In addition, the NICI campaign is better poised to image
extrasolar planets than any other current survey. The first images a bona-fide
extrasolar planet will have transformative impact on our knowledge of planet
formation and the frequency of solar systems with outer giant planets.