* 0807896
* Nonlinear Signal Processing and Wireless Communications using Frames and Operators Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Radu Balan, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2012
* USD 177,243.00

Balan&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0807896&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The investigator develops a
new mathematical framework for&lt;br/&gt;nonlinear signal processing and
wireless communication channels. &lt;br/&gt;The nonlinear signal processing
problem addressed here is signal&lt;br/&gt;reconstruction from the magnitude of
a redundant linear&lt;br/&gt;representation. When the linear redundant
representation is&lt;br/&gt;associated to a group representation (such as the
Weyl-Heisenberg&lt;br/&gt;grgoup), the relevant Hilbert-Schmidt operators
inherit this&lt;br/&gt;invariance property. Thus a fast (nonlinear)
reconstruction&lt;br/&gt;algorithm seems possible. A wireless communication
channel is&lt;br/&gt;modeled as a linear operator that describes how
transmitted&lt;br/&gt;signals propagate to a receiver. For ultrawide band
(UWB)&lt;br/&gt;signals, the Doppler effect no longer can be modeled as
a&lt;br/&gt;frequency shift. Instead it is captured as a time
dilation&lt;br/&gt;operator. A continuous superposition of time-scale shifts
is&lt;br/&gt;used to model a UWB communication channel, and consequences
to&lt;br/&gt;pseudo-differential operator theory are analyzed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The investigator takes up two problems related to
signal&lt;br/&gt;processing. In the first he considers how to represent
signals&lt;br/&gt;in ways that allow more effective reconstructon of them
from&lt;br/&gt;limited information. In the second he analyzes properties
of&lt;br/&gt;wireless communication channels, aiming at improvements
in&lt;br/&gt;transmission. The solutions to these problems have a
strong&lt;br/&gt;impact in the strategic area of information technology.
&lt;br/&gt;Important applications such as signal processing,
X-ray&lt;br/&gt;crystallography, and quantum computing are affected by
solutions&lt;br/&gt;to the first problem. High-impact applications related to
the&lt;br/&gt;second problem include ultrawide-band through-wall
imaging&lt;br/&gt;systems, higher-throughput 802.15 Wireless Personal
Area&lt;br/&gt;Networks, and wireless sensor networks. &lt;br/&gt;