* 0807400
* A Multi-wavelength Study of the Massive Black Hole Sagittarius A* at the Galactic Center
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Farhad Yusef-Zadeh, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 06/30/2012
* USD 371,926.00

Dr Yusef-Zadeh will use multiwavelength time-series observations to test two
models to explain the flaring observed in the Milky Way's central radio source.
According to the 'plasmon' model, blobs of radio-bright material move outwards
from the central black hole, brightening at successively longer wavelengths as
they become optically thin to their own synchrotron radiation. If the flares are
instead caused by hot-spots in an accretion disk around the black hole, the
source should brighten simultaneously at all wavelengths. Sub-millimeter
observations would be taken in both the northern and southern sky with single-
dish telescopes, and radio-telescope arrays would be used at centimeter
wavelengths, to measure both total intensity and polarization over periods of
several days. Data from two such campaigns in 2007 is now in hand, and another
that includes observations with NASA's Chandra space telescope in the X-ray is
scheduled for mid-2008. Future campaigns may include mid-infrared data from
ESA's Herschel space telescope. Archival data from the Very Large Array will
also be used. Theoretical work will include an extension of the plasmon model to
predict polarization that arises from the anisotropic emitting
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Yusef-Zadeh has developed an interactive web
client with problem-based exercises for undergraduate and adult-education
classes. He will develop further exercises for this system, based around this
project. He will also continue to coordinate a program of interdisciplinary
science lectures for the public, to teach at Adler Planetarium, and to involve
students in public outreach. A postdoc will be trained through involvement in
the research.