* 0807578
* Development and evaluation of a problem-based, field and laboratory environmental geochemistry course
* GEO,GEO
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Carla Koretsky, Western Michigan University
* Continuing Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 08/31/2011
* USD 134,534.00

Western Michigan University will initiate a model problem-based undergraduate
course that will help students to acquire important skills required for
employment in the environmental industry. These include the ability to design
statistically-significant field data collection protocols in temporally and
spatially heterogeneous environmental systems and to recognize appropriate
methodologies (and their limitations) for water, sediment and microbial sample
collection, preservation and analysis. Additionally, students will learn to work
effectively with their peers and communicate the results of their study to the
general public. Currently, most geosciences and environmental studies students
receive little to no hands-on training in environmental field and laboratory
methods and have few opportunities to practice communication of science to the
public. Initially, the course will focus on an urban lake undergoing cultural
eutrophication. Students will work collaboratively to assess lake water quality
and to consider appropriate remediation or pollution prevention strategies.
Their results will be presented to area residents, local K-12 teachers, and
other undergraduate students in an open house setting. Educational research
utilizing a multi-case study approach will provide rigorous assessment of the
efficacy of this problem-based, service-learning curriculum. Research will
examine how students in the course conceptualize complex environmental problems,
as well as how they acquire or refine essential research skills in the context
of problem-based courses. This research will also provide insights into the
novice-expert transition, which has seen little formal study and is still poorly
understood with respect to how students gain field skills viewed as critical to
the geoscience and environmental science professions.