* 0807690
* The MEarth Project:  A Transit Search for Rocky Planets in the Habitable Zones of Low-mass Stars
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* David Charbonneau, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Womack
* 06/30/2011
* USD 557,229.00

Nearby, low-mass M-dwarf stars are particularly attractive targets for transit
surveys to detect small, rocky planets orbiting within their stellar habitable
zones. Unlike their Sun-like counterparts, terrestrial planets transiting late
M-dwarfs present a photometric signal that is of sufficient depth as to permit
detection with ground-based observatories. Moreover, the low stellar
luminosities imply that the habitable zones are located at small orbital
distances from the central star, which in turn suggests detection of planets in
their habitable zones should be facilitated by the higher geometric probability
of a transit, and by the reduced orbital period and hence time span required to
detect such an event.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Here, Dr. Charbonneau will lead a
3-year survey of the 2000 nearest late M-dwarfs with a cadence and sensitivity
sufficient to detect habitable-zone planets with radii as small as twice that of
the Earth. The survey will be conducted at the MEarth Observatory at Mt Hopkins
in southern Arizona, which consists of 8 identical 40cm CCD-based telescopes
located in a single roll-off enclosure. By sequentially surveying only nearby,
well-characterized targets, MEarth overcomes the severe problems of false-
positive contamination that have plagued extant wide-field surveys.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is expected that the survey will either detect large,
habitable-zone terrestrial exoplanets, or yield an upper limit (with 99%
confidence) of 17% on their rate of occurrence. In the event of a detection,
these planets will (1) provide the first constraints on models of the physical
structure and composition of terrestrial exoplanets, (2) inform models of the
planetary formation around low-mass stars, and (3) provide keystone targets for
subsequent studies of their atmospheres, which in turn will permit an
understanding of the atmospheric chemistry and dynamics for terrestrial
exoplanets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this project, postdoctoral fellows,
graduate students and undergraduates will be trained through access to a
cutting-edge research opportunity in the rapidly-evolving field of exoplanet
science. The results will be disseminated broadly by Dr. Charbonneau and the
project participants through a series of publications in refereed journals,
articles in popular science magazines, talks at astronomical and
interdisciplinary research conferences, and a project webpage geared for the
general public.