* 0807305
* Flow-Driven Molecular Cloud Formation: An Origin of the Initial Mass Function?
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Lee Hartmann, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* James Neff
* 08/31/2013
* USD 300,273.00

Lee Hartmann, Edwin Bergin, and Fabian Heitsch (University of Michigan) will
compute models of flow-driven molecular cloud formation to derive the
appropriate initial conditions for star formation. The goal is to generate the
turbulent substructure needed to create the dense concentrations which
ultimately form stars as a result of various instabilities in post-shock gas,
rather than put this substructure in ''by hand''. The turbulence generated by
these instabilities will be modified by global flows generated by self-gravity;
such flows can produce mid-scale concentrations of mass leading to the formation
of star clusters. The program will involve a series of calculations of
increasing complexity, including molecule formation and other chemistry, cooling
at high densities, self-gravity, and the effects of magnetic fields. Detailed
radiative transfer calculations will be employed to compare in detail with
observations of molecular clouds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will attempt
to answer the following questions: Do instabilities which arise naturally in
flow-driven molecular cloud formation produce a mass spectrum of dense
concentrations consistent with observations of protostellar cores? Do these
initial perturbations solely determine the core mass function, or is there
significant gravitational merging/coagulation? Is the resulting core spectrum
consistent with the stellar initial mass function, or must there be additional
fragmentation? How does the environment (metallicities, flow parameters) affect
the fragmentation and thus the initial mass function? And how do magnetic fields
affect the formation of protostellar cores within flow-formed molecular clouds?
These questions are of direct importance to understanding star formation and the
origin of the stellar initial mass function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of
this project will have application to research in the areas of galaxy mergers
and star formation at low metallicities because the mechanism of colliding flows
is not limited to current Galactic star formation. This project will result in a
numerical data set that can be readily compared to observational data of
existing or upcoming high-resolution facilities; the simulation results will be
made publicly accessible, with analysis tools also provided to extract basic
observables. In addition, the numerical projects as well as their results will
provide ample training opportunities for undergraduate or graduate student
research projects.