* 0807413
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Ecological Role of Fish in Southwestern Streams
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2010
* Nelson Hairston, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 05/31/2010
* USD 11,936.00

A species with a strong influence in one ecological community may have a limited
influence under other environmental conditions, but the factors determining the
strength of species interactions are often unclear. Fish control important
characteristics of many stream systems. Native fishes of the American southwest
are ideal for testing the influence of abiotic and biotic factors on species
interactions because single species are broadly distributed throughout a
heterogeneous landscape of hot deserts and cool mountains. Native fishes are
declining in these streams; thus, understanding the effects of their loss is
vital.

To assess how environmental context affects species interactions in Southwestern
streams, this study will investigate the influence of two related, but
functionally different fish species, Catostomus insignis and Catostomus clarki,
on ecosystem processes along an elevational gradient. This gradient will enable
examination of the effects of these species on critical stream processes such as
primary production and organic matter generation under conditions ranging from
warm water, low desert streams to cool water, high mountain streams. Using
large-scale enclosures controlling fish identity in a single stream combined
with small-scale fish exclosures in multiple streams, this study will estimate
the effects of fish on ecosystem properties, and assess how environmental
context modifies them. The project also will track fish habitat use to
understand if effects on ecosystem processes are heterogeneous within the
stream. Understanding the factors modifying species importance in ecosystems
will provide information particularly valuable for management agencies, which
must develop sustainable practices to use and protect these ecological
resources.