* 0807055
* Scholarship Program to Support STEM Students at North Carolina Central University
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2014
* Laura Smith, North Carolina Central University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 07/31/2014
* USD 555,220.00

The S-STEM program at North Carolina Central University (NCCU) is increasing the
number of under-represented minorities in the science and technology workforce,
with particular focus on the NCCU departments of Physics and Environmental,
Earth and Geospatial Sciences. With scholarships available to sophomores through
graduate students, NCCU's program is improving retention, matriculation,
graduation rates, and acceptance into graduate programs or careers in the STEM
fields. In addition to scholarship funds, each S-STEM scholar receives extensive
support to ensure success, including the assignment of a faculty mentor who
works with the students and also provides feedback to the management team on
student performance. S-STEM scholars also benefit from the rich local research
capacity that includes NCCU's STEM departments, the Research Triangle Institute,
the US Environmental Protection Agency and the National Institute of
Environmental Health Sciences. Through this research environment, scholarship
recipients are provided the opportunity to participate in research programs and
interact with researchers; attend seminar series in their STEM areas; and
participate in local and national research conferences. Other services provided
to S-STEM scholarship recipients include tutorials and career development. The
S-STEM program provides scholarships of approximately $7100.00 per year to each
of seventeen students, including at least one graduate student in each of the
five NCCU STEM departments.