* 0807875
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Infectious Disease in Wild African Carnivores: Are Domestic Dogs a Reservoir for Common Canid Pathogens?
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2008,11/30/2009
* Katherine Prager, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 11/30/2009
* USD 12,000.00

Domestic dogs are thought to be the source of infectious diseases that threaten
wild African carnivore populations including the critically endangered African
wild dog (Lycaon pictus). This project seeks to understand the role of domestic
dogs and African carnivores in pathogen transmission dynamics and to apply this
knowledge towards carnivore conservation efforts. Jackals (Canis mesomelas) and
hyenas (Crocuta crocuta) living in areas with low or high levels of exposure to
domestic dogs will be tested for evidence of exposure to specific pathogens.
Findings from this and a concurrent study in African wild dogs will be used in
the development of a predictive model that will help guide conservation
management decisions for African carnivores at risk.

Conservation of top predators such as African wild dogs, jackals and hyenas is
critical for maintenance of healthy ecosystems and for their intrinsic value,
which brings tourism income to developing countries. Pathogens, such as rabies
and canine distemper virus, may have a significant impact on the survival of
these top predators, leading to disruption of ecosystems. In addition, rabies
presents an important human health risk. By understanding the ecology of these
and other infectious diseases that threaten these animals, appropriate
conservation management and human health policy can be developed and
implemented.