* 0807954
* Mathematics of Anisotropic Electrical and Dielectric Properties of Nanocomposites
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Xiaoyu Zheng, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/2012
* USD 95,305.00

Zheng DMS-08-7954

The investigator studies two important areas in nanocomposites: (1) homogenized
effective dielectric constant of nanocomposites; and (2) percolation-dominated
electrical conductivity of nanocomposites. This project is focused on
anisotropic systems with orientationally ordered nanoparticles, and is based on
an accurate description of the nanoparticle orientational probability
distribution function from flow-processing databases, which we then map to
effective properties through volume averaging and percolation phenomena. In the
first part, the effective dielectric tensor is considered in two explicit
systems of current interests: high dielectric constant nanoparticles dispersed
in polymers, and conducting nanoparticles dispersed in polymers. Both systems
are observed to lead to enhanced effective dielectric properties. This requires
careful preparation, because the properties are extremely sensitive to details
of composition and processing. In the second part, key aspects of salient
electric properties are considered, such as percolation threshold modification
by mechanical loading, multiscale homogenization method, and a molecular-scale
electron hopping model. Numerical and mathematical homogenization and non-
equilibrium percolation techniques need to be developed to address these
challenges. The proposed projects modify, apply, test, and extend existing
mathematical theory and numerical approaches for two-phase (or three phase, if
interphase is considered) composites, where the number of particles and new
surface area simply overwhelm existing tools.

The aspirations for extreme property enhancements through designer
nanoparticles mixed into traditional materials are based on prototype
experiments. However, there are new challenges unique to nanocomposites for
which there are no predictive mathematical or computational tools. This project
is a response to these needs, through a coordinated combination of mathematical
analysis and scientific computation, ranging in scale from individual particles
to bulk properties. Today, limitations imposed by particle numbers only allow
low moments of the nanoparticle distributions to be measured, and the inherent
material sensitivity to the details of the distribution observed in experiments
is unknown. This project gives insight into the mechanism underlying extreme
property gains, and thus provides key input into design and control strategies.