* 0807250
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Modeling the effects of invasive earthworms on watershed nitrogen dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2010
* David Costello, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 04/30/2010
* USD 9,837.00

Most of the earthworms commonly found in the U.S. are non-native, originating in
Europe and transported to and around the U.S. by human activities. Although
viewed as beneficial in farm fields and gardens, these invasive earthworms are
damaging deciduous forests. Earthworms feed on fallen leaves, and can remove an
entire autumn's leaf fall in less than one year. Without a protective leaf
layer, exposed forest soils are subject to erosion, seedling death, and nutrient
loss. In soils invaded by earthworms, rainwater can rapidly transport mineral
nutrients away from plant roots and into nearby streams or lakes. A spatial,
mathematical model of the Kalamazoo River, MI, watershed will be used to study
how earthworms in forests and farm fields increase the amount of nitrogen in
river ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nitrogen pollution of terrestrial and
aquatic ecosystems is of great current concern. Nitrogen transported from land
to streams and lakes pollutes those water bodies and has been implicated in
causing the "dead zone" in the Gulf of Mexico. Many strategies, such as
vegetation buffer strips, are being used to remove nitrogen before it can
pollute waterways, yet earthworms may be hindering the ability of plants to
remove nitrogen. Invasive earthworms are continually being transported to new
areas as fishing bait, in potted plants, and on truck tires. Once earthworms
invade, they are nearly impossible to remove. A mathematical model of earthworm
invasion will be used to highlight areas of the landscape that should be managed
to slow the loss of nitrogen. This study will provide strategies needed by land
managers to control earthworms and thereby protect forests and aquatic habitats.