* 0807290
* A Fundamental Test of the GRB Fireball Model
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Bernard McNamara, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 07/31/2011
* USD 120,000.00

The group will use the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS), a large automated survey
in 5 colors, to search for objects that might be 'orphan afterglows' of the
stellar explosions that produce gamma ray bursts (GRB), intense short-lived
bursts of gamma rays. The gamma rays are so intense, and arrive over such a
short time, that they are probably concentrated into a narrow beam. When the
beam is not pointed in our direction, we would see an optical brightening but no
gamma rays: an 'orphan afterglow'. Dr. McNamara's group will concentrate on 300
square degrees of the sky to which the SDSS telescope has returned every few
nights over many months. They will examine the SDSS database of objects that
have been found to brighten rapidly, and examine automatically which of these
resemble the optical behavior of known gamma-ray bursts, but without any
accompanying gamma rays. The group estimates that if the currently-popular
'fireball' model is correct, they should find roughly 20 orphan afterglows.
Failure to detect any orphan afterglows would indicate serious problems with the
model.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Dr. McNamara is on the faculty of one of the six
Hispanic-Serving Institutions that are also Research I universities. The group
plans to involve at least 2 students from under-represented minorities each year
in this research, and it has a strong record of such mentorship. Dr. McNamara is
involved in an effort at New Mexico State University that provides after-school
programs to K-12 students from under-represented minorities, and he has
developed distance-education classes for K-8 teachers. For the teachers, he will
develop lesson plans incorporating New Mexico's public school standards that
allow students to identify prominent variable astronomical objects.