* 0807974
* The NEWFIRM Medium-Band Survey: Accurate Redshifts for 80,000 K-Selected Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Pieter van Dokkum, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas S. Statler
* 06/30/2012
* USD 440,819.00

Dr. van Dokkum and his team will conduct a survey using the NEWFIRM infrared
imager at NOAO's Kitt Peak 4-meter telescope to measure photometric redshifts of
galaxies out to z=3.5. The innovative aspect is a set of medium-band filters
that splits the J atmospheric window near 1.2 microns into three bands, and the
H window near 1.6 microns into two bands. Simulations show that these finer
bands should yield estimates of the redshift that are roughly four times more
precise than those from broadband surveys, and with a tenfold smaller rate of
'catastrophic' failure where the predicted redshift is grossly discrepant.
Telescope time has already been allocated for a survey of four fields each
thirty arc minutes on a side, which should include 18,000 galaxies at redshifts
above 1.5 that are bright enough to obtain reliable photometric redshifts. This
study will obtain luminosity and mass functions of the red sequence galaxies at
high redshift, and study their stellar populations, environment and
clustering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two graduate students and a postdoc will
participate in the research. The spectral energy distributions and redshifts for
the survey galaxies will be released to the astronomical community, and the
medium-band filters bought under this grant will be available for general use
once the project is concluded. The team will produce a 3-D movie for a projector
system at the new Yale Planetarium, to be built with private donations on the
outskirts of the New Haven campus.