* 0807738
* Dynamics and interactions of free fluid interfaces
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Jay Wright, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2012
* USD 110,000.00

The primary research objectives of this project are: to understand the long time
dynamics of nearly flat vortex sheets; to determine analytically the stability
of solitary waves in bi-directional model systems of vortex sheets; and to study
the behavior of interfaces between electrified fluids. The first project is
rooted in proving dispersive estimates for the linearized vortex sheet problem
along with a priori energy estimates for the nonlinear problem. The ultimate
goal is to show that if the initial configuration is nearly flat then solutions
of the full nonlinear equations of motion exist globally in time. The second
area is focused on understanding and circumventing technical obstructions which
arise when trying to establish orbital stability for solitary waves in
approximate models for free fluid interfaces derived without the assumption that
there is a preferred direction of propagation. Uni-directionality plays an
important but subtle role in the stability analysis and generalization to bi-
directional systems has proven difficult. The third project is centered around
understanding how an applied electric field can exacerbate/arrest rupture of the
interface. The electro-magnetics introduce new nonlocal and nonlinear effects
which complicate the analysis of the system.

Predicting how an interface between two fluids which are shearing past one
another moves in time is a central problem in mathematical hydrodynamics. This
very general scenario occurs in many situations of practical interest: on the
surface of the ocean, between layers in the atmosphere, in the wake of a boat or
behind the wing of an aircraft. A natural question to ask is whether or not an
interface initially very close to being perfectly flat will in fact become
perfectly flat as time evolves. In the first part of this research project, very
precise quantitative descriptions of nearly flat interfaces will be developed.
The second component of this project concerns the evolution of solitary water
waves, which are called tsunamis when they occur in the open ocean. The
destructive power of these waves is directly related to the fact that they are
very difficult to disrupt: they can travel great distances essentially
unchanged. That solitary waves are so stable is well understood for a variety of
models for their evolution wherein one makes an assumption that the wave has a
preferred direction of motion. This part of this project studies their stability
without this assumption, and also to examine ways in which bottom topography can
(possibly) disturb such waves. The final part of this project is concerned with
developing and analyzing systems which model the effects of an applied
electromagnetic field on a fluid interface. There is a great deal of interest in
manipulated fluid interfaces in this way. Applications include: dynamic wave
guides and lenses, high speed switching, coating and cooling processes.