* 0807879
* Dissertation Research: Impacts of invasive species: population consequences of altering inbreeding depression and mating systems in native plants
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2010
* Alan Templeton, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 05/31/2010
* USD 11,870.00

Invasive plants are one of the greatest threats to global diversity, yet the
mechanisms by which they affect native plants are not well understood. In
addition to directly reducing the fitness of native plant populations by
competing for resources, invasive plants may disrupt important population
properties, such as the extent of clonal reproduction, the proportion of self
fertilization, or the fitness differences between self-fertilized and outcrossed
individuals. In this study, the investigators will integrate genetic, molecular,
and population modeling techniques to determine how the invasive purple
loosestrife (Lythrum salicaria) alters these properties in the square-stemmed
monkeyflower (Mimulus ringens), and the resulting affects the population fitness
of M. ringens.

This will be the first work to characterize the influence of invasive
competitors on the fitness effects of self-fertilization in plants. Furthermore,
it will quantify the population-level effects of an invasive competitor on a
native plant, providing valuable insight to future attempts to predict and
manage biological invasions. This research will contribute to the scientific
training of undergraduate researchers and the education and management programs
at the Shaw Nature Reserve in Missouri, which receives 60,000 visitors every
year.