* 0807705
* Formation of singularities in relativistic theories of electromagnetism
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2013
* Michael Kiessling, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2013
* USD 348,695.00

This research project studies the question of singularity formation in nonlinear
dynamical theories of relativistic electromagnetic fields, both at the classical
and the quantum level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The classical part is concerned with
two main problems: (1) Analysis of the well-known relativistic Vlasov-Maxwell
equations, which had been conjectured to be globally well-posed as a Cauchy
problem with suitable finite-energy classical data. This project will rigorously
analyze a recently-developed scenario for a counterexample exhibiting finite-
time collapse for a family of solutions. (2) Analysis of the nonlinear Maxwell-
Born-Infeld equations for electromagnetic fields in the absence of point
charges. This project will investigate recently-discovered spatially periodic
plane wave solutions that exhibit finite-time blow-up to determine whether the
corresponding set of Cauchy data is part of a generic bad
set.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The quantum part of the research project concerns
solutions of the Maxwell-Born-Infeld field equations with point defects that
represent particles. The charged particles move according to a quantum velocity
field obtained from a many body Dirac formalism coupled to generic
electromagnetic fields. This project will study whether the Dirac Hamiltonian
for the system can become unbounded below.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
addresses fundamental issues in the theory of electromagnetism, which is central
to modern science and engineering. The study of singularity formation has long
been at the forefront of research in general relativity and in fluid dynamics.
Recent discoveries suggest that singularities may also pose a major conceptual
challenge in the nonlinear electromagnetic models that have been proposed as
candidates for a consistent formulation of an electromagnetic theory without
artificial regularizers. The principal investigator recently developed a
consistent formulation of electromagnetic theory, incorporating intrinsic spin
of particles, that is consistent at both classical and quantum levels. The
current project investigates possible singularity formation in this theory.
Another part of this work examines finite-time collapse in the relativistic
Vlasov-Maxwell model. Such collapse would provide a novel mechanism for the
formation of very small celestial bodies whose gravitational self-attraction is
too weak to aid in their formation. This project aims to establish that
possibility; the results could have a major impact on theories of planetary
system formation.