* 0807327
* Dynamics of Singularly Perturbed Systems and Ion Channel Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Weishi Liu, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2012
* USD 166,809.00

This proposal consists mainly of geometric studies of singularly perturbed
problems with turning points and analyzing Poisson-Nernst-Planck (PNP) systems.
A great deal of multi-scale physical phenomena can be suitably modeled by
singularly perturbed systems. Turning points, if present in the problem,
increase dramatically the level of complexity of the global dynamics. They allow
a seemingly simple system to support very rich and, sometime, surprising
behaviors. The investigator proposes to continue his research on turning point
problems, particularly on the collective effects of multi-family turning points.
A class of problems to be investigated concerns multi-family turning points
without spectral gaps. Along with this investigation, motivated by the success
of geometric singular perturbation theory for zero-order approximations, the
investigator will extend the theory for higher-order approximations which are
crucial for both qualitative and quantitative purposes in applications. Another
major component of this proposal concerns PNP systems. PNP systems serve as
fundamental models for ion transport in semi-conductors and through ion
channels. They are nonlinear electro-diffusion systems that possess multiple
time and space scales. In addition to their significant application values, PNP
systems provide a rich source for a variety of challenging mathematical
questions concerning the basic well-posedness problem, the existence and
multiplicity of steady-state solutions, the complexity of their asymptotic
behavior, et cetera. The investigator and his collaborators have obtained a
number of important results for PNP systems. The success depends heavily on the
discovery of the intrinsic structure of PNP systems. The investigator proposes
to conduct a systematic study of PNP systems. This activity will enhance the
theoretical understanding of this important class of multi-scale
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study on Poisson-Nernst-Planck (PNP)
systems is motivated by direct applications to transmembrane ion channels of
cells. Understanding the biological function of ion channels is critical to
human health. In fact, specific defects of relative channels are the underlying
causes of many health problems, and a large fraction of all drugs work directly
on ion channels. The validity of PNP systems for modeling ion channel properties
has been carefully examined. PNP systems have been studied numerically to a
great extent, and the results have demonstrated excellent agreement with
experimental data in many cases. There is, however, a serious need for a better
understanding of PNP systems through mathematical analysis. The investigator and
his collaborators will focus on biologically relevant mathematical problems of
PNP systems; for example, the current-voltage relations from which the
permeation and selectivity of channels can be extracted, the "gating" phenomena
that are critical for auto-controlling of biological signal propagation, and the
effect of mutating permanent charges on channel properties. The study of PNP
systems will ultimately advance our knowledge of ion channels, suggest effective
and efficient lab designs, and provide fundamental mechanisms for producing
better drugs.&lt;br/&gt;