* 0807107
* PERSIST in Biology and Chemistry (Program to Enhance Retention of Students In Science Trajectories in Biology and Chemistry)
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2014
* Donald Lovett, The College of New Jersey
* Standard Grant
* Joyce B. Evans
* 06/30/2014
* USD 599,960.00

This S-STEM program is addressing the disparity in success among students on the
basis of financial need and focusing on students in the departments of Biology
and Chemistry. These students already form a naturally-associating group through
their shared enrollment in STEM foundation courses and many upper-division
classes, their shared participation in STEM student organizations, and their
shared experiences in either the interdisciplinary Summer Undergraduate Research
Program or the Merck-AAAS-funded Biology and Chemistry Interdisciplinary
Connections Research Program. The program is increasing the retention of
academically high-achieving and financially-needy students in the STEM majors,
and improving the preparation of these students to enter the workforce in STEM
careers, or to continue on with post-baccalaureate programs. Each scholarship
recipient is assigned a faculty mentor to engage the student in the academic
community, to ensure that the student receives the necessary support to succeed
in and complete their degree program, and to coordinate the introduction of the
student to collaborative research. Scholarship recipients also receive
coordinated peer mentoring, peer tutoring, and career development programs,
which have been enhanced to improve the success of the scholarship recipients.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;