* 0807417
* Radiative signatures of dust and lines: From protostellar disks to active galactic nuclei
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Moshe Elitzur, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 07/31/2012
* USD 358,261.00

AST-0807417&lt;br/&gt;Elitzur&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project continues a
long-term program to develop practical radiative transfer methods, and refine
them to match the progress of new observations. This program has already had a
transformative impact on studies of astronomical masers and dust infrared
emission from active galactic nuclei (AGN). The present work will expand and
enhance two recently developed techniques, one a new exact method for line
emission from multi-level systems and the other for handling radiation from
clumpy media. These enhancements will be used for improved matching of dust
emission models to forthcoming high-resolution observations, for corrected
calculations of line emission from AGN that remove faulty assumptions, for
realistic calculations of radiation pressure on dust, and to study the thermal
and maser line emission from accretion disks. Close collaboration between this
theory program and the observing teams is a major ingredient of the research,
because the theory is strongly anchored in
observations&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developed modeling codes will continue to be
placed in the public domain, and past codes have been used in many unrelated
studies. The principal investigator maintains a broad range of international
collaborations, and former students all continue active involvement with the
program: a major accomplishment of this group has been its continuing
educational impact.