* 0807760
* Evolution of Inner Halos: Disk Growth and First Generation of Galactic Bars
* MPS,AST
* 02/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Isaac Shlosman, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Patricia Knezek
* 07/31/2013
* USD 235,845.00

Dr. Shlosman will develop new methods to study how galaxies like our Milky Way
form their disks inside halos of invisible 'dark matter'. He will examine how
the density builds up in the central 'cusp' of the dark halo, and how the
presence of the disk disturbs and changes that growth. The dark halo does not
grow smoothly as the galaxy forms; it is usually lumpy and far from a well-mixed
equilibrium. Dr Shlosman will use both gravitational N-body simulations and
analytic calculations to follow the growth of disks in asymmetric and lumpy dark
halos, and examine how bars are triggered in the stellar disk. The initial
conditions for the N-body simulations will be set using the method of
Constrained Realizations, an exact algorithm to construct the Gaussian random
fields representing the distribution of matter at early times. The effects of
interstellar gas, including energy dissipation, star formation, and the feedback
of newly-born stars on the surrounding gas, will be taken into
account.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A graduate student will be trained by
participating in the research. The University of Kentucky at Lexington has
recently built an observatory for undergraduate teaching and public outreach. Dr
Shlosman will participate in outreach programs at this observatory, illustrating
the process of galaxy formation with animations developed from the computations
that he will perform.