* 0807575
* Facilitating a Deeper Understanding of Change in the Earth System on Multiple Time Scales
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Tamara Ledley, TERC Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 08/31/2011
* USD 149,991.00

The Facilitating Student Understanding of Change in the Earth System on Multiple
Time Scales is a pilot project to develop a week-long unit of activities focused
on the cryosphere, implement the activities with students, and study their
effectiveness. This project is motivated by the increasing need for today's
students to sufficiently understand how the Earth system changes so they can
address the environmental challenges of the future as scientists, decisions
makers, and citizens. This project will provide new insights on the difficulties
high-school students have in comprehending Earth system changes on multiple time
scales, and to design activities and materials that can help them and their
teachers overcome these challenges. The overarching goals of this project are
to: 1) build, mainly with existing resources, a sequence of scaffolded
activities and investigations that will help students more fully understand how
the cryosphere changes on multiple time scales and how it impacts and is
impacted by the other components of the Earth system, and 2) investigate the
effectiveness of the developed sequence of activities and investigations at
helping students understand how and why a component of the Earth system varies
over time, to apply that knowledge to improve the unit of activities used in
this study, and to make that knowledge and materials available to the broader
educational community. This work will provide a firm foundation on which to
develop a full high-school capstone Earth system science course that will
include the broader range of complexity and time scales present in the Earth
system - a course which is now on the books in Texas - and make these materials
available to high-school teachers and students across the country through the
EarthLabs web site. In addition, the project will create a teacher professional
development program to provide training to high-school teachers on the use of
these materials. Project partners include TERC (project lead and materials
development), Michigan State University and Mississippi State University
(evaluation and research), University of Texas-Austin (Texas Earth and Space
Science Revolution Project - materials review and implementation).