* 0807893
* Variational Conditions: Analysis, Algorithms and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Shu Lu, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/2012
* USD 88,822.00

Lu&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0807893&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The variational condition
provides a unified mathematical&lt;br/&gt;model for a large number of
equilibrium problems. It is also&lt;br/&gt;closely related to other mathematical
problems such as&lt;br/&gt;optimization problems and complementarity problems.
The&lt;br/&gt;investigator and her colleagues study the mathematical
structure&lt;br/&gt;of certain finite-dimensional variational conditions,
develop&lt;br/&gt;solution algorithms, and apply these to handle model
input&lt;br/&gt;uncertainty in practice. Specifically, they investigate
the&lt;br/&gt;influence of the major constraint qualifications on the
structure&lt;br/&gt;of the variational condition, to identify conditions
that&lt;br/&gt;indicate nice solution behavior and are more general than
the&lt;br/&gt;current nondegeneracy condition. Based on these conditions,
they&lt;br/&gt;analyze the sensitivity and stability of a variational
condition&lt;br/&gt;with respect to perturbations in both the function and the
set in&lt;br/&gt;its formulation, provide criteria to identify classes
of&lt;br/&gt;practical problems that satisfy these conditions, and design
and&lt;br/&gt;justify algorithms for solving these problems. They also
apply&lt;br/&gt;knowledge gained in this work to other areas dealing with
model&lt;br/&gt;input uncertainty, such as robust programming and
stochastic&lt;br/&gt;optimization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The investigator
studies a mathematical model called&lt;br/&gt;variational condition. This is a
general model that&lt;br/&gt;characterizes an equilibrium status. For example,
it can model&lt;br/&gt;an economic equilibrium that predicts commodity prices,
sector&lt;br/&gt;activities, and consumer consumptions, or a force
equilibrium&lt;br/&gt;that describes the geometry and dynamics of a
mechanical&lt;br/&gt;structure, or a traffic flow equilibrium in a
transportation or&lt;br/&gt;computer network. Thus, this model provides a
unified framework&lt;br/&gt;for a very large number of equilibrium problems from
areas&lt;br/&gt;including economic policy studies, structural
engineering,&lt;br/&gt;transportation, computer networks, materials science, and
other&lt;br/&gt;areas. It is also closely related to some other
important&lt;br/&gt;mathematical problems, such as optimization problems; it can
be&lt;br/&gt;regarded as a generalization of optimization problems. In
this&lt;br/&gt;project, the investigator and her colleagues seek to
develop&lt;br/&gt;better insight into the mathematical structure of this
problem,&lt;br/&gt;and to exploit this insight to produce better
computational&lt;br/&gt;algorithms and the means for justifying them. They
investigate&lt;br/&gt;what the solutions of this problem look like, how they
change&lt;br/&gt;corresponding to changes in the model input, how to find
a&lt;br/&gt;solution quickly and robustly, and how to identify
practical&lt;br/&gt;problems that are easy to solve and have robust behavior.
&lt;br/&gt;Success in the work helps to better understand, analyze and
solve&lt;br/&gt;the broad class of equilibrium problems.