* 0807314
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: A Test of the Generality of the Shuster and Wade Model
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2008,09/30/2010
* Lisette Waits, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 09/30/2010
* USD 12,000.00

PI Lisette Waits (PI)&lt;br/&gt;Proposal number: IOS-0807314&lt;br/&gt;Title:
Using the Pronghorn to Test the Strength of Sexual
Selection&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sexual selection, or selection caused by
competition over mates, is a major driving force of evolution. To understand
sexual selection in the wild, detailed knowledge of individual identities and
mating success is required but is rarely available. Recently a model based on
the distribution of sexually receptive females in space and time was proposed as
a proxy to estimate the strength of sexual selection in the absence of detailed
population information (Shuster and Wade 2003). For the first time, the validity
of this model will be tested using the population of pronghorn (Antilocapra
americana) found on the National Bison Range, Montana. Behavioral observations
will be used to calculate the intensity of sexual selection based on the Shuster
and Wade (2003) model. These results will be compared to the intensity of sexual
selection calculated using genetic paternity analyses. If the model is valid,
sexual selection should be a strong force when receptive females are clustered
in space and a weak force when they are clustered in time. The estimate of the
intensity of sexual selection determined using behavioral data should also
correlate with that found using the genetic analyses. As broader impacts, the
results of this study will be pertinent to a variety of fields including animal
behavior, evolution, and genetics. The data will provide information on basic
population parameters to the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service for use in
management of pronghorn. This project involves collaboration between two
colleges at the University of Idaho, and will lead to the training of one female
Ph.D. student and approximately 12 undergraduate students. Information from this
project will not only be presented at scientific conferences, but also to an
upper-division biology major Animal Behavior course, to biology students at St.
Maries High School in rural St. Maries, Idaho, and to visitors at the National
Bison Range.&lt;br/&gt;