* 0807657
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Genetic and Phenotypic Variation in Resource Acquisition and Allocation: Testing the Fundamental Model for Life-history Evolution.
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Daphne Fairbairn, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 08/31/2010
* USD 11,346.00

Organisms have a finite amount of energy to devote to basic life processes such
as reproduction and dispersal. They must allocate this energy to competing
structures and functions, leading to ?trade-offs? between these processes.
Understanding how these trade-offs shape allocation strategies is central to
understanding biological diversity. In this proposal, the investigators use a
theoretical model to predict patterns of variation in trade-offs and propose an
experiment to test these predictions using the well-studied trade-off between
flight capability and reproductive output in the sand cricket, Gryllus firmus.
By raising families on different food levels, they will quantify the influence
of genetics (family) and resource availability (food level) on both the
acquisition of energy and its subsequent allocation to competing processes.
These results will be integrated into a novel genetic model for predicting
variation in trade-offs within and among species.&lt;br/&gt;A key objective of
this project is to train new scientists by providing hands-on experience for an
ethnically diverse cadre of undergraduate students. The project offers students
the unusual challenge of integrating biological knowledge across many levels,
including physiology, ecology, genetics and evolution. Talented students will be
encouraged to develop independent research projects and PI Fairbairn has a
strong record of success in mentoring such students.&lt;br/&gt;