* 0807787
* Satellites, Weather and Climate (SWAC) - Contributing to geospatial climate education and literacy
* GEO,GEO
* 07/01/2008,12/31/2010
* Lesley-Ann Dupigny-Giroux, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 12/31/2010
* USD 149,466.00

The Satellites, Weather and Climate (SWAC) project at the University of Vermont
(UVM) is an innovative, 2-year professional development program aimed at
enhancing the competency of in-service Science and Mathematics teachers at K-12
levels in the STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics)
disciplines. Teachers will participate in a summer institute to develop
knowledge and skills in climatology, meteorology, electrical engineering,
statistical analyses, geostatistics and the geospatial technologies of remote
sensing and GIS (Geographic information systems). Geospatial content will also
be enhanced via distance-learning activities with NASA. Summer learning
experiences will be followed by content and technology "refresher" sessions
during the school year to facilitate long-term change in the classroom. One
unique aspect of SWAC is the use of geospatial technologies to address both
atmospheric and land processes, in a problem- and project-based environment that
is accessible to students at all levels from K-16. SWAC team members highlight
career paths in academia and the public service (weather forecasting and
outreach) as a way of showcasing traditional career opportunities in the field
of atmospheric sciences and climate. SWAC modules were created in response to
K-12 teacher input on student learning and needs. The resulting curricula and
resources will be used to increase climate education and literacy. Results of
the SWAC project (including lesson plans) will be disseminated via the SWAC-KIDS
website, the Vermont Geographic Alliance website and by SWAC-CDs, as well as
through the online journal, PUMAS (Practical Uses of Math and Science), and
regional science education meetings.