* 0807030
* Bridge to Graduate Study in Interdisciplinary Sciences
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Paul Joyce, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 08/31/2012
* USD 597,331.00

The project is strategically awarding S-STEM scholarships to bridge the gap at a
pivotal point in postsecondary education: the transition from undergraduate to
graduate studies. The intent is three-fold: the first is to retain
undergraduates to baccalaureate degree completion by awarding approximately 20
scholarships each year to academically talented, financially needy juniors and
seniors in undergraduate feeder disciplines (including Computer Science,
Mathematics, Chemistry, Physics, Engineering, and Biological and Geological
sciences). The second is to use graduate scholarships to recruit outstanding
students into three university-wide interdisciplinary graduate programs
(Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, Environmental Science, and
Neuroscience) by awarding approximately 5 graduate scholarships to students who
demonstrate potential for success in graduate school. Undergraduate S-STEM
Scholars are given priority for support. The third objective is to increase
diversity at the undergraduate and graduate levels by awarding Bridge
scholarship funds to students who meet diversity criteria.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bridge Scholars participate in integrating activities
including a seminar series, having a research faculty mentor, and professional
development activities. The overall long-term outcome is an increase in the
number, quality, and diversity of students who complete undergraduate STEM
degrees and graduate degrees in interdisciplinary STEM programs at the
university. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Knowledge across
disciplines is advanced by enabling students to complete baccalaureate degrees
in STEM fields and by recruiting these and other students into interdisciplinary
graduate programs. Three team members are successfully managing a current NSF
S-STEM project; the other three direct the interdisciplinary graduate programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Discovery and understanding are advanced
through teaching, student training, and research in the three interdisciplinary
graduate programs. A key objective is to broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups in STEM fields at the undergraduate and graduate levels.