* 0807658
* Small-scale structures in dynamical systems: Accurate numerics and renormalization
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Nikola Petrov, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2012
* USD 136,293.00

This is a proposal for research in mathematical physics and applied mathematics
that focuses on small-scale structures in dynamical systems. Investigations of
small-scale structures are important because they are inextricably related to
the asymptotic behavior of the system -- a central theme in the theory of
dynamical systems with numerous important applications. We plan to investigate
numerically and theoretically the global organization among the scaling
exponents for different transitions to complex behavior -- a new phenomenon
noticed recently in the numerical studies of the PI and his collaborators. We
propose a theoretical explanation of some of these phenomena that is based on
the renormalization group description. While most research on applications of
renormalization to dynamical systems focuses on the asymptotic behavior of the
renormalization operator around a particular fixed point, we believe that the
methodology proposed by the PI and his collaborators will lead to new insights
about the global behavior of the renormalization operator. Other projects that
we propose to pursue are related to quasiperiodically forced systems (in
particular, the classical and quantum effects in resonators with moving
boundaries) and small-scale properties of some physical systems and critical
dynamical objects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a proposal for research in
mathematical physics and applied mathematics that focuses on small-scale
structures in dynamical systems. The proposed research will deepen our
understanding of the dynamics of the renormalization operator and may spur new
research in areas where renormalization group description plays an important
role -- dynamical systems, statistical physics, fluid dynamics, field theory,
solid state physics. The project will further our knowledge about some physical
phenomena and the general properties of critical dynamical systems. The project
is truly interdisciplinary -- it will employ methods of applied analysis,
techniques for high-accuracy numerical computations, and methods of theoretical
physics, and will stimulate the interaction between experts in different areas
of mathematics and science. It will involve undergraduate and graduate students
majoring in mathematics and physics, offering them opportunities to gain
knowledge and skills useful in their career paths, whether within or outside of
academia.