* 0807332
* Analytical Studies of Liquid Crystalline Patterns and Phase Transitions
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2011
* Ibrahim Fatkullin, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2011
* USD 115,115.00

Fatkullin&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0807332&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The investigator studies
free energy functionals associated&lt;br/&gt;with liquid-crystalline systems and
gradient flow evolutions (and&lt;br/&gt;more general dynamics) associated with
these functionals. The&lt;br/&gt;study of critical points of the free energy
functionals provides&lt;br/&gt;information about the equilibrium states of the
corresponding&lt;br/&gt;systems, whereas the gradient flows provide insights
into the&lt;br/&gt;out-of-equilibrium phenomena. In particular, the
investigator&lt;br/&gt;applies the methods recently developed for the Onsager
model of&lt;br/&gt;spatially homogeneous nematic liquid crystals to a more
general&lt;br/&gt;setting. Employing a novel approach based on the combination
of&lt;br/&gt;Oseen-Frank, Landau-de Gennes, and Onsager's theories,
the&lt;br/&gt;investigator obtains an analytically tractable theory
explaining&lt;br/&gt;the spatial variations of orientational ordering. Further
on,&lt;br/&gt;the investigator exploits the fact that a particular case
of&lt;br/&gt;two-dimensional nematics is closely related to
complex&lt;br/&gt;Ginzburg-Landau-type models and the problem of harmonic
mapping&lt;br/&gt;of a domain into a unit circle. This connection allows him
to&lt;br/&gt;establish rigorous asymptotics for various patterns
(twisters,&lt;br/&gt;vortices, domain walls, etc.,) arising in this particular
setting&lt;br/&gt;using the tools from Ginzburg-Landau theory. The dynamical
part&lt;br/&gt;of this project concentrates on the extent to which the
kinetic&lt;br/&gt;equations for evolution of orientation probability densities
and&lt;br/&gt;correlation functions (described via gradient flows
in&lt;br/&gt;Wasserstein spaces of probability measures or more
general&lt;br/&gt;mass-transportation dynamics) are reducible to the commonly
used&lt;br/&gt;Ginsburg-Landau-type dynamics of the order parameters.
A&lt;br/&gt;systematic analysis of such reductions is requisite for
a&lt;br/&gt;complete understanding of dynamics of liquid-crystalline systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Liquid crystals are substances that share
characteristics&lt;br/&gt;with conventional liquids and crystalline solids. Such
an exotic&lt;br/&gt;combination of material properties allows for a high degree
of&lt;br/&gt;dynamic control, which in turn allows for a wide range of
useful&lt;br/&gt;applications. Liquid Crystal Display (LCD) technology
is,&lt;br/&gt;undoubtedly, the prime example. Modern applications employ
the&lt;br/&gt;fact that optical properties of liquid crystals change
under&lt;br/&gt;external influences such as applied electric or magnetic
fields,&lt;br/&gt;stresses, etc. By manipulating the latter in an
appropriate&lt;br/&gt;manner one can achieve the desired effects. The theory of
liquid&lt;br/&gt;crystals has been developing since the middle of
twentieth&lt;br/&gt;century. Its success has been recognized by a Nobel
Prize&lt;br/&gt;awarded in 1991 to P.-G. de Gennes for fundamental
contributions&lt;br/&gt;to our understanding of order phenomena in complex
systems. &lt;br/&gt;Still, due to enormous growth in applicability of liquid
crystals&lt;br/&gt;and rapid development of the associated technologies, it
has&lt;br/&gt;become even more important to go beyond the general
principles&lt;br/&gt;and to further expand our understanding. Although
computer&lt;br/&gt;simulations provide valuable insights, for precise control
over&lt;br/&gt;liquid-crystalline materials it is essential to support
the&lt;br/&gt;experimental findings and computer simulations with a
rigorous&lt;br/&gt;mathematical theory. Development of such a theory is the
primary&lt;br/&gt;goal of the investigator's work. His particular interest
is&lt;br/&gt;mathematical analysis of patterns, their formation and
evolution,&lt;br/&gt;and dynamics of phase transitions in liquid crystals.