* 0807272
* Dissertation Research:  Hydrologic-carbon cycle linkages in a sub-alpine catchment
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2010
* Diego Riveros-Iregui, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 04/30/2010
* USD 12,000.00

Soil carbon dioxide efflux is a natural process by which soil carbon is released
into the atmosphere through plant and microbial respiration. While this flux
represents the largest natural respiratory flux from forested ecosystems, the
effects of soil temperature, soil water content, soil nutrient status, and
vegetation cover on soil carbon dioxide efflux remain poorly understood. This
dissertation research seeks to identify the relationship between these
biophysical controls and the resultant carbon dioxide efflux across the soil-
atmosphere interface in a subalpine catchment of the northern Rocky Mountains.
This study incorporates knowledge gained through field observations (two growing
seasons) into a process-based modeling approach to estimate point-to-catchment
scale soil carbon dioxide efflux. Field knowledge will be used to aid in
modeling parameterization and calibration. This model will be useful for
corroboration and integration of soil and canopy level carbon fluxes. The
synergistic nature of this exercise will provide bidirectional feedback, as the
model will benefit from field knowledge, and empirical data can be further
explored according to modeling results. This study addresses two outstanding
eco-hydrological, carbon cycle research questions: the role of hydrology as a
spatial and temporal control of soil carbon dioxide efflux, and the effects of
yearly hydrological variability in regulating ecosystem carbon balance. The
broader impacts of this research include involvement of undergraduate assistants
and scholars, incorporation of data from this research into field trip materials
and homework problems of undergraduate watershed science classes, and exposure
of minority students (Hispanic) to research.