* 0807992
* Comparative Exoplanetology: Ground-Based Observations of the Atmospheres of Transiting Exoplanets
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2008,01/31/2009
* Seth Redfield, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Donald M. Terndrup
* 01/31/2009
* USD 223,838.00

As the number of detected extrasolar planets continues to rise, a particular
subset provides unique opportunities for detailed investigations into the
properties of the extrasolar planets themselves. The transmission spectrum of a
transiting exoplanet, obtained by the comparison of observations taken in-
transit with those taken out-of-transit, can be used to directly measure the
effective radius of the exoplanet and its atmosphere or exosphere. Such
measurements in strong optical transitions (e.g., Na I, K I) can be used to
measure the atmospheric metallicity, rainout of condensates, distribution of
stellar flux, and photoionization of atmospheric constituents.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Here, Dr. Redfield and his team will build upon their
success in detecting the first atmosphere of a transiting exoplanet via
transmission spectra. A recently granted large block of survey time on the 9.2-m
Hobby Eberly telescope at the McDonald Observatory of the University of Texas at
Austin will be used to expand their program to several other bright transiting
exoplanets. This large-scale observational program is a major undertaking, and
will require a nontrivial commitment to data reduction and analysis. Important
issues that must be addressed include the removal of the telluric spectrum, a
model of the contribution of differential stellar limb-darkening between the
continuum and the cores of stellar lines, and an assessment of the contribution
of systematic errors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of this project is
to measure the full optical transmission spectrum for several transiting
exoplanets, and enable the first comparative study of exoplanetary atmospheric
properties derived from transmission spectra. The resulting observational
database will be very rich and will lead to several auxiliary research programs
other than transmission spectroscopy, including stellar variability monitoring,
reflected light searches, and stellar metallicity
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To aid in the dissemination of the results,
the McDonald Observatory Education and Public Outreach Office will work with Dr.
Redfield to create a series of annual workshops. These workshops will be
designed for fifteen secondary school teachers selected from a nationwide
applicant pool, and will introduce them to the scientific issues related to
extrasolar planets, their atmospheres, and the high spectral resolution
observations used to study them. An extensive post-workshop evaluation will also
take place in order to assess the effectiveness of the translation of activities
developed in the workshop to the classroom.