* 0807771
* The Problem of Measurement Output Control under Set-membership Uncertainty
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Pravin Varaiya, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2011
* USD 200,000.00

A key problem of control theory is to construct feedback control laws based on
available data and to determine how the level of uncertainty in the model and in
the information arriving on-line, through noisy measurements, would affect the
system performance. In the absence of statistical description such problems of
Measurement Output Feedback Control (MOFC) were investigated mostly within the
H(inf) setting, with soft-type integral costs, while problems with hard bounds
on the unknowns were less developed. The present proposal is aimed to produce a
fairly complete investigation of the problem of output feedback control
constructed through available measurements under unknown but bounded
disturbances subject to hard bounds on the uncertain items. The proposal covers
topics from basic theoretical problems to computational methods. The novelty of
the suggested solution schemes, applicable to nonlinear systems, with greater
specifics for the linear case, lies in the combination of dynamic programming,
set-valued analysis and minmax approaches. It is well understood that the
overall problem under consideration is a combination of two ? a finite-
dimensional problem of guaranteed state estimation and an infinite-dimensional
problem of feedback control under set-membership uncertainty. The second problem
is especially difficult to formalize and solve. In the proposed solution, based
on earlier work, the aim is to reduce the second problem to a finite-dimensional
one, which would facilitate calculation. For systems with linear structure and
convex constraints the computational procedure is to be based on using and also
generalizing the ellipsoidal calculus which proved effective for many problems
and allows development of complementary software. It is expected that such
approach will produce solutions "to the end," with illuminating examples. For
the nonlinear case calculations may be facilitated by using the specifics of the
problem and applying modifications of the earlier suggested comparison
principles that allow one to relax the original equations or variational
inequalities of the Hamilton-Jacobi type through simpler, finite-dimensional
relations.

The Measurement Output Feedback Control (MOFC) problem has been thoroughly
studied in a stochastic setting as a combination of stochastic filtering theory
within the theory of stochastic control. However a considerable number of
problems in control design have to deal with systems subjected to information
conditions that are other than stochastic. Such problems of MOFC are
increasingly motivated by applied issues, given the progress in design of high-
tech complex systems arising in automation, navigation and the cyber-physical
field (including hybrid, impulsive, time-lag, multi-agent, communication-
oriented processes and the like). They naturally require new techniques, new
types of models and their mathematical formalization, as well as new numerical
methods, algorithms and software. The present project is designed in response to
the indicated demand.