* 0807514
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Nutrient cycling and distribution over multiple scales in a Kenyan savanna as mediated by an acacia-ant mutualism
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2008,11/30/2010
* Amelia Wolf, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 11/30/2010
* USD 12,000.00

In Kenya, a common Acacia tree in effect employs an army of ants to defend its
leaves from being eaten by giraffes, elephants, and other large herbivores. In
exchange for this protection, the trees provide the ants with nesting space and
nectar for food. This mutually beneficial interaction between Acacia trees and
ants may involve more than just protection, though: preliminary data suggest
that at least some of the ants may also fertilize the trees in which they live.
The objective of this research is to examine how nutrients are exchanged between
ants and trees, to determine how this interaction might affect soil nutrient
availability, and to investigate the effect of the disappearance of large
mammals on these processes. To address these questions, this study will combine
a nitrogen-tracing experiment with soil sampling to track ant-derived nutrients,
in addition to using long-term mammal-exclusion plots to investigate the
influence of mammals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study incorporates work directly
applicable to land management in eastern Africa: loss of native browsers, a
significant problem across much of Africa, could alter the mutually beneficial
interaction between ants and plants, in turn affecting soil fertility and forage
quantity and quality. This research will employ a Kenyan research assistant as
well as involve undergraduates from Stanford University. Results of applied
aspects of the research will be communicated to local land owners and managers
through local publications, talks, and conversations. &lt;br/&gt;