* 0807381
* Particle Acceleration in Astrophysical Collisionless Shocks
* MPS,AST
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2013
* Anatoly Spitkovsky, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 06/30/2013
* USD 392,975.00

AST-0807381&lt;br/&gt;Spitkovsky&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Acceleration of particles
in collisionless shocks is at the heart of most models of nonthermal phenomena
in the Universe, including pulsar wind nebulae, active galactic nuclei, gamma-
ray bursts, and supernova remnants. The conversion of flow energy into
relativistic particles is usually attributed to the first-order Fermi mechanism,
but this is not well understood. This project will construct a self-consistent
theory of shock acceleration by performing the first large-scale three-
dimensional particle-in-cell (PIC) simulations of astrophysical collisionless
shocks. The PIC method is the most fundamental ab initio approach to plasma
dynamics that is able to resolve directly the complex microphysics of plasma
instabilities, particle scattering, and magnetic field generation near shocks.
Specific questions to be addressed include: 1) Do collisionless shocks generate
significant magnetic fields that can survive far downstream? 2) What fraction of
shocked particles is injected into the Fermi mechanism? 3) What is the effect of
high-energy particles on shock hydrodynamics and magnetic field amplification?
4) What mechanisms cause equilibration between particle species in shocks? This
study will be a definitive test of the prevailing hypothesis that Fermi
acceleration in collisionless shocks is the origin of high energy cosmic rays
and nonthermal particles in a variety of astrophysical
sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results will be of broad significance to
observers, experimentalists, and theorists involved with experiments to study
high-energy astrophysical and cosmological sources. The research integrates
research and education by involving graduate and undergraduate students, and
postdocs, training in numerical modeling and visualization of multiscale
systems. An offshoot will be a comprehensive web-based introduction to the
physics of collisionless shocks. In addition, a new version of the massively-
parallel PIC code TRISTAN-MP and its analysis tools will be publicly released
and supported on the web site.