* 0807110
* Scholarships for Undergraduates to Reach Goals in Education (SURGE)
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2008,05/31/2013
* Tuncay Aktosun, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Grabowski
* 05/31/2013
* USD 483,000.00

This scholarship project provides support for two ten-student cohorts who are
pursuing baccalaureate degrees in mathematics. Each student receives a
scholarship of up to $10,000/year for up to three years, depending on financial
need. Since most of the institution's students transfer from two area community
college systems and many students choose these community colleges for financial
reasons, the project is focusing its recruiting effort mainly on attracting
talented and financially needy students from these two community college
systems. The intellectual merit of this project lies in a comprehensive academic
support system that builds on an existing mathematics learning community,
anchored by the local student chapter of the Mathematical Association of America
(MAA). The centerpiece of the support component is the faculty/peer/external
career mentoring that ensures weekly interactions between mentors and the S-STEM
students. Additional special programs are available for interested S-STEM
students, depending on their interest and schedule. These programs help
strengthen each cohorts' sense of community and include conducting research,
working in a university Mathematics Clinic, taking internships at local
companies, attending conferences, and performing community service. The
project's broader impacts are felt in its improvement of educational
opportunities for mathematically talented and financially needy students in the
Dallas/Fort Worth area, particularly for women and underrepresented minority
students. In particular, the two community college systems from which students
are drawn have a very high enrollment of women (over 50% for both systems) and
minority students (53% and 37%, respectively). Moreover, since the support
programs for this project are extendable to other students at the institution,
and broad faculty participation and university support are present, the success
of this specific project is catalyzing a broader departmental effort that
benefits all mathematics majors and many other students.