* 0807363
* From Core to Outflow:  Binaries, MHD and the Origin of Planetary/ Pre-Planetary Nebulae
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Eric Blackman, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Womack
* 08/31/2011
* USD 384,984.00

This project is a continuation of Dr. Frank and Dr. Blackman's efforts better to
understand the process of planetary nebula formation and the late stages of
evolution of low and intermediate mass stars. As the final stage of mass loss
for such stars, planetary nebulae represent a critical step in the mass and
chemical evolution cycle for more than half the material ejected into the
interstellar medium. The ubiquity of planetary nebulae and their ease of
observation have also made them premier laboratories for testing new
astrophysical theories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently, high-resolution images
of planetary nebulae and their progenitors (pre-planetary nebulae) have
triggered a critical re-evaluation of the dominant model for both nebular
shaping and stellar evolution. Studies of pre-planetary nebulae show them to be
collimated and to drive energetic outflows that lack sufficient luminosity for
radiative driving. The launching or collimation of pre-planetary nebulae, and by
association planetary nebulae, therefore cannot be considered to be understood.
In light of new data the theory of pre-planetary and planetary nebulae evolution
and, by implication, ideas about processes at work in the late stages of stellar
evolution are undergoing fundamental revision. A new picture is emerging in
which binaries and magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) processes are responsible for the
majority of pre-planetary and planetary nebulae. Previous work by Drs. Frank and
Blackman has established the potential efficacy of magneto-centrifugal launching
processes in these systems. They have shown the pathways by which binary
companions can create conditions for MHD launching, including the efficacy of
dynamo processes in binary stars and its limits in single
stars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will build on this progress with three
specific goals: 1) to provide a more accurate account of the field conditions
supplied by dynamos in binaries, 2) to explore the formation of disks, the
outflows generated by such disks, and the morphology and observational
signatures produced, and 3) to understand the generation of magnetic tower
explosions by binary driven dynamos. Goals 2 and 3 will be achieved using a new
adaptive mesh refinement MHD code (AstroBEAR) developed by Dr. Frank and
collaborators. Additionally, the project will provide continued theoretical
support for a series of laboratory astrophysics experiments at Imperial College
in London, which are of broad interest to astrophysics and directly relevant to
pre-planetary and planetary nebulae.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Collimated outflows
from a central gravitating source are a ubiquitous phenomenon in astrophysics.
Jets and wider bipolar outflows are observed in newly forming stars, highly
evolved high mass stars, compact objects in binaries, starburst galaxies, and
supermassive black holes powering active galactic nuclei. Collimated outflows
are also invoked in models for supernovae and gamma ray bursts. While this work
is focused on planetary nebulae it will be of direct relevance to these other
fields both theoretically and observationally in the sense of allowing planetary
nebula to act as a test-bed for theories of MHD outflows. The collaboration with
the Imperial Collage group will help to deepen the rapidly growing field of High
Energy Density Laboratory Astrophysics. The work developing the AstroBEAR code
is of particular benefit in continuing research with new multi-physics methods
as well as training the next generation of computational astrophysicists.
Finally this program also includes an innovative outreach program involving the
creation of Sci-Interactives: simulation based learning modules which will be
posted on the nation's most popular science magazine websites.