* 0807105
* Scholarships to Increase Diversity and Achievement in Computer Sciences, Mathematics, and Physics Majors
* EHR,DUE
* 06/15/2008,05/31/2013
* Bryan Bilyeu, Xavier University of Louisiana
* Standard Grant
* Joyce B. Evans
* 05/31/2013
* USD 487,500.00

This project provides undergraduate scholarships in computer science, computer
information systems, mathematics, and physics (CMP) programs to academically
talented, but financially needy, students. The CMP Scholars Program is designed
to: (a) Increase the number of African American college graduates that enter the
nation's science, technology, and academic workforce. (b) Support and mentor two
cohorts of scholars through four years at the university. (c) Enhance the
knowledge and professional readiness of CMP scholars.

Intellectual Merit: The cohort of interdisciplinary scholars (1) meet regularly
with CMP faculty advisors and each other to build a supportive CMP community;
(2) enroll in common computer science and mathematics courses; (3) attend
extracurricular activities to enhance their academic background; (4) connect
knowledge with experiences by reflecting on academic work using CMP scholar
portfolios, and (5) participate in high quality undergraduate research during
each scholarship year. Scholars have increased retention rates, more content
knowledge, extensive research experience, curiosity about their field, increased
graduation rates, and self-assessment portfolios to better navigate their myriad
career choices.

Broader Impacts: The program recruits and selects students from the New Orleans
metropolitan area that, like Xavier, is predominately African American.
Scholars' research experiences enhance the linkage between research and
education; and the scholars are role models for other underrepresented students
in the sciences.