* 0807945
* Dissecting the Sub-Structured Halo
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2013
* Steven Majewski, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* James Neff
* 06/30/2013
* USD 748,432.00

Dr. Steven Majewski (University of Virginia) and his team will undertake a suite
of five major experiments that will both expand the census of known Milky Way
halo tidal streams and exploit halo streams for the understanding of galaxy
evolution, structure formation and dark matter (DM) on galaxy-scales. These
experiments are (1) A study of the chemistry of halo tidal streams using echelle
spectroscopy of stream stars at both optical and near-infrared wavelengths to
verify the discovery of a metallicity gradient in the leading arm of the
Sagittarius stream, (2) A study of the 3-D motions of stream stars contained in
a ground-based proper motion survey of 54 near-equatorial Kapteyn Selected Area
fields to derive stream orbits and constrain the shape and strength of the Milky
Way potential, (3) Undertake a pilot study with the Green Bank Telescope of a
sample of M-type giant stars in tidal streams to look for bright water masers
that can be used for precision astrometry of tidal streams using the Very Large
Baseline Array, (4) A spectroscopic follow-up to the photometric Grid Giant Star
Survey, which has already identified a number of previously known and newly
discovered halo substructures across both hemispheres of the sky, and (5) More
fully characterize the spatial and radial velocity distributions of G and K
giant stars in what look to be "classical" stellar halos discovered around the
Large and Small Magellanic Clouds by this research group.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The stellar component of our Galactic halo provides an
important test-bed for theories of galaxy formation. The present "concordance",
hierarchical DM cosmologies predict the presence of stellar streams as tidal
remnants of accreted sub-halos. Finding and characterizing these streams thus
provides crucial information to constrain the nature of the Cold DM-predicted
merging history. These streams are also highly sensitive dynamical probes
constraining the shape, strength and lumpiness of the halo of the Milky Way, and
provide key insights into the chemical evolution of galaxies. A key aspect of
this research is that it has been fueled primarily by student leadership and
contributions at both the undergraduate and graduate level. Each experiment is
being led or will be led by a different graduate student as part of their Ph.D.
dissertation.