* 0807418
* Dissertation Research - Coevolution in a insect-plant interaction: geographical variation, local adaptation and the costs of counteradaptation
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2008,04/30/2010
* Douglas Futuyma, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 04/30/2010
* USD 11,992.00

Coevolution, the evolution of adaptations to ecological interactions with other
species, has enhanced the diversity of life and has had profound effect on
ecological communities and ecosystems. However, rates and processes of
coevolution are not well understood. The investigators will use a highly
integrative approach to study coevolution between a plant, the rattlebox
(Crotalaria pallida), and a moth (Utetheisa ornatrix) that consumes seeds and is
the plant's major enemy. The plant has chemicals that are thought to provide
protection against the moth, and the investigators have discovered that the
plant-moth interaction varies geographically, with the moth locally adapted to
the plant. The investigators will integrate diverse approaches to unravel the
coevolutionary dynamics. They will use molecular markers and biochemical assays
to study the genetic structure of the plant and the moth populations, the
relationship of genetic structure to the interaction, and adaptation of the moth
to the plant's toxins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will train students,
including those from underrepresented groups, and will facilitate exchange of
ideas between United States and Brazilian academic communities through
collaboration with a Brazilian research group. The results are likely to have
important implications for biological control of weeds and insect pests, and may
also advance understanding of coevolution between pathogens and
humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;