* 0807374
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Climate as a driver of leaf trait diversification in Mexican Dioscorea
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2012
* Geeta Bharathan, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Ranker
* 06/30/2012
* USD 11,890.00

A grant has been awarded to the State university of New York at Stony Brook
under the direction of Dr. R. Geeta to study the relationship of climate to the
evolution of herbaceous plants. The grant will improve the doctoral dissertation
research of Ramona Walls. This research addresses questions about trait and
species diversification by integrating techniques from phylogenetics, species
distribution modeling and plant anatomy and physiology. It is designed to test
the hypothesis that natural selection by regional climate factors is responsible
for the diversification of leaf forms in Mexican Dioscorea, a widespread group
of herbaceous vines. Additional species will be sampled to provide a more
accurate hypothesis of evolutionary relationships within the genus. This
information with be combined with species locality data and physiological
measurements from a common garden study to examine form-function relationships
in the context of climate tolerances and evolutionary history. Indicators of two
leaf functions. water use efficiency and leaf hydraulic conductance, will be
measured in a large number of plants in their natural environment. This will
make it possible to test the additional hypotheses that the conservatism or
evolution of precipitation niches in Mexican Dioscorea is accompanied by the
conservatism or evolution of leaf functions, and that the conservatism or
evolution of leaf functions is linked to specific sets of leaf
traits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this research include both
social and educational benefits. Mexican Dioscorea contain the wild relatives of
a major tropical food crop (yams) as well as many species that are harvested for
pharmaceutical compounds. Understanding the evolutionary relationships in this
group, and the impacts of climate on its variation and distribution, is
therefore economically and socially important. This research is generating a
large data-base of plant localities, phenotypic characteristics, environmental
tolerances, botanical images and DNA sequences that will be available to the
scientific community through publication in online databases. International
collaboration is an integral part of this research, and several trips to Mexico
have lead to extensive interactions with Mexican scientists and students.
Finally, more than fifteen undergraduate students have participated in this
research, most from underrepresented groups.