* 0807651
* RUI: Magnetic Diffusivity in a Predictive Solar Dynamo Model
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2008,09/30/2013
* Elizabeth Zita, Evergreen State College
* Standard Grant
* Maria Womack
* 09/30/2013
* USD 187,732.00

Understanding the solar activity cycle remains one of the key problems in solar
physics. Observed magnetic activities, such as sunspot cycles and magnetic field
reversals, produce solar flares and coronal mass ejections, with significant
influences on the Earth. Physicists generally believe that a magnetohydrodynamic
dynamo produces the observed 11-year activity cycle by generating and changing
magnetic fields in the solar convection zone (the outer 30% of the Sun).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Progress has been made in solar dynamo theory to the point
that computational models may now be used as predictive tools (to a certain
extent). The solar dynamo depends on the shearing, buoyancy, twisting and flows
of magnetic plasma, the hot ionized gas that makes up the Sun. One of the least
understood aspects of the solar dynamo concerns a material property of the Sun
itself - the magnetic diffusivity, which contributes to changes in magnetic
fields, and is itself changed by dynamic magnetic fields. A more complete
understanding of the magnetic diffusivity in the convection zone, and of its
effects on the evolution of solar magnetic fields, is required to more fully
understand the solar dynamo. This is not only an interesting theoretical problem
in solar physics and magnetohydrodynamics, it is also of practical importance to
technologies that are sensitive to solar activity (from communications
satellites to power grids), and to understanding the impact of the variable Sun
on our biosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Here, a proven solar dynamo model will be
improved to better predict future solar cycles. The two dimensional, nonlinear,
kinematic flux-transport dynamo model will be used to investigate the detailed
causes and effects of diffusivity variations in radius, latitude, and time, due
to factors such as temperature, turbulence, and changes in the local magnetic
field strength. Dr. Zita will carry out investigations that will include
important new physics such as dynamical magnetic quenching of diffusivity, and
magnetic advection due to diffusivity gradients. Systematic evaluation of each
effect, and comparison with other key dynamo elements, will deepen insight into
the fundamental mechanisms of the solar dynamo. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Her
investigations will contribute directly to key goals in solar physics, including
understanding how magnetic fields appear, distribute, and disappear from their
origin in the solar interior; and quantification of the physics, dynamics, and
behavior of the system over the solar cycle. The research will produce (1)
physics-based diffusivity models for use by solar dynamo modelers and (2) an
improved dynamo model for prediction of future solar cycles. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This work can also illuminate dynamos in other stars, galaxies, and
fusion plasmas; and mechanisms by which magnetic energy can be transformed into
heat in the solar chromosphere and corona, as these all require better
understanding of magnetic diffusivity. Undergraduates will be directly involved
in the research at all stages. Ongoing scientific collaborations with the High
Altitude Observatory at the National Center for Atmospheric Research will give
students access to high quality research experiences. Dr. Zita is also active in
public science literacy and science outreach to girls, and her home institution
is a pioneer in outreach to students from underrepresented groups. Research
projects such as the work supported here are routinely integrated into
interdisciplinary college curricula. Finally, the project will strengthen the
infrastructure for solar physics research, established in recent years at
Evergreen College in the collaboration with the High Altitude
Observatory.&lt;br/&gt;