* 0807551
* Research on Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations in Conservation Laws and Related Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2012
* Gui-Qiang Chen, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 05/31/2012
* USD 268,471.00

This project is focused on mathematical research on nonlinear partial
differential equations in conservation laws and related applications, along with
the analysis and development of efficient nonlinear techniques. The work has
three interrelated aspects: (i) shock reflection-diffraction; (ii) stability of
multidimensional shock-fronts; and (iii) isometric embedding in differential
geometry. Their unifying mathematical theme is the theory of nonlinear partial
differential equations of mixed hyperbolic-elliptic type and related nonlinear
techniques. In each topic, nonlinear problems involving partial differential
equations of mixed type will be posed and corresponding mathematical techniques
for their solution will be devised. As a result, new physical insights will be
gained by investigating important nonlinear applied partial differential
equations, effective nonlinear techniques will be developed, and the correct
mathematical frameworks in which to pose and discuss these problems will be
established. The work will also lead to the analysis and development of
nonlinear techniques which will have applications in broader classes of
important nonlinear partial differential equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While
great progress has been made for nonlinear partial differential equations of
hyperbolic type (e.g. for the description of wave propagation) and of elliptic
type (e.g.. for deformations of solid bodies) respectively, the mathematical
study of such equations of mixed hyperbolic-elliptic type and related
applications is much less developed. Problems of this type occur when the
behavior of gas flow near the speed of sound in the vicinity of solid objects is
described. Examples include aircraft wings and turbine components. The work
supported by this award will support research on nonlinear problems involving
partial differential equations of mixed type and corresponding mathematical
techniques. It will lead to a deeper understanding of nonlinear phenomena of
mixed hyperbolic-elliptic type and will provide efficient nonlinear methods and
theories for applications. Given the richness and range of applications, this
research project will have a broad impact by investigating several important
nonlinear partial differential equations of mixed type and related applications
and by developing methodology and a set of nonlinear techniques for their
further study. The project will (i) yield new understanding of the mathematics
of gases, fluids, and geometry, which is critical for aerodynamics, industrial
gas processing, materials science, medical imaging, and environmental science;
(ii) provide advanced training for graduate students, post-doctoral associates,
and other junior researchers, including several members from underrepresented
groups. Furthermore, since the design of efficient numerical schemes hinges on
the understanding of the underlying mathematical structure and pattern, success
with this project will be useful to numerical analysis.