* 0807269
* Mathematical Modeling of Heterogeneous Materials
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2011
* Guillermo Goldsztein, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2011
* USD 170,493.00

Goldsztein DMS-0807269

The goal of this project is to develop mathematical tools for the understanding
and prediction of the behavior and properties of heterogeneous materials. In
these studies, the length scale of the heterogeneity is generally much smaller
than the size of the material. The particular problems considered here are the
transport of solute and heat in porous media and the understanding of the flow
within poroelastic materials due to time dependent applied loads. The particular
mathematical techniques to be used include asymptotic and homogenization
methods, numerical simulations and modeling.

The problems studied here are motivated by applications of scientific and
technological interest. Examples where solute transport in porous media plays an
important role, and thus the results of this project have an impact, include:
the transport of contaminants in soils, the transport of nutrients in bones, the
intrusion of salt in fresh water in soils near ocean coasts, movement of
minerals (e.g. fertilizers) in soils, recovery techniques in oil reservoirs,
etc. Heat transport in porous media plays an important role in the transport of
reactive solutes in rocks and soils (the reactions produce heat and the
transport of that heat is coupled with the fate of the solutes, nuclear waste is
included here), solar receivers, building thermal insulation materials, fuel
cells and drying technology. Additionally, while flow within poroelastic
materials occurs in many systems such as soils and rocks, a main motivation of
the project is the transport of nutrients in bones and the stresses generated by
the flow within bone, which are believed to play a role in the remodeling of the
bone (i.e. change of bone shape and size due to gain and loss of bone mass in
different regions of the bone).