* 0807585
* Collaborative Research: The Siberian Traps and the end-Permian Extinction: Coincidence and Causality
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2015
* Linda Elkins-Tanton, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Leonard E. Johnson
* 07/31/2015
* USD 1,327,246.00

This project address an important, and unresolved question in Earth evolution,
i.e. did the eruption of the Siberian Large Igneous Province (LIP) a.k.a.
Siberian Traps cause the Permo-Triassic extinction? In reality there are two
questions at the heart of this proposal; what causes flood basalts and do flood
basalts cause extinctions? These questions have been the subject of active
research for several decades. One of the unique aspects of this project is that
both are addressed simultaneously by an international team of experts whose goal
is to gain an in-depth understanding of this LIP from its origin to both short-
and long-term effects on Earth systems. The PIs will use a large suite of
techniques: geochemistry, geothermometry, paleomagnetics, seismology,
geodynamics, paleontology, and climate modeling to achieve their goal.
Specifically, the PIs will:

> create high-precision eruption time scales for the entire volcanic succession,
thus obtaining flux rates; > quantify the volatile loads of the igneous rocks
including lavas, intrusives, and in particular the voluminous tuffs; > quantify
volatile release from country rocks; > begin to map the crustal and upper-mantle
structure beneath the region using existing seismic data and geodynamical
modeling; > study the climatic consequences of sulfur injection and buildup of
atmospheric carbon dioxide; and > continue detailed studies of the end-Permian
extinction, using paleontology, stable isotope geochemistry, and geochronology.

Broader Impacts:

The PI team consists of scientists from 7 different countries. A central
repository will be created for samples obtained under this project. Information
will be maintained on the web and material made available to other scientists. A
documentary film producer associated with the National Geographic Corporation
will be in the field with the PIs gathering footage for a film about the
project. Additional coverage is will be provided through the American Museum of
Natural History?s Science Bulletins, short films about current research that are
shown at the AMNH and distributed to over 40 science centers and museums around
the world.