* 0807491
* Black Hole Feedback and Galaxy Formation
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2013
* Kentaro Nagamine, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Knezek
* 07/31/2013
* USD 449,317.00

Dr. Nagamine will combine his hydrodynamic simulations of newly-forming galaxies
in regions hundreds of light years across with those of co-investigator Dr.
Proga, which follow disk accretion within the central few light years around a
black hole. To bridge the 8 orders of magnitude in scale between them, these
calculations will be linked by runs at intermediate scale using a 'zoom-in'
technique of successively re-simulating an interesting volume at much higher
resolution. Black holes are included in the largest-scale simulations both as
sink particles that grow in mass by merging and by accreting gas, and as sources
of energy, momentum and ultraviolet radiation. Both 'sink' and 'source' terms
will be represented by approximate formulas; the model predictions will be
compared with observations of the intergalactic gas, and the numbers of active
galactic nuclei seen at each redshift. As a novel aspect, the PI will calculate
how the ultraviolet radiation of young stars and active nuclei propagates out
into the intergalactic gas. Galaxy-scale simulations will be used to find how
fast gas will flow into the inner galaxy. This provides an outer boundary
condition for the last calculation, which describes the accretion disk around
the central black hole. At this last stage, the group can calculate how much
radiation and momentum the black hole should inject back into the gas of the
galaxy. These will be the first calculations of how a black hole feeds and
shines, when it is in the center of a galaxy that is itself merging with others
according to cosmological predictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A graduate student
and a postdoctoral fellow will be trained by their involvement in the research.
Undergraduate students will participate through an NSF-funded summer Research
Experiences for Undergraduates program. Dr. Nagamine will help to plan a new
public planetarium on the UNLV campus, and will design cosmology exhibits for
it. The team will generate images and movies made from the simulations, for use
in public outreach; they aim to produce visualizations of sufficient quality for
an IMAX movie. Both investigators will continue to give public lectures in a
series organized by UNLV.