* 0807458
* Cosmological Applications of Gravitational Lensing
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2014
* Roger Blandford, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 06/30/2014
* USD 501,495.00

A gravitational lens is produced when the gravitational field of a star, galaxy
or cluster of galaxies distorts the images of background sources, 'strongly'
when multiple images are created and 'weakly' otherwise. Gravitational lenses
are now regarded as tools used to: (i) probe the nature of unseen mass, from
black holes to dark matter and dark energy; (ii) measure distances and probe the
size, shape and expansion of the universe; and (iii) study distant sources in
exquisite detail. Future projects using new telescopes, like the Large Synoptic
Survey Telescope and the SuperNova Acceleration Probe, will enable detailed,
statistical studies of dark matter, and will provide a sensitive and robust
measurement of the empirical behavior of dark energy. Past results from Dr.
Blandford's group include: (i) demonstrating that dark matter is effectively
collisionless and distinct from normal, baryonic matter (ii) a competitively
accurate determination of the Hubble constant using a quadruply-imaged variable
galaxy nucleus, (iii) measurement of the clustering of the faintest galaxies
observed by the Hubble Space Telescope, (iv) understanding the distribution and
clustering of distant quasars, and (v) developing new computational tools for
cosmological investigations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new work will include: (i)
more detailed planning for handling the variability data for many thousands of
lensed quasars, (ii) analyzing what can be learned from the rare lensed
supernovae and gamma ray bursts, (iii) more about galaxy-galaxy weak lensing and
what can be learned about the potential wells of galaxies and their halos, (iv)
new ideas on systematic errors in gravitational lensing, notably the difficulty
of distinguishing a change in the size of the universe from the addition of
extra mass, (v) studying the predicted incidence of exceptional lenses that can
be used to test the theory of how mass clumps in the expanding universe, (vi)
the distribution of sizes of the largest gravitational lenses, and (vii) how to
use the gravitational lensing-induced distortion of the clustering of faint
galaxies to determine the distribution in space, properties, and histories of
these galaxies. It will significantly advance understanding of the size, shape
and expansion of the Universe and of the properties of its major constituents,
dark matter and dark energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cosmological questions
continue to attract much genuine interest among non-scientists and especially
among young people who might ultimately become practicing scientists or
engineers. Future projects with large publicly-accessible databases are likely
to transform the relationship between professional and amateur astronomers.