* 0807232
* Materials World Network: Ordered Ge/Si Core-Shell Nanostructures for Nonvolatile Memory Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Roger Lake, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 07/31/2012
* USD 483,000.00

Investigators from two groups at the University of California at Riverside (UCR)
and one group at Nanjing University, China, develop materials technologies
necessary for realizing the scalability of flash memory technology toward the
CMOS ultimate limit and beyond using ordered Ge/Si core-shell quantum dots.
Flash memory, which is a key component in many portable electronics, will not
operate properly when higher storage capacity and lower power consumption are
requested. As an alternative device, silicon nanocrystal memory, although being
extensively investigated by the memory industry for commercialization, will also
fail for technology nodes beyond 32nm. The key issues are non-uniform writing
and erasing due to floating dot density variation and unacceptable short
retention as a result of thinner tunnel oxide for lower voltage operation. In
this project, engineering of Ge/Si core-shell quantum dots into one-dimensional
arrays through cooperative self-assembly is synergistic with the current CMOS
scaling trend toward one-dimensional structures and is expected to result in
additional performance improvement. The effect of scaling on the electronic
properties of the Ge/Si core-shell quantum dots is theoretically investigated
using fully atomistic models and both semi-empirical and first-principle models.
Experimental fabrication and characterization provide close coupling between the
theory and experimental data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Summer exchange activities
and small workshops of research presentations allow participating PhD students
and undergraduate students to be trained in a wide variety of areas of
expertise. Research-based curriculum development, web-based dissemination of
research results, publications and conference presentations, and dissemination
to local school districts through videos will impact more students including
those at the pre-college level. Considering the very diverse background of
student body in UCR and its surrounding area, many of the students involved and
affected come from groups traditionally underrepresented in science and
engineering. This international exchange of students exposes U.S. students to
the Chinese style of networking in research and Chinese culture in Nanjing, and
it also exposes Chinese students to U.S.-style research and culture. If
successfully demonstrated, the work will have broad impact on the nonvolatile
memory industry. This project is co-funded by the Division of Materials
Research, the Office of International Science and Engineering, and the MPS
Directorate Office of Multidisciplinary activities.&lt;br/&gt;