* 0807093
* Materials World Network:  Scanned Probe Studies of FMR Driven Spin Injection in Individual Fe-filled Carbon Nanotubes
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* P. Chris Hammel, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 07/31/2012
* USD 420,000.00

There is growing recognition of the opportunities offered by the spin degree of
freedom of the electron to enhance information processing. This Materials World
Network award, which supports collaborative research between the Ohio State
University (OSU) in Columbus, OH and the Institute for Solid State Research,
Leibniz Institute for Solid State and Materials Research, Dresden, Germany (IFF-
IFW), will study spin transport within iron nanowires and across various
interfaces within them. Iron (and copper) filled multi wall carbon nanotubes
will be grown and characterized in Germany and the US team will study these
structures using Magnetic Resonance Force Microscopy (MRFM) techniques. MRFM is
a novel scanning probe technique that detects the magnetic spin of electrons and
acquires resonance images at nanometer scale resolution. In this project,
Ferromagnetic Resonance Force Microscopy (FMRFM) will be applied to individual
nanowires; in particular, spatially resolved FMR studies within individual
ferromagnetic nanowires will be carried out. These studies will improve
understanding of magnetic properties, particularly damping, of the nanowires,
and deepen insight into spin transport across interfaces with ferromagnetic
metals through microscopic studies of spin pumping in ferromagnetic nanowires.
The project also presents an opportunity to study FMR pumped spin injection
across interfaces in ferromagnetic nanowires. This work will provide
opportunities for several graduate students both in Ohio and Germany and an
undergraduate student to participate in cutting edge nanomagnetics research. The
prinicipal investigator on this project will also develop a course for
undergraduate student laboratory in modern nanomagnetism.

Ferromagnetic nanowires possess unusual magnetic properties and are well suited
for fundamental studies aimed at understanding nanoscale magnetism. These
nanowires have rich technological potential for use as elements in nanoscale
spin-electronic structures and also as magnetic probe tips in magnetic resonance
molecular imaging applications. This project combines unique ferromagnetic
resonance imaging capabilities available at Ohio State University with nanowire
growth and characterization expertise of collaborating researchers in Germany.
The focus is on the study of iron filled carbon nanotubes, which is an exciting
new ferromagnetic nanowire system. An iron filled multi wall carbon nanotube is
a crystalline iron wire 5 to 10 nm in diameter encased in a protective carbon
nanotube shell. The research team will study spin transport within the nanowires
and across various interfaces. These studies will improve understanding of
magnetic properties and deepen insight into spin transport across interfaces
with ferromagnetic nanowires. The project offers international research
experience for several graduate and undergraduate students through exchange
visits and trains them in modern nanomagnetism related areas.

This work is supported through a grant from the division of Materials Research
in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences directorate.