* 0807140
* Scientists for Tomorrow- Scholarships for the recruitment and retention of bright young scientists.
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* Shardha Jogee, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* John Krupczak
* 08/31/2014
* USD 600,000.00

Intellectual merit: This project provides a new scholarship program, Scientists
for Tomorrow, to leverage existing research and student programs towards long-
term student success by providing a critical and otherwise unavailable piece --
funding to support entering students. This program fills a critical gap,
supporting approximately 43 incoming Astronomy, Computer Sciences, Math and
Physics first-year students each year with scholarships ranging between $2,500
and $5,000 annually. Objectives include 1) increasing access to STEM education,
2) improving first-year performance among at-risk groups, 3) involving students
in the scientific community, 4) transitioning students to other existing sources
of support, and 5) ultimately affecting graduation rates, graduate school
matriculation and scientific career choices. Students apply on-line, are
filtered by the Office of Student Financial Services based on need, and selected
by a departmental committee using academic merit criteria. Scholarship
recipients participate in community building activities, are placed in an
academic cohort in their discipline, are assigned a faculty mentor, and attend
graduate school, undergraduate research and career seminars.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This scholarship program specifically
addresses national areas of need and supports low-income college students and
groups underrepresented in the sciences. The university already makes a major
contribution to minority education in the United States and is listed among the
top ten institutions in awards of bachelor's degrees and first in the nation in
the number of doctoral degrees awarded to Hispanics. Existing freshman programs
at UT-Austin provide support and encouragement to students in traditionally
underrepresented sections of our population, and encourage participation in
research. The project expects to make a concrete impact on recruitment and
retention in the sciences.