* 0807832
* Laboratory Astrophysics of Interstellar Ice Mantles
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2008,11/30/2012
* Raul Baragiola, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* James Neff
* 11/30/2012
* USD 411,026.00

AWARD NO: AST - 0807832&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: University of Virginia Main
Campus&lt;br/&gt;PI: Raul A Baragiola&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: Laboratory Astrophysics
of Interstellar Ice Mantles&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will address the
question of the balance between molecules in the gas and on dust grains in dark
interstellar molecular clouds, one of the central unsolved problems in the
evolution of interstellar matter. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The problem consists of
the following: due to the low temperature of molecular clouds and high
condensation coefficients, all gaseous species, with the exception of H2 and He
would be depleted by condensation on grains, in times of typically 100,000
years. Yet a typical molecular cloud lives much longer, millions of years, and
contains a relatively high number of molecules in the gas phase. Therefore, an
efficient desorption mechanisms must operate. However, none of the proposed
mechanisms can convincingly maintain the gas population observed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For this reason, the laboratory studies to be undertaken
here perform novel experiments to determine desorption rates due to: a)
photodesorption by ultraviolet Lyman-alpha photons, b) thermal desorption by
recombination of H atoms into H2 molecules adsorbed on ices, c) desorption from
dissociative electron attachment caused by low energy electrons. In addition,
since the main interstellar gas in molecular clouds is molecular hydrogen, which
can be readily absorbed in microporous water ice, the experiments will simulate
those conditions, studying H2 adsorption, replacement of H2 by adsorption of
other gases such as CO, and the effect of adsorbed hydrogen on the
photodesorption and molecular photosynthesis in water ice.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will use highly sensitive techniques of
microgravimetry and mass spectrometry to measure desorption of ices at cryogenic
temperatures in ultrahigh vacuum. The research group has demonstrated expertise
in the research area and promote innovation by applying knowledge and techniques
from other areas of science into astronomical problems, such as the new concept
that desorption by low energy electrons will occur in molecular clouds.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the astronomical applications of the
research, the understanding of radiation processing of materials developed here
has applications in semiconductor, thin film and chemical industries. The Dr.
Baragiola is collaborating with scientists on some of these applications.
Students will be active participants in this research which will provide
training for students that will prepare them for industrial, government and
academic career paths. Some of the research will also be incorporated into
undergraduate introductory astronomy courses in part to help students understand
the role laboratory astrophysics plays in our ongoing quest to understand our
universe.