* 0807323
* The LMC as a Massive Star Formation Laboratory
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Tony Wong, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 07/31/2012
* USD 378,146.00

Dr. Leslie Looney (University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign) will fill a
crucial observational gap in the understanding of how massive stars form by
probing fundamental properties of a new sample of 244 massive protostars in the
Large Magellanic Cloud (LMC). This is the largest sample of massive young
stellar objects at a well-known distance (about 50 kiloparsecs). The advantage
of investigating massive protostars in the LMC is that the objects can be
studied without many of the problems inherent in the study of Galactic high-mass
young stellar objects, which are small in numbers, have poorly constrained
distances, generally suffer from confusion along the line of sight and have high
foreground extinction. These benefits will allow the first detailed study of a
sample of massive protostars and the environment in which they form at a uniform
distance, probing the infrared properties on size scales of 0.01 parsec and
molecular gas on size scales of 0.1 parsec.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Massive stars
play a fundamental role in galactic evolution at all stages of their relatively
short lives, and they are the only mode of star formation seen in other
galaxies. Dr. Looney and his team have a new and unique sample of massive
protostars from Spitzer Space Telescope observations. This work will survey
these massive protostars to understand how massive protostars evolve and how
that evolution affects their environment. The research goals in this project
will push our understanding of massive star formation and cluster formation
while integrating the project into the promotion of teaching, training, and
learning. Dr. Looney will build upon a major revitalization of the astronomy
undergraduate curriculum at the University of Illinois and a new partnership
with the Astronomical Research Institute, which operates three robotically
controlled telescopes in Illinois, to develop astronomical laboratory
experiments that will guide students through the concepts of this research.
These exercises will be made available to the general public. Finally, two
graduate students, as well as one undergraduate student, will be involved in
this research project, playing pivotal roles.