* 0807793
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Genomic Basis of Adaptation in Experimentally Evolved Rhizobia
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2009
* Maureen Stanton, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Richard S. Inouye
* 05/31/2009
* USD 10,560.00

High-throughput sequencing technology will be used to identify mutations that
influence the fitness of rhizobia that are symbiotic partners of legumes,
providing a window into the ways that rhizobia adapt to the symbiotic lifestyle.
Use of experimentally evolved populations of rhizobia derived from the model
rhizobium 'Sinorhizobium meliloti' will enable direct measurement of the extent
of host-symbiont conflict by asking whether mutations that confer higher
rhizobia fitness have positive or negative effects on host performance.
Identification of mutants will lead to development of testable mechanistic
hypotheses and macro-evolutionary predictions, connecting laboratory results to
natural populations. The symbiosis between legumes and rhizobia, bacteria that
form root nodules and fix atmospheric nitrogen, is among the best model systems
for understanding coevolution. While the interaction is widely assumed to be
mutually beneficial, there is ongoing debate over the extent to which rhizobia
can cheat their host plants by receiving plant resources without providing fixed
nitrogen in return. The rhizobia-legume symbiosis is a key component of
sustainable agriculture, as legumes can grow without oil-derived fertilizers and
enrich soil fertility over the long-term when used in crop rotations. Legumes
include the economically important crop species soy, alfalfa, pea, bean,
chickpea, and peanut that provide plant-based protein for human and animal
nutrition. Thus, increased understanding of the rhizobia genes implicated in
this study may prove useful to agriculture for designing more efficient legume-
rhizobia symbioses.