* 0807368
* Surface, Interface, and Bulk Electronic Structure of Nano-Scale Thin Film Organic Semiconductors
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Kevin Smith, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 06/30/2011
* USD 362,924.00

In this research, supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, a
powerful combination of x-ray spectroscopies will be used to measure the
surface, bulk and interface electronic structure of organic semiconductors.
These new semiconductors are the subject of great interest due to the promise
they hold for the development of advanced, flexible, carbon-based electronic
devices. This program will measure the fundamental electronic properties of
these materials in thin film form, as well as how they interact with their
physical environment. It aims to produce definitive spectroscopic measurements
of electronic structure in organic semiconductors which have hitherto been
missing, and thus transform our understanding of such materials.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt; This program will have broad impact in three areas. First, this
project will have a significant impact on the education of students and
postdoctoral research associates by exposing them to a highly collaborative
research environment at national synchrotron radiation x-ray user facilities.
Second, this program will have a broad impact on scientific infrastructure by
supporting the full utilization of a state-of-the-art multi-technique x-ray
spectrometer system. This apparatus is a significant infrastructure enhancement
at a national user facility. Finally, this program is interdisciplinary and
collaborative by its very nature. The successful application of these
measurement techniques to organic systems will potentially have broad impact in
a number of areas of chemistry, physics, materials science, and electrical
engineering.