* 0807462
* SGER:  Spatial Patterns of Post-Wildfire Neighborhood Recovery
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2008,07/31/2009
* Jacqueline Mills, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 07/31/2009
* USD 51,314.00

While much attention on large-scale disasters like massive hurricanes,
tornadoes, earthquakes, and wildfire focuses on the dynamics of the catastrophe
and the magnitude of its adverse impacts, scholarly attention also has been
given to the processes through which people recover from the devastations
associated with these traumatic events. A spatial variant of the "conservation
of resources" (COR) stress model provides a suitable theoretical frame to
investigate the geography of recovery in a post-disaster landscape. This theory
holds that the loss of social (networks/neighborhood) and personal (possessions,
emotions) aspects of life can result in psychopathology among affected residents
unless the effects are modified by different coping strategies and eventually by
the return to normalcy. Building on two years of experience in studying the
recovery of New Orleans to the ravages of Hurricane Katrina, the investigators
of this research project will use a Small Grant for Exploratory Research to
collect geographic data on neighborhood recovery over a series of time periods
in San Diego County neighborhoods affected by the destructive wildfires of
October 2007. The investigators will adapt a spatial video acquisition system
(SVAS) first developed in collaboration with the National Center for
Geocomputation (NCG) in Ireland for use in New Orleans to monitor the recovery
of about 8,500 properties in five areas that were significantly impacted by the
wildfires. The system, which consists of two video cameras mounted to either
side of a vehicle, with the audio track recording a perpetual GPS signal, will
be used at roughly three-month intervals for a year following the fires to
gather critical data that can then be analyzed to determine the form and
character of recovery in the different neighborhoods. These data will be
analyzed with respect to data on the socioeconomic characteristics of the
neighborhoods as well as other variables to analyze the spatial patterns of
post-disaster recovery and to assess the impact of recovery efforts on the
psychopathology of residents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will gather
critical data that will enable these and other researchers to assess a wide
range of questions associated with the dynamics of post-disaster recovery. These
investigators will use the data to test hypotheses associated with post-disaster
psychopathology, thereby advancing theoretical understandings regarding
geographic factors that may affect the longer-term mental health of residents
adversely affected by major disasters. The project will have direct practical
benefits for public health officials seeking better understanding of where
critical facilities might be placed, and the insights and data from this project
will have utility in other settings, thereby providing new information that
might aid future post-disaster recovery efforts. The project will also aid in
the refinement of new methods for gathering consistent data regarding post-
disaster recovery over longer time periods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;