* 0807871
* Toward a First Principle Understanding of Internal Waves, Eddies, and Their Interactions
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Yuri Lvov, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2013
* USD 149,099.00

Despite the enormous complexity of the ocean, the spectral energy density of
internal waves is believed to be universal, given by the Garrett-Munk spectrum
(1972). It has been generally understood that such a spectral energy density of
internal waves is the result of nonlinear wave-wave interaction, and the theory
of wave turbulence describes the spectral energy transfers in such systems. Wave
turbulence has contributed tremendously to our understanding of spectral energy
transfers in atmosphere and ocean. However, the question remains why the
internal wavefield spectrum possesses such a universality. The goal of the
research that is funded by this award is to give a theoretical explanation of
this apparent universality. To begin with, it will be demonstrated that the
traditional wave turbulence assumptions of weak nonlinear resonant wave-wave
interactions are violated by interacting internal waves. A generalization of
traditional wave turbulence is necessary, including strongly nonlinear wave-wave
interactions that are not necessarily resonant. Oceanographers believe that it
is sufficient to consider only wave-wave interactions to describe the formation
of the spectral energy density of internal waves. It will be demonstrated that
this intuition is correct to a large extend. Yet wave-wave interactions alone
are not exclusively responsible for the formation of the spectral energy density
of internal waves. Using direct numerical simulation of wave-wave interactions,
it will be demonstrated that energy tends to cascade towards longer and longer
horizontal waves. Additional, large scale vortices in the ocean and their
interactions with internal waves will be considered. In particular, the coupling
of the quasi-geostrophical potential vorticity turbulence and of internal waves
will be studied. Such wave-vortex interactions will describe how internal waves
are influenced and influence large scale oceanic vortices. To achieve these
goals, a novel Hamiltonian structure that has been developed for internal waves
will be used, and a rigorous reformulation of wave turbulence theory that was
developed recently by the proposer will be employed.

The oceanic wavefield is a large and complex system. For such systems, it is
often extremely useful to decribe the energy spectrum of the underlying
dynamics: How much energy is contained in surface ripples, how much in swells
travelling across the ocean, how much in tidal flows, how much in large scale
currents such as the Gulf Stream, and how do these features at vastly different
scales influence each other. The work supported by this award focuses on
internal waves. For a simple table-top illustration, one should visualize a
glass container whose bottom half is filled with water, with oil in the top
half. Then it is possible that waves slosh around at the water-oil interface
while the oily surface appears calm. Such waves at interfaces between fluids of
different density are often observed in the ocean over the continental shelf
during the summer, due to solar heating, and they in turn influence weather
patterns. It has been observed that such internal waves in the ocean have an
energy spectrum that is universal. This research work will contribute to a
theoretical understanding of this universality. It will also lead to a better
understanding of processes in the ocean and in the atmosphere, and thus
contribute to mathematical models for climate and weather modeling and
prediction.