* 0807132
* SciMath Scholars:  The Sequel
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Julie Johnson, Normandale Community College
* Standard Grant
* James Hamos
* 06/30/2012
* USD 596,992.00

This project builds on the Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics
(CSEMS) scholarship program and is designed to provide scholarships averaging
$4,000 for academically talented and financially needy students. Approximately
130 students per semester are being supported to enroll full time (12 credits)
in science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) associate degree
programs. Students who carry a 16 credit load to complete their associate's
degree in two years are eligible for up to $5,400 in scholarship support.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Each student is assigned a faculty
mentor from a STEM department. A colloquium course for the scholar cohort
sponsors guest speakers and workshops. This project continues the CSEMS
successful scholarship probationary period that allows students to remain in the
program for one semester if their GPAs fall below 3.0. During the probationary
semester scholars work with their mentor and an academic support coordinator and
receive academic assistance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This community
college is the number one provider of transfer students to the University of
Minnesota, the University of St. Thomas, and Minnesota State University,
Mankato. This scholarship program provides a pool of diverse candidates for
these institutions and their STEM baccalaureate degree programs. High technology
industries in the Twin Cities metropolitan area benefit from the skilled workers
whose education is subsidized by the scholarships. The program recruits
underrepresented groups to pursue education and careers in STEM disciplines. The
minority participation in the current CSEMS program is 27% which is higher than
for the college as a whole which is at 21%.