* 0807953
* Collaborative Research: Data-driven Inquiry in Geoscience Environmental Restoration Studies
* GEO,GEO
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* David Montgomery, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 08/31/2012
* USD 249,046.00

Educational researchers from SRI International and geoscientists from the
University of Washington (UW) are engaging American Indian high school and
college students from the Puget Sound region of Washington State in the
geosciences through place-based field work, while exploring models for
developing data literacy and enhancing quantitative reasoning skills by
connecting abstract representations of place-based spatio-temporal data with
inquiry tasks. Employing curriculum and assessment methods developed by SRI, the
team is developing and piloting problem-based, inquiry-oriented curriculum
modules about the environmental history of the Washington State Puget Sound
region and about what implications the history has for the American Indian
communities in the region. The Data-driven Inquiry in Geoscience Environmental
Restoration Studies (DIGERS) modules are using data collected by the UW team for
the Puget Sound Regional Synthesis Model (PRISM) and Puget Sound River History
Project. The modules will be pilot-tested in a new undergraduate environmental
history course at UW and in science classes in high schools serving American
Indian students in Seattle and Puget Sound tribal communities. The curriculum
modules will consist of problem-based units and performance assessments centered
on student use of the UW data, plus accompanying geographic visualizations and
other representations. DIGERS will provide the UW geoscientists with the
opportunity to demonstrate to the regional tribes that their research, some of
which has been funded by Puget Sound tribes, can be used in the service of the
American Indian youths? STEM education in addition to use by tribal agencies in
resource restoration and management. DIGERS will provide adaptable and
publically available designs of data-centered geoscience inquiry tasks that can
support future development of high school and undergraduate-level curricula. In
addition, the project will contribute to the knowledge base about how students
can become more engaged and more skilled in geoscience inquiry and data analysis
and what variations in educational supports and expectations should exist to
build successful experiences for the students with the materials. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;