* 0807033
* Analysis and Synthesis of Scattered Data on Surfaces via Radial and Related Basis Functions
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2011
* Joseph Ward, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2011
* USD 224,900.00

Ward&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0807033&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The main object of this project
is to develop new methods&lt;br/&gt;and tools for the analysis and synthesis of
scattered data by&lt;br/&gt;means of radial and related basis functions. Very
recently, the&lt;br/&gt;investigators Ward and Narcowich and a collaborator
introduced a&lt;br/&gt;new tool for fitting a divergence-free vector field
tangent to a&lt;br/&gt;2D orientable surface contained in 3D to samples of such
a field&lt;br/&gt;taken at scattered sites on the surface. The method,
which&lt;br/&gt;involves a kernel constructed from radial basis functions
(RBFs),&lt;br/&gt;has applications to problems in geophysics -- for instance,
the&lt;br/&gt;nonlinear flow of an incompressible fluid in a single
hydrostatic&lt;br/&gt;atmospheric layer. Mathematically, incompressibility
translates&lt;br/&gt;to the velocity having vanishing surface divergence.
Fitting&lt;br/&gt;divergence-free tangent vector fields to data taken in
these&lt;br/&gt;cases would help in modeling the incompressible velocity
fields&lt;br/&gt;involved. In addition to handling scattered data, it has
the&lt;br/&gt;advantage of avoiding special treatment for the poles.
The&lt;br/&gt;investigators study the approximation properties of this
tool,&lt;br/&gt;with a view towards estimates on its data-fitting errors as
well&lt;br/&gt;how robust it is. For certain cases, numerical
experiments&lt;br/&gt;suggest both a good fit of data and robustness. In
addition,&lt;br/&gt;unstructured scattered data -- i.e., clumped, or clustered,
or&lt;br/&gt;nonuniformly distributed data -- present problems for any
method,&lt;br/&gt;including the traditional RBF-type algorithms based on
translates&lt;br/&gt;of one conditionally positive definite function. These
clustered&lt;br/&gt;data occur naturally in learning theory, neural nets,
meshless&lt;br/&gt;methods, and other situations. To deal with clustered data,
the&lt;br/&gt;investigators initiate the study of the construction of
new&lt;br/&gt;bases, preconditioners, and in general a new RBF-type paradigm.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Problems that involve analyzing data taken from
scattered&lt;br/&gt;sites -- that is, irregularly placed sites -- in space or on
the&lt;br/&gt;surface of the earth arise frequently in diverse
fields:&lt;br/&gt;computer-aided design graphics, data mining, medical
imaging,&lt;br/&gt;learning networks, and geoscience, in addition to many
other&lt;br/&gt;areas. Such problems present difficulties for
traditional&lt;br/&gt;methods, which are based on collecting data at uniformly
placed&lt;br/&gt;sites. For example, weather prediction is based on
a&lt;br/&gt;mathematical model where the earth's surface is assumed to be
a&lt;br/&gt;surface of a sphere. The investigators develop new methods
and&lt;br/&gt;tools to help in analyzing such phenomena via so-called
radial&lt;br/&gt;basis function methods. &lt;br/&gt;