* 0807469
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Learned Social and Mate Recognition in Species Pairs of Sticklebacks
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2010
* Janette Boughman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 05/31/2010
* USD 12,000.00

Janette Boughman&lt;br/&gt;IOS-0807469&lt;br/&gt;Doctoral Dissertation Research:
Learned Social and Mate Recognition in Species Pairs of Stickleback
Fish&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How new species form is an important question in
biology. One way to approach this question is to study why mating does not occur
between closely related species. This research will use behavioral experiments
to look at the effect of social interactions on mating behavior in a pair of
species (benthic and limnetic stickleback fish) that can form hybrids but
normally do not interbreed. Previous work found that social experience as
juveniles (being raised with the other species) altered which species fish chose
to mate with. The project will look at whether interactions with parents or
predators affect mate choice and hybridization. Being raised by a parent of
another species might make sticklebacks more likely to mate with their foster
species; this occurs in other fish and bird species. Experience with predators
could also increase hybridization between species, since females become less
selective of males of their own species when predators are present. To test for
these effects, two experiments will be performed. In one, sticklebacks will be
raised either by a parent of their own or the other species and then tested to
determine which species they prefer to mate with. In another experiment,
sticklebacks will see trout predators in an adjacent tank to determine if the
perceived risk of predation makes them less particular about who they mate with.
Studying how social interactions alter hybridization will give insight into the
role social behavior may have had in the initial evolution of these species.
Additionally, it will identify factors that lead to increased hybridization
between these species. This information could help explain why hybridization
occurs in some disturbed lakes and inform conservation efforts. Broader impacts:
These experiments will provide research opportunities for undergraduate
students. Furthermore, the data collected will be used to develop educational
materials that employ sticklebacks to illustrate evolutionary principles.