* 0807898
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Functional dissimilarity in soil microbial communities
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2010
* Mark Bradford, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 05/31/2010
* USD 11,032.00

The activities of microbes in the soil, such as bacteria, are essential for soil
fertility and hence play a central role in maintaining ecosystem productivity
and structure. Soils are experiencing an increasing number of insults, from
invasive species to land-use change. These insults bring a new set of plant
species into contact with soil microbes. Given the tremendous species richness
and abundance of soil microbes, ecologists typically assume that microbial
communities rapidly adapt to new conditions and hence maintain their essential
ecosystem functions in light of changing conditions. However, recent evidence
suggests that unique sets of microbial species are found in different locations,
just as for animals and plants. This presents the intriguing possibility that
microbial species in different locations might function differently. Initial
work suggests that this is the case and the work under this new project will
explore this result. Specifically, it will use an experimental approach to
explore the role that both the contemporary environment and extant microbial
communities play in shaping ecosystem function. The expectation is that the
community will be more important in environments where plants with complex leaf
chemistry, such as trees, are present. The understanding gained will facilitate
informed prediction of how soil fertility and other ecosystem properties will
change in response to a changing environment. As well as training a Ph.D.
student, the work will train an undergraduate student from underrepresented
groups in ecology. The results will be broadly disseminated via publication in
peer-reviewed journals and presentations at national meetings.