* 0807129
* Variability of Accreting Magnetized Stars Studied with 3D MHD Simulations and 3D Radiative Transfer
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2011
* Marina Romanova, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Womack
* 07/31/2011
* USD 566,001.00

Accreting magnetized stars, such as Classical T Tauri stars, cataclysmic
variables, and millisecond X-ray pulsars show a wide variety of variability in
their light curves and spectra. In some cases, exact periodicity is observed,
while in other cases the light curves show stochastic fluctuations or quasi-
periodic oscillations. Understanding these magnetized stars requires global 3D
magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) modeling. Recent 3D and 2.5D MHD simulations performed
by Dr. Romanova and her collaborators have shown a wide variety of possible
paths of matter flow around magnetized stars, including the possibility of
direct accretion through the Rayleigh-Taylor instability. These investigations
have shown that magnetized stars may be either in the stable or unstable regime
of accretion, with strikingly different observational properties. This and other
interesting phenomena found in their MHD simulations may describe different
properties or stages of evolution of different accreting magnetized
stars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;However, to compare the results with observations,
one needs to calculate continuum and line spectra from the stars and the
surrounding matter. This requires high-level radiative transfer modeling, which
is the primary goal of this project: to perform full 3D radiative transfer
modeling, using the results of the 3D MHD simulations as a base. Results of such
3D (MHD) + 3D (radiative) models will be compared with observations of different
Classical T Tauri stars for which spectral and photometric observational data
are available. A number of new MHD simulations will be done aimed at
understanding different phenomena around magnetized stars, including (1)
accretion through instabilities; (2) modeling of outflows; (3) investigation of
disk oscillations and warping generated by a misaligned
dipole.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is expected that this research will be an
important new step in modeling accreting magnetized stars. Two modern state-of-
the-art codes (3D MHD and radiative transfer) will be combined in a major effort
to understand the physics of magnetized stars. The results will be valuable for
understanding the whole range of accreting magnetized stars, from magnetic brown
dwarfs to neutron stars. The results on disk oscillations and warping will be
valuable for understanding processes around compact stars. The methods and
numerical MHD codes developed here also have general value and are applicable in
other areas of science such as planetary science, geophysics, earth
magnetospheric science and heliospheric science, and in engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is ideal for training young scientists -
graduate and undergraduate students - who will learn magnetohydrodynamics and
programming, how to parallelize the codes, and to write auxiliary programs. The
project will also support a public exhibition at the Ithaca Sciencenter on the
birth of stars featuring the roles of accretion and plasma physics.