* 0807827
* Regularity of the 3D Navier-Stokes equations in the largest critical space and related problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,07/31/2009
* Alexey Cheskidov, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2009
* USD 103,500.00

The regularity of solutions of the three-dimensional incompressible Navier
Stokes equations (NSE) remains a significant problem. Even thought it is far
from been solved, numerous regularity criteria have been proved since the work
of Leray in the 1930s. The research funded with this award will extend classical
regularity and uniqueness results, in particular, the recently established
Escauriaza-Seregin-Sverak criterion, to wider classes of Besov spaces. The
methods to be used will combine harmonic analysis tools and classical
techaniques for the Navier-Stokes equations. In addition, it is planned to study
global attractors of the 3D NSE and related models, such as the dyadic (a.k.a.
shell) models of turbulence. The study of the structure of the global attractor
is essential for a better understanding of turbulent phenomena. Due to the lack
of a uniqueness proof, it is not known whether the 3D NSE possesses a semigroup
of solution operators, and consequently a classical theory of semiflows cannot
be used for this system. It is proposed to continue developing a theory of
global attractors for an evolutionary system, which is a generalization of a
dynamical system that can be applied in this
situation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support research on some
fundamental open questions concerning the equations of fluid motion. The
equations were introduced almost two centuries ago but are still not well
understood mathematically. Even though the equations are broadly used by
physicists and engineers for real-life applications, the existence and
uniqueness of (classical) solutions is still not known. An answer to this
question is expected to shed light on fundamental issues related to turbulence.
Turbulence, often referred to as the last unsolved problem in classical physics,
is a fundamental phenomenon occurring in fluid flows around airplane bodies,
vehicles, ships, and blades of turbines. A better mathematical understanding of
turbulence will result in improvements in the design of these objects.