* 0807477
* Collaborative Research: Tracing the Spectropolarimetric History of Circumstellar Structures from High-Mass Stars through Supernovae
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2014
* Jennifer Hoffman, University of Denver
* Continuing Grant
* James Neff
* 07/31/2014
* USD 380,708.00

Though their field was once thought to be reasonably well-understood,
astronomers in the massive-star community are now faced with a number of new and
fundamental questions about the non-spherical character of stellar mass loss.
The nature and extent of wind clumping remains an unsolved problem; recent
studies suggest that due to this clumpiness, O star mass-loss rates should be
revised downward by an order of magnitude or more. In addition, a growing body
of evidence shows that magnetic fields can influence the geometry of mass loss
in hot star winds in unanticipated ways. The effects of stellar rotation on the
structure and formation of disks around some main sequence and post-main
sequence massive stars are still not fully understood. Meanwhile, detailed
observations of supernovae reveal that many more core-collapse objects interact
extensively with aspherical circumstellar environments than previously realized,
and signatures of this interaction may be mined for clues to the mass-loss
histories of massive supernova progenitors.

This project is a comprehensive study of clumpy and aspherical structures in the
circumstellar media of massive stars and supernovae. Motivated by access to
high-resolution spectropolarimetric data and using an established Monte Carlo
radiative transfer code, Drs. Ignace and Hoffman, and their team, will construct
simulations of variable line and continuum polarization in the stochastically
clumped winds of Wolf Rayet, luminous blue variable, and O stars; in the disks
and rotating magnetospheres of other active stars; and in core-collapse
supernovae interacting with their immediate environments. They will also develop
algorithms that will allow the modeling code to simulate line polarization
arising from the Zeeman and Hanle effects from the circumstellar fields of
magnetized stars. The investigators have broad experience in both radiation
transport techniques and interpreting spectropolarimetric observations of hot
star winds and interacting supernovae. By confronting detailed 3D models of
these systems with multiwavelength and polarimetric data, the goal is a better
understanding of how the mass-loss history of main-sequence and evolved massive
stars can be extracted from their observation and those of core collapse
supernovae.

The project includes a unique outreach program, Promoting Careers in Science,
through which Drs. Ignace and Hoffman will each implement innovative strategies
for improving science education and literacy in their respective communities.
Dr. Ignace will reach out to school counselors to enhance science education
among Appalachian middle- and high-school students. Dr. Hoffman will partner
with the University of Denver's Women's College to create new entry points into
the scientific career 'pipeline' for non-traditional female undergraduate
students. In addition, Dr. Ignace will continue supervising undergraduate
research projects both through East Tennessee State University and through
involvement in an REU site program. The bulk of the 5-year funding will go to
support the training and professional development of a postdoctoral researcher
at East Tennessee State University and a graduate student at the University of
Denver who will be trained in the theoretical modeling of radiation transfer.