* 0807411
* Collaborative Research: Multivariate positive definite polynomials and their applications via SDP
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2008,10/31/2011
* Alexander Barg, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 10/31/2011
* USD 114,328.00

Musin&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0807640&lt;br/&gt;Barg&lt;br/&gt;DMS-
0807411&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project is devoted to the study of point
allocations on&lt;br/&gt;the real sphere and related configurations using
methods of&lt;br/&gt;distance geometry, coding theory, and semidefinite
programming. &lt;br/&gt;The properties of the point sets studied include
restricting the&lt;br/&gt;minimum angular separation between any pair of
distinct points in&lt;br/&gt;the set or the degree of the cubature formula
supported by it. &lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in these problems include a solution
by the&lt;br/&gt;investigator of the kissing number problem in 4 dimensions, a
new&lt;br/&gt;proof for the kissing number problem in 3 dimensions, and a
new&lt;br/&gt;approach to bounds on codes using semidefinite programming,
due&lt;br/&gt;to Schrijver, Bachoc, and the investigator. The kissing
problem&lt;br/&gt;in x dimensions is the question of how many unit spheres
can&lt;br/&gt;touch (kiss) a unit sphere in x dimensions. The new
ideas&lt;br/&gt;developed in these works pave the way for further advances in
the&lt;br/&gt;problems of bounding the size of codes and in a number of
other&lt;br/&gt;problems in distance geometry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The main
problems to be addressed in the project are related&lt;br/&gt;to bounding the
size of optimal sets of points on a sphere when&lt;br/&gt;the sets have a
certain property, and the links between the&lt;br/&gt;bounding problem and
multivariate positive definite polynomials. &lt;br/&gt;Interesting properties of
the point set include having a minimum&lt;br/&gt;angular separation that exceeds
a given value between any two&lt;br/&gt;points in the set (this is relevant for
signal processing&lt;br/&gt;problems), and supporting an exact cubature formula
for spherical&lt;br/&gt;harmonic functions of a given degree. Applications of
the point&lt;br/&gt;sets studied include communication theory, numerical
analysis,&lt;br/&gt;the meshing problem, data representation, and localization
in&lt;br/&gt;sensor networks.