* 0807902
* Urban Hydrology:  A Means of Engaging Urban High School Students in the Geosciences
* GEO,GEO
* 10/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Mark Noll, SUNY College at Brockport
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 08/31/2011
* USD 145,449.00

Using a theme of urban hydrology, eight to ten hands-on laboratory experiences
that employ a constructivist approach, project-based learning style are being
developed by researchers at The College at Brockport State University of New
York, in collaboration with teachers from the Rochester (NY) City School
District. The urban hydrology theme is both one of interest and concern to
scientists investigating environmental issues and one that students see on a
daily basis. This approach is expected to capture students' attention using a
relevant topic, easily transferred to other urban settings, and increase the
skills and achievements of a diverse population of urban students in using
inquiry-based hands-on science focused on geoscience topics. The overall
project, and curriculum development efforts, are addressing three overarching
goals: 1) to engage students in 'doing' science, to better enable them to
understand the nature of science, 2) to have students better understand the
realities upon which scientific theories are built, and 3) to provide students
with experiences using modern equipment that enables them to build their own
robust data sets, develop ownership of a project, and make science fun. Data are
being collected to evaluate both teacher and student response to the project and
newly developed curricular materials.