* 0807919
* An Investigation of Post-Main-Sequence Mass Loss Using Fragile Binaries
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2008,11/30/2013
* Terry Oswalt, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Maria Womack
* 11/30/2013
* USD 397,516.00

In this project, Drs. Oswalt and Holberg will undertake a study of widely
separated "fragile binary stars" that contain normal lower mass main sequence
stars with distant noninteracting white dwarf companions. As stars evolve to the
white dwarf stage, most lose well over half their original mass. This initial-
to-final mass relation is one of the weakest links in our understanding of
stellar evolution and how matter is recycled into the interstellar medium. It is
also of special importance to a number of different areas in astrophysics such
as age and distance determinations of globular clusters, studying the chemical
evolution of galaxies, and also for understanding the history of star formation
as recorded by the Galaxy's remnant white dwarfs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For
several decades it has been known that stellar chromospheric activity declines
with age in Solar-type stars. Dr. Oswalt and collaborators have recently shown
evidence that this trend is valid to nearly the expected age of the Galactic
disk. Other work has demonstrated stellar ages can be determined by isochrone
fitting in color magnitude diagrams or via stellar rotation rates obtained from
simple photometric observations. These techniques will be applied here, where
appropriate, to determine the ages of a sample of wide separation binaries with
white dwarfs. The ages of the white dwarfs themselves, which span the entire
history of the Solar neighborhood, can be determined from their observed
temperatures. And by subtracting the ages of the white dwarf companions from the
total age of the binary yields its progenitor main sequence lifetime and initial
mass. In this way, they will empirically calibrate the initial-to-final mass
relation for white dwarf stars to at least the age of the Sun.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Florida Tech Department of Physics &amp; Space
Sciences is home to one of the largest astronomy-related undergraduate programs
in the U.S. In autumn 2007 it enrolled 142 majors. About half are women and/or
minorities. Undergraduates will be involved in all aspects of the project, from
data acquisition with the Southeastern Association for Research in Astronomy
(SARA) 0.9m and Florida Tech 0.8m telescopes, to presenting our results to the
scientific community. Two graduate students will also conduct dissertation
projects directly related to this project. A postdoctoral research fellow will
work closely with Drs. Oswalt and Holberg and the students to derive an
independent age determination for each of the wide binaries via the isochrone
technique. Co-PI Holberg will lead the effort to incorporate the physical data
on the white dwarf components of wide binaries obtained by this project into the
University of Arizona White Dwarf Database, which is a widely used by the
international astronomical community and general public. Results of this project
will be brought into astronomy courses and to the public via the Florida
Institute of Technology Observatory Astronomy/Astrophysics Lecture Series, AAS
Shapley Lectures, and other media. It is also anticipated that K-12 students
will participate in the data acquisition phase of the project via the Global
Hands-On Universe project.