* 0807979
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Winging It! Phylogeny and Evolution of the Helicopter Damselflies (Pseudostigmatidae: Odonata)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2008,12/31/2009
* Marc Branham, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 12/31/2009
* USD 11,906.00

This research focuses on a group of very large, unique and endangered insects,
the helicopter damselflies. These insects exhibit unique feeding and flight
behaviors and have adopted a unique habitat for damselflies (forest canopy
dweller). These characteristics have resulted in several structural adaptations
to the wing in both form and support. Two other features make helicopter
damselflies an appropriate group for studying the evolution of wing structures
within insects: they are members of one of the most primitive winged groups of
insects alive today (Odonata) and they have one of the best fossil records of
any insect lineage. This research will also focus on determining evolutionary
relationships within this and a related group of damselflies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on a familiar group of organisms,
damselflies, and will generate baseline data that are needed for their
conservation. Further, this research seeks data from multiple sources (DNA and
morphology from living and fossil specimens), in order to study insect wing
evolution over the past 100 million years. This information has applications to
the field of biomechanics, such as insect wing modeling and the design of micro
air vehicles. Results from this research will have a broad educational impact
via development of an online Tutorial On Evolution designed for use in the high
school classroom, peer-reviewed publications, and by depositing image data on
the on-line image database, MorphBank.&lt;br/&gt;