* 0807973
* Dissertation Research:  Phenological interactions in Arabidopsis thaliana--natural variation and natural selection
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2011
* Elena Kramer, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 06/30/2011
* USD 11,739.00

Plants adapt to changing climate primarily by altering their seasonal life phase
transitions, such as the timing of germination and the timing of flowering.
Thus, a major question regarding plant responses to environmental change
concerns the genetic basis and adaptive significance of these responses. For
annual plant species, the timing of germination and flowering are especially
important because they influence each other both environmentally and
genetically. Very little is known, however, about the genes that underlie
natural variation in their response to seasonal environments, especially for
germination timing. This research combines the measurement of natural selection
in the field and molecular-genetic analysis to test hypotheses about the genetic
basis of natural variation in life cycle responses to seasonal conditions in the
annual plant Arabadopsis thaliana, and to examine how different genes interact
to determine its overall fitness. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project investigates
fundamental genetic mechanisms of variation as a function of seasonal factors
that vary with dispersal and climate change. The work therefore has relevance to
predicting dynamics of introduced weedy species dispersed over a broad
geographic range, as well as predicting their responses to environmental change.
The project also contributes to an ongoing international collaboration with
scientists in Germany and Spain.&lt;br/&gt;