* 0807075
* Collaborative Research: Cosmological All-wavelength Radiative Transfer (CART)
* MPS,AST
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2012
* Tom Abel, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 06/30/2012
* USD 242,769.00

This group will investigate how the light of newly-forming galaxies and the
active nuclei of galaxies propagates through the intergalactic gas. They focus
attention on a period that ended about a billion years into cosmic history, when
the neutral intergalactic gas was ionized by the ultraviolet light of galaxies.
To calculate how gas and dark matter came together to make the galaxies, the
group will use hydrodynamic simulations. They will develop and refine their
calculations to predict when a galaxy should form stars, or develop an active
nucleus. Then, the photons emerging from the galaxy will be tracked using Dr.
Li's 3-dimensional radiative-transfer code. That code will be improved to handle
Lyman-alpha photons, ionization, and the effect of very small dust grains. The
group will produce large mock catalogs of high-redshift galaxies and quasars
that describe their emission from X-ray to millimeter wavelengths, and include
the hydrogen lines at 21cm and Lyman alpha. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two graduate
students will be trained by participating in the research. The new radiative-
transfer code, and the mock catalogs, will be made available to the astronomical
community. Those catalogs summarize the predictions of our theories about how
galaxies grow. This group and others will test those theories by comparing the
catalogs with what is seen in current and planned deep surveys of distant
galaxies. Both Dr. Li and Dr. Abel work at institutions with strong records in
public outreach, and this project will yield attractive still images and movies
to illustrate current ideas about galaxy formation.