* 0807840
* Transmission Problems and Large Surfaces
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Bogdan Vernescu, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2011
* USD 198,809.00

Mosco&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0807840&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The investigator and his
colleagues study mathematical&lt;br/&gt;problems with large surfaces and small
volumes that arise in&lt;br/&gt;physics (e.g., highly fragmented electrical
conductors, high&lt;br/&gt;voltage electric discharges, electrolytic
deposition,&lt;br/&gt;diffusion-limited aggregation), chemistry (catalytic
converters,&lt;br/&gt;surface chemistry), biology (cell membranes, vascular
systems),&lt;br/&gt;engineering (hydraulic fracturing in oil wells, thin
ramified&lt;br/&gt;fibers, elastic thin bodies, towers and bridges in open
space). &lt;br/&gt;In all these problems a lower-dimensional physical body --
the&lt;br/&gt;"surface" -- intrudes and interacts with a full
dimensional&lt;br/&gt;surrounding body -- the "volume." The volume is small,
the&lt;br/&gt;surface is large, possibly fractal and with infinite area.
In&lt;br/&gt;this project, the mathematics of fractal structures in space
is&lt;br/&gt;focused on two fundamental issues: 1) second order
transmission&lt;br/&gt;conditions for second order operators; 2) singular
homogenization&lt;br/&gt;with fractal terms. New tools of analysis are
developed, like&lt;br/&gt;Hoelder metrics and measure-valued Lagrangeans. Finite
element&lt;br/&gt;numerical approximations provide the quantitative and
flexible&lt;br/&gt;setting required by prospective applications such as
those&lt;br/&gt;mentioned above. The principal investigator and his
colleagues&lt;br/&gt;develop new mathematics aimed at meeting the challenges
and&lt;br/&gt;taking advantage of the new technologies of the time.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The mathematics developed in this project is motivated
by,&lt;br/&gt;and oriented to, the study of applied problems of unusual
type,&lt;br/&gt;occurring in the materials sciences and
manufacturing,&lt;br/&gt;nanotechnology, biotechnology, and the environmental
sciences. &lt;br/&gt;The unusual feature of these problems consists in the
presence&lt;br/&gt;and interaction, within the same system, of two
physical&lt;br/&gt;phenomena, one confined in a "small volume," the second
unfolding&lt;br/&gt;itself on a "large surface." Nanotechnology can produce
very&lt;br/&gt;fine fractal surfaces that can be assembled to form
composite&lt;br/&gt;materials with enhanced internal surface effects
(catalytic&lt;br/&gt;devices, absorbers, surface chemistry, radiators and
similar). &lt;br/&gt;Environment-driven fractal networks can support irrigation
of&lt;br/&gt;large surfaces with scarce fluid volume (as in vascular
and&lt;br/&gt;biological systems). Interlaced thin fibers and fractal
thin&lt;br/&gt;structures can tune wave propagation in space. Despite
their&lt;br/&gt;complexity, these applications hinge on an unusual volume
vs.&lt;br/&gt;surface relation of the kind mentioned before. The
project&lt;br/&gt;involves young researchers and students -- with attention
to&lt;br/&gt;underrepresented minorities -- who receive a broad,
flexible&lt;br/&gt;training that provides access to science and technology as
well&lt;br/&gt;to professional activities outside academic institutions.