* 0807543
* Some Studies in the Mathematics and Mechanics of Textured and Prestressed Polycrystalline Materials
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2013
* Chi-Sing Man, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2013
* USD 166,198.00

Man&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0807543&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project comprises three
parts. In Part 1, the&lt;br/&gt;objective is to develop a group-theoretic method
by which&lt;br/&gt;explicit expressions that delineate the effects
of&lt;br/&gt;crystallographic texture on material tensors of weakly-
textured&lt;br/&gt;polycrystalline materials can be derived systematically.
A&lt;br/&gt;representation theorem is proved that reduces the problem to
that&lt;br/&gt;of finding irreducible tensor bases of the rotation group.
A&lt;br/&gt;method is developed to generate irreducible tensor bases for
a&lt;br/&gt;given tensor space. The method delivers representation
formulas&lt;br/&gt;at once applicable to all texture and crystal symmetries.
&lt;br/&gt;Specific instances important for applications
in&lt;br/&gt;acoustoelasticity and plasticity are fully worked out. Part
2&lt;br/&gt;concerns nondestructive inspection of subsurface residual
stress&lt;br/&gt;by ultrasonic measurements. The material body in question
is&lt;br/&gt;modeled as a vertically heterogeneous, prestressed,
anisotropic&lt;br/&gt;half-space. An extension of the Stroh formalism is
developed to&lt;br/&gt;relate the dispersion of the Rayleigh wave to the
vertical&lt;br/&gt;heterogeneity of stress and/or texture. In Part 3
a&lt;br/&gt;phenomenological theory is developed for the interpretation
of&lt;br/&gt;resonance shifts and line shapes in ultrasound
resonance&lt;br/&gt;spectroscopy of sheet metals. The sheet metal in question
is&lt;br/&gt;modeled as a textured, largely elastic material with a
small&lt;br/&gt;power-law viscosity. An attempt is made to draw information
on&lt;br/&gt;resonance shifts, line shapes, and frequency dependence
of&lt;br/&gt;attenuation through analysis of the basic initial-boundary-
value&lt;br/&gt;problem. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The crystal grains that
constitute polycrystalline materials&lt;br/&gt;(e.g., wrought and cast metallic
alloys) often carry preferred&lt;br/&gt;orientations (or crystallographic
texture) that strongly affect&lt;br/&gt;mechanical behavior of the aggregate
material (e.g., the&lt;br/&gt;formability of sheet metals). Part 1 of this
project delivers&lt;br/&gt;formulas that describe quantitatively how
crystallographic&lt;br/&gt;texture affects the behavior of a polycrystalline
material in&lt;br/&gt;elastic and plastic deformations. Part 2 arises from
the&lt;br/&gt;industrial need for a nondestructive measurement technique
that&lt;br/&gt;allows monitoring of the retention of subsurface residual
stress&lt;br/&gt;induced by surface conditioning treatments on metal parts
for&lt;br/&gt;lifetime enhancement against fatigue failure and stress
corrosion&lt;br/&gt;cracking. The availability of such nondestructive
technique&lt;br/&gt;also allows emerging surface-enhancement technologies
(e.g.,&lt;br/&gt;laser-peening, low plasticity burnishing) to be more
cost&lt;br/&gt;effective and improves quality control of surface
conditioning&lt;br/&gt;processes. Part 3 helps lay the mathematical foundations
for the&lt;br/&gt;development of an ultrasonic technique for monitoring of
texture&lt;br/&gt;and material microstructures in sheet metals (and hence of
their&lt;br/&gt;formability) on the production line.