* 0807666
* Analysis and Control of Complex Behavior: Linear Transfer Operator Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2008,12/31/2011
* Umesh Vaidya, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* George Chiu
* 12/31/2011
* USD 209,999.00

This proposal introduces a novel framework for the analysis and control of
nonlinear systems exhibiting complex dynamics. The underlying idea of the
framework is to study the evolution of sets in the phase space as opposed to the
conventional point-wise approach. The advantage of the approach is that the
evolution of sets is linear and is described by a linear transfer Perron-
Frobenius operator. The linear nature of the framework allows us to carry our
intuition from linear systems, a mature area of research, to nonlinear systems.
A perfect example is the introduction of Lyapunov measure as a new tool to
verify a set-theoretic notion of ?almost everywhere? stability in nonlinear
systems. Lyapunov measure is shown to be dual to the Lyapunov function and a
linear program using the finite dimensional approximation of the Perron-
Frobenius operator is proposed for its computation. The proposed research
exploits the linearity of the framework for the model order reduction and
parameter identification in systems exhibiting complex dynamics with
applications in jet engines. The framework also provides a systematic procedure
based on the linear programming for the control of complex dynamics. The
proposed research uses this procedure for the problem of control of mixing in
fluid flows with potential application in analyzing the transport and mixing
properties of large-scale oceanographic and atmospheric flows.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The success of this research will result in a new set of
tools and methods that are general enough to be applied in diverse fields, such
as fluid dynamics and mechanical systems. The reduced order model in jet engines
will be used in better control design, which ultimately results in less fuel
consumption and increased life of engines. The improved control algorithm for
mixing will benefit the pharmaceutical, petrochemical, transportation, and power
generation industries among others. The PI?s collaboration with United
Technologies Research Center will help in transferring the know-how from
industry to academia, and vice versa. As the part of the education plan, the PI
will introduce interdisciplinary courses on nonlinear dynamics at the
undergraduate and graduate levels. By serving as a faculty mentor for the
special interest group in robotics, the PI will help increase the involvement of
undergraduate students in research. &lt;br/&gt;