* 0807387
* Coastal Geoscience and Engineering: Development of a Joint Degree Program Between Georgia Institute of Technology - Savannah and the Skidaway Institute of Oceanography
* GEO,GEO
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* James Sanders, Skidaway Institute of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 06/30/2011
* USD 149,976.00

The Georgia Institute of Technology and the Skidaway Institute of Oceanography
are developing a joint GT/SkIO advanced degree program for Fall semester 2008
entitled Coastal Science and Engineering. Integration of geoscience and
engineering concepts and rigor is fundamental to successfully address the
spectrum of issues arising from the consequences of rapidly increasing coastal
populations and exacerbated by changing weather and climate patterns. Educating
coastal geoscientists and engineers to be mutually literate at the graduate
level is critical, but with a few exceptions, educational programs to accomplish
this goal are virtually absent. The complexity of coastal processes and
environments requires that this effort integrates research and education; adopts
a holistic, system approach to the teaching and examination of coastal
processes; ensures that concepts from other basic sciences (e.g., meteorology,
hydrogeology, life sciences) are a fully integrated part of the instruction
base; focuses classroom instruction on fundamental concepts and processes that
are universal rather than on facts that may only apply to a single location or
process; requires the partnering of engineers with geoscientists to ensure the
use of mathematical techniques for applying concepts to environmental
situations; and stresses problem-solving skills while meeting emerging workforce
needs. Both partner institutions have considerable success in the entrainment of
underrepresented minorities into STEM educational tracks. The joint program will
offer a transformative coastal geoscience/engineering graduate educational
curriculum currently completely absent in the US southeast and rare elsewhere in
the country. It is expected to serve as a model program for other US regions.
Graduates of the program will be equipped to populate the future workforce to
design and manage harbors, develop and maintain ocean observatory sensors and
networks, model and predict invasive species and pathogen trajectories, and
mitigate or manage environmental consequences of coastal habitation.