* 0807731
* IMR: Phase Ib Energy Recovery Linac (ERL) Technology R&amp;D
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2010,12/31/2015
* Joel Brock, Cornell University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Guebre Tessema
* 12/31/2015
* USD 30,948,000.00

0807731 &lt;br/&gt;Gruner&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award from the Division of
Materials Research and the Division of Chemistry supports Cornell University to
perform accelerator and x-ray technology research and development (R&amp;D) to
advance in a non-site specific way preparation for construction of an ultrahigh
spectral brightness, hard x-ray coherent light sources (CLS), such as Energy
Recovery Linacs and X-ray Free Electron Lasers. The high coherence and temporal
properties of a CLS would transform the sciences and engineering and would
enable numerous experiments that are not feasible using existing x-ray sources.
Enabled capabilities would include studies on ultrafast chemical reactions,
holographic imaging of materials and biological structures, new ways to
determine the structure of proteins, properties of matter under extremely high
pressures, and properties of glasses, disordered, and polycrystalline materials.
Continued R&amp;D is needed on the electron beam and x-ray technologies required
to realize a CLS. Cornell proposes to utilize apparatus assembled under previous
NSF awards to perform R&amp;D based on the Energy Recovery Linac Technology,
with specific emphasis on the requisite (1) superconducting electron
accelerators, (2) electron sources, (3) electron beam physics and diagnostics,
(4) electron beam dynamics, and (5) x-ray beamline components capable of
handling CLS x-ray beams. The R&amp;D will involve collaborations with other
laboratories, both in the U.S. and abroad. Training the technical work force
will be a major product of the work. This training is made more important by
intense world-wide demand for accelerator physicists and beamline scientists
familiar with the apparatus and challenges of new high brightness synchrotron
beams. The work includes an effective, diversity-based, broad outreach program
to the K-12 and undergraduate communities.