* 0807308
* Stellar Rotation, Mixing, and the Chronology of the Galaxy
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2008,09/30/2013
* Marc Pinsonneault, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Womack
* 09/30/2013
* USD 290,439.00

As Sun-like stars age, their initial rapid rotation slows through the braking
action of magnetized winds. Stellar evolution theory incorporating angular
momentum loss and internal angular momentum transport strongly predicts that at
late times all stars of a particular mass should spin at the same rate,
regardless of initial conditions. This convergence of rates and subsequent
decline could, in principle, be used as a clock for determining the ages of
field main-sequence stars. There are, however, two fundamental problems with
this picture. First, there are simply not enough data to tell whether the
convergence takes place as predicted and how it depends on mass. Second, there
are many different possible processes for angular momentum transport. There are
even some indications from both theory and observation that the convergence
might not happen, particularly if the loss of angular momentum stops below a
threshold rotation rate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address these issues, Dr.
Pinsonneault and collaborators will undertake a combined observational and
theoretical investigation of the rotational evolution of stars in selected open
clusters. Time-series photometry at the MDM observatory will pick out cluster
members with high accuracy and will find all stars with rotational brightness
modulation above 0.3% and periods less than 30 days. Targeted clusters will be
selected to fill important gaps in age and mass from previous studies. The
physical ingredients in stellar rotation codes will be extended to include wave-
or magnetic-driven angular momentum transport processes. The various transport
phenomena will be distinguished by their effect on the distribution of rotation
and on the rate of destruction of light elements such as lithium, beryllium, or
boron in young stars. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The stellar evolution codes
incorporating new treatments of angular momentum transfer from magnetic
instabilities or waves will be made available to other researchers. The project
will establish the range of mass and time over which a rotation clock can be
calibrated, and an early application of the new clock will be to analyze the
vast number of rotation periods to be found by NASA's Kepler mission. Along the
way, new distances and metallicities for the targeted clusters will refine the
extragalactic distance scale through recalibration of the Cepheid period-
luminosity relation. Light element abundances in existing studies will be placed
on a common temperature and abundance scale, and the new theoretical models will
be used to create better tests of nucleosynthesis in the Big Bang through
studies of lithium abundances in old halo stars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will also be used to create new content on stellar evolution for the
middle school program at the COSI Science Center in Columbus. Dr. Pinsonneault
and collaborators will give approximately five lectures per year as part of the
field trip experience and help create teacher professional development
materials, pre- and post-experience testing, web and CD-ROM materials for
students, etc., in collaboration with the COSI team.