* 0807989
* Modeling Seasonal Variations in Ice Giant Atmospheres with Observational Constraints Including Solstice and Equinox
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Timothy Dowling, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas S. Statler
* 07/31/2012
* USD 228,339.00

AST-0807989&lt;br/&gt;Chanover&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Internal heat is considered
the most important energy source needed to explain the range of clouds, storms,
and planetary winds in the atmospheres of the outer planets, but Uranus has
little to no such measurable source. This, its extreme axial tilt, and the
unusual seasonal pattern it produces, set Uranus apart from the other giant
planets. Neptune, on the other hand, has a significant internal heat source.
Both planets, however, now show increasing levels of atmospheric activity, which
might be due to variations in the solar heating affecting the atmospheric
dynamics. This project will use the Explicit Planetary Isentropic Coordinate
(EPIC) general climate model to simulate the atmospheres of Uranus and Neptune,
including the effects of solar insolation on the zonal and meridional
circulations, and investigating vortex stability and seasonally-altered zonal
wind structure. Such comparative modeling will elucidate the role that solar
insolation plays in driving the atmospheric dynamics of ice giant planets, and
contribute to understanding the origin and evolution of gas and ice giant
atmospheres.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work is interdisciplinary, linking the
fields of atmospheric dynamics, computational physics, and observational
astronomy, to promote synergy between the observational and modeling endeavors
of planetary astronomy. The program involves practical research by a graduate
student and links the Astronomy Department at NMSU with the Comparative
Planetology Laboratory at the University of Louisville. It includes public
outreach to a predominantly Hispanic community.