* 0807892
* White Dwarfs in Cataclysmic Variables: Probes of Evolution and Accretion Physics
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Patrick Godon, Villanova University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Womack
* 08/31/2011
* USD 214,866.00

A cataclysmic variable is a compact binary (with a period less than twelve
hours) in which the primary (a white dwarf) accretes matter and angular momentum
from the secondary star (a main sequence star) filling its Roche-lobe. In non-
magnetic systems, the matter is transferred, at continuous or sporadic rates, by
means of an accretion disk around the white dwarf. Ongoing accretion at a low
rate (quiescence) is interrupted every few weeks to months by intense accretion
(outburst) of days to weeks, and every few thousand years by a thermonuclear
explosion (a classical nova event). Thus the white dwarfs in these systems are
probes of cataclysmic evolution and accretion physics because they bear the
thermal, chemical and rotational imprint of their long-term accretion and
explosive thermonuclear history. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Here, Professor Sion,
accompanied by collaborators and students, will examine white dwarfs in
cataclysmic binaries and make measurements of their surface temperatures,
rotation rates and chemistry of their accreted atmospheres, using multi-
component synthetic spectral fitting. This will allow them to probe the age,
evolutionary history, time-averaged accretion rate, white dwarf mass and core
temperature, and the mass transfer driving mechanisms in these systems. In
particular, measurements of photospheric chemical abundances will test accretion
and diffusion theories, while overabundances of thermonuclear-processed elements
could indicate pre-historical nova explosions or processed core material from an
originally more massive secondary. The distribution of white dwarf rotation
rates above and below the period gap, which will be explored here, is key to
understanding the physics of angular momentum transfer during accretion.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this project they will also enlarge the sample of
white dwarfs with known surface temperatures across all cataclysmic variable
subtypes. They will carry out evolutionary accretion simulations with time-
variable accretion and thus provide a new and independent means of determining
white dwarf masses, constraining white dwarf rotation velocities, and
determining the thermal impact that prolonged accretion heating has on the white
dwarfs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An understanding of the consequences of accretion
in cataclysmic variables is the first step in a global understanding of
accretion-related phenomena throughout the universe (e.g. around neutron stars
and black holes) which cannot be easily observed. Also the ejected material into
the interstellar medium from novae explosions, and hence the composition of the
outer envelopes of white dwarfs in cataclysmic variables, tells us about which
elements (metals) are expected to be recycled in the interstellar medium for the
next generation of stars. In addition, some cataclysmic variable systems are
possible progenitors for Type Ia supernovae and changes in our understanding of
these accreting white dwarfs translates into change in the possible size of the
population from which Type Ia supernovae arise. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Throughout
this project, undergraduate students will play key roles in the analysis and
synthetic spectral modeling of the data. They will also participate in the
dissemination of the results via presentation of poster papers at professional
meetings and co-authoring refereed publications.&lt;br/&gt;