* 0807650
* Transformations of Parental Monitoring and Psychological Control during Early Adolescence
* SBE,BCS
* 12/22/2007,08/31/2010
* Robert Laird, University of New Orleans
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 08/31/2010
* USD 181,997.00

Why do parents parent the way they do? How do parenting and parent-child
relationships change when children become teenagers? Can parents remain aware of
their children's whereabouts, activities, and friends as the children move from
elementary school into and through middle school? Is intrusive parenting
avoidable during early adolescence? Will working to maintain a positive
relationship with their children help parents remain aware and avoid becoming
intrusive? Dr. Robert Laird seeks answers to these and other questions in his
research funded by the National Science Foundation. Parents' awareness of their
teenagers' whereabouts and activities protects children from many problem
behaviors and outcomes including violence and delinquency; drug, tobacco, and
alcohol use; early initiation of sexual intercourse and risky sexual behavior;
and poor school performance. On the other hand, when parents frequently rely on
psychological intrusion and manipulation to control their children, the children
are more likely to experience anxiety and depression and to engage in aggressive
and delinquent behavior. Dr. Laird seeks to understand how parents' awareness
and interactions with their children change as children become teenagers.
Parents report being more nervous and apprehensive about adolescence than any
other period in their child's life but little is known about how parenting or
parent-child relationships change when children become teenagers. Dr. Laird's
research team will interview a group of 200 mother-child dyads once a year for
three years beginning the summer after the child completes fifth grade. Dr.
Laird will focus on identifying change in parents' awareness and intrusiveness
and will attempt to connect these changes with developmental changes in the
child such as growing older and going through puberty; aspects of the parent-
child relationship such as conflict, communication, and trust; and parents' own
feelings of confidence, depression, and hostility.

The intellectual merits of the project are derived from Dr. Laird's extensive
focus on processes through which adolescents influence and determine the
parenting they receive. The broader impacts of the study include information for
parents, interventionists, and therapists on how the transition from childhood
to adolescence influences parenting and parent-child relationships, and how such
parenting and relationships may influence the development of adolescent behavior
problems. This project also integrates research and education by providing
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students to participate in
research.