* 0807221
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Testing multiple determinants of growth rate-mass scaling relationships in an Amazonian forest
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2011
* Brian Enquist, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 05/31/2011
* USD 11,928.00

Understanding how tree growth rates change with tree size is an essential
ecological question. This relationship between growth-rate and size-scaling may
result from common properties of vascular networks. While network theory may
explain global trends in growth rate size scaling it has been less successful
locally; at local scales network theory leaves much variability between species
and individuals unexplained. This study aims to extend network theory to local
scales by accounting for two additional factors: (i) tree traits (for example,
photosynthetic properties and branching patterns) and (ii) light limitation. In
the Tapaj√≥s National Forest (PA, Brazil), this study will sample many
individuals of ten species across a size range and track individual growth,
traits, and light environments. These data will allow the factors responsible
for variation in growth rate size scaling to be
evaluated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will help illuminate the role of the
Amazon (and tropical forests broadly) in climate change. Growth must be tallied
across tree sizes to understand how much of the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide
the Amazon takes out of the atmosphere. Since this study will ask what factors
cause growth rate to change with size, it will also ask what factors drive
carbon dioxide uptake and strengthen the link between climate change and the
ecology of the Amazon.