* 0807356
* Stellar Chemistry
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2015
* M. Bruce Fegley, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* James Neff
* 08/31/2015
* USD 180,437.00

This project is a three-year theoretical investigation into the gas and
condensation chemistry of the elements in astronomical dust forming
environments, with an emphasis on evolved stars. The research is an expansion of
theoretical work that Dr. Lodders carried out previously. Here, working with
collaborators and students, Dr. Lodders will provide a fundamental framework for
interpreting the chemical composition of the gas and condensates in stellar
environments. The work is important to several areas in astrophysics and
cosmochemistry as chemistry takes over as soon as physical conditions allow gas
molecule and condensate formation. Systems where molecular gas and dust
chemistry is important include protostellar disks (with and without planetary
formation); and ejecta of evolved stars that feed dust and gas to the
interstellar medium, from which new stellar and planetary systems originate. The
project, which focuses on chemistry at non-solar metallicities is highly
relevant to planetary formation around high metallicity stars, as well as
condensation around low-metallicity stars or even in dusty galaxies at high red-
shift.

The project is complementary to spectroscopic studies of the molecular dominated
atmospheres and circumstellar shells of red giant stars and other ?dusty?
objects. The computations to be carried out here can be used as a guide to
interpret observations obtained from instruments such as the Hubble Space
Telescope (HST), the Infrared Space Observatory (ISO), the Spitzer Space
Telescope, the Stratospheric Observatory for Infrared Astronomy (SOFIA), and the
Herschel Space Observatory. Key to the project are ongoing collaborations with
observers to develop and test chemical fractionation models. The work is also
complementary to the analysis of presolar grains (stardust) isolated from
meteorites

The ongoing collaborations of researchers with expertise in different
disciplines will enhance interdisciplinary connections between meteoritics,
astrophysics, and observational astronomy as well as strengthening international
networks. The project also includes the participation of undergraduate students,
and will provide them with valuable research experience, helping to train the
next generation of astronomers. Results will be described in scientific papers,
at professional meetings, and in public lectures. Expansions of Dr. Lodder?s
website are planned as part of this effort to make computational results widely
available.