* 0807399
* Frames as codes and classifiers
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Bernhard Bodmann, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/2011
* USD 112,257.00

Bodmann&lt;br/&gt;0807399&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The mathematical description of
redundant linear&lt;br/&gt;representations of analog signals is called frame
theory, and it&lt;br/&gt;is central to open problems in many fields of applied
mathematics&lt;br/&gt;such as approximation theory and numerical as well as
statistical&lt;br/&gt;analysis. In short, a frame is an (over)complete set of
vectors&lt;br/&gt;that gives stable expansions. Previous works have measured
the&lt;br/&gt;error correction capabilities of frames with means derived
from&lt;br/&gt;geometric or functional analytic formulations. However,
for&lt;br/&gt;purposes of signal communication and statistical
analysis,&lt;br/&gt;information theory should provide the guiding principles
for&lt;br/&gt;optimal design. The goal of the project is to close this gap
by&lt;br/&gt;combining frame and information theory.
Applying&lt;br/&gt;information-theoretic optimality criteria to frame design
is&lt;br/&gt;expected to have a significant impact on all tasks that
involve&lt;br/&gt;analog signals being transmitted or interpreted in the
presence&lt;br/&gt;of noise. The investigator seeks to characterize and
construct&lt;br/&gt;linear signal encoding and decoding maps for two specific
areas&lt;br/&gt;of applications: Find frames with associated encoding
and&lt;br/&gt;decoding maps that achieve the information-theoretic optimum
for&lt;br/&gt;(1) error correction of digital streaming media and
(2)&lt;br/&gt;classification of signals in noisy microscopy images.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Digital signal transmissions have revolutionized our
daily&lt;br/&gt;lives, from cellular phones and Voice-over-Internet-
Protocol&lt;br/&gt;telephony to high-definition television and other
streaming&lt;br/&gt;media. The use of digitization helps suppress
distortions&lt;br/&gt;typical for analog devices and allows seemingly
faultless&lt;br/&gt;communication by incorporating redundancy, that is,
repetetive&lt;br/&gt;information. However, at times the digital nature of
error&lt;br/&gt;suppression leads to artifacts that do not resemble the
graceful&lt;br/&gt;degradation we recall from analog transmissions. The reason
for&lt;br/&gt;this deficiency is that the general-purpose digital
communication&lt;br/&gt;protocols are not well-adapted to the properties of the
encoded&lt;br/&gt;analog signal. The investigator aims to restore the
possibility&lt;br/&gt;of graceful degradation to streaming media sent across
the&lt;br/&gt;internet, or to wireless communications in
unreliable&lt;br/&gt;environments. The optimal design of analog-digital encoding
has&lt;br/&gt;similar implications for the decoding of analog signals, such
as&lt;br/&gt;the extraction of information from microscopy images in biology.
&lt;br/&gt;The reliable monitoring and classification of cell
constituents&lt;br/&gt;in microscopy images is essential for measuring
physiologic&lt;br/&gt;responses in cells (such as the stages in the cell cycle)
and for&lt;br/&gt;detecting anomalous behavior that occurs as a result of
disease. &lt;br/&gt;Classifying cell behavior is relevant for the evaluation of
drugs&lt;br/&gt;with high-throughput assays, including the development
of&lt;br/&gt;cancer-cell growth inhibitors.