* 0807240
* Materials World Network/Research in Undergraduate Institutions:  The True Three-Dimensional Nature of Aligned Dislocation Boundaries in Deformed Metals
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Lori Bassman, Harvey Mudd College
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Taleff
* 07/31/2012
* USD 242,000.00

This project is based on collaboration between Harvey Mudd College (HMC) and the
School of Materials Science and Engineering and the Electron Microscope Unit at
the University of New South Wales (UNSW) in Australia. It is also a Research in
Undergraduate Institutions activity, as the award supports international
materials science research experiences for HMC undergraduate students. The
project focuses on resolving a longstanding controversy about the nature of
arrays of aligned dislocation boundaries that are generated during rolling of
deformed face-centered cubic and body-centered cubic metals with intermediate to
high stacking fault energies. The structure and origin of these dislocation
boundaries are of substantial interest due to their role in determining
anisotropy in yield stress and strain hardening. Insight into the true character
of these microscale structures is essential for advancing the predictive
capabilities of physically-based models for macroscale mechanical properties.
The two opposing theories of the structure and origin of these aligned
boundaries in deformed polycrystals are: (i) they are oriented along certain
crystallographic planes, or (ii) their alignment is dictated primarily by the
macroscopic stress state during plastic deformation. Current evidence supporting
these theories is based on two-dimensional data that does not necessarily reveal
the true nature of deformation microstructures and can lead to erroneous
interpretation. To definitively resolve the issue and to further modeling
capabilities, three-dimensional (3D) orientations of the boundaries are
required. Data in 3D is collected using focused ion beam-electron backscatter
diffraction (FIB-EBSD) tomography. EBSD maps of FIB-generated serial sections
are combined in post-processing to generate full crystallographic volumes
capable of revealing many types of structural features at submicron resolution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;HMC students lead the development of new computational
tools required to efficiently and accurately analyze the large 3D data sets that
result from this method. They also refine FIB-EBSD methods and present their
findings in peer-reviewed journals and national or international conferences. At
UNSW, the supported undergraduates and the principal investigator have extensive
access to electron microscopy facilities and training unavailable at HMC. The
project therefore provides an extraordinary opportunity for collaboration
between UNSW's experts in physical metallurgy and electron microscopy and
U.S.-based undergraduate students. This award is co-funded by the Division of
Materials Research and the Office of International Science and
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;