* 0807151
* Collaborative Research: Massive Surveys for Pulsars and Radio Transients Using the Arecibo L-band Feed Array
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* James Cordes, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Womack
* 08/31/2012
* USD 383,019.00

This collaborative project will discover and study a large sample of neutron
stars and also search for a variety of radio transient sources using the Arecibo
L-band Feed Array (ALFA) at the Arecibo telescope. The science return results
from both the hundreds of expected new pulsars and from rare, individual objects
that will serve as laboratories for probing fundamental areas in physics and
astrophysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The pulsar survey will complement and
transcend previous surveys by reaching more than twice the distance of the very
successful multibeam survey using the Parkes telescope. The work is expected to
lead to discoveries of rare objects that will be used as laboratories for basic
physics and astrophysics to probe the equation of state of nuclear matter,
gravity in compact, high-mass binaries, and gravitational-wave backgrounds.
Discoveries may include the first black-hole/neutron-star binary, which would
allow unprecedented studies of gravity in the strong-field limit. The large
sample of new pulsars, when combined with existing ones, will contribute to the
understanding of neutron stars as end products of stellar evolution, and will
enable state-of-the-art modeling of the Milky Way Galaxy with respect to its
ionized components. Also, use of the large number of pulsars as tracers will
allow delineation of some ambiguously defined spiral arms of the Galaxy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate goals of the project will be enabled by the
availability in 2008 of a new spectrometer that utilizes the full capabilities
of the 7-beam system at Arecibo, and the availability of computer and data
storage systems that can process and archive the large volume of data generated.
Specific tasks include developmental activities related to the commissioning at
Arecibo of the large bandwidth spectrometer, the setting up of the
infrastructure required to analyze the data, and the intensive data analysis
required to find new pulsars, all of which will be conducted in collaboration
with the Pulsar ALFA Consortium, an international group of about 30 researchers.
Over the 3-year project, about 1000 Terabytes of data will be analyzed using
several computer clusters. Post-discovery studies will include timing campaigns
and multiwavelength observations. A web-based system will provide access to
source catalogs, timing models, and intermediate data products that can be used
as a resource for synergistic studies. Raw data will be archived for long-term
data mining applications and use in multiwavelength campaigns, such as future
gamma-ray space telescope observations that require radio counterpart
observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The large data volume requires development of
data management for streamlined analysis, archival and retrieval. The project
therefore serves as a prototype for future data-intensive surveys in astronomy,
and will enable eventual connection to multi-user facilities such as national
and international virtual observatories. The project will also contribute to the
training of graduate students, and to the teaching of undergraduate students by
their inclusion in certain aspects of data analysis.