* 0807284
* Nonlinear Waves and Dynamical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2013
* Roy Goodman, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2013
* USD 199,881.00

This project is concerned with (1) the stability of nonlinear waves and the
interaction between nonlinear waves in a variety of physical systems, and (2)
the application of mathematical tools from computer-aided geometric design
(CAGD) to problems in dynamical systems. The first project addresses symmetry-
breaking bifurcations in equations modeling a physical system that can "trap"
pulses of light. It will also look at so-called collective-coordinate models of
solitary wave interactions - both the mathematical validity of this approach
(still a major unsolved area) and some of the mathematical structures that arise
in these models. This includes the application of new and powerful topological
methods to simple iterated maps derived by the PI as approximations to the
collective-coordinate dynamics. The second project will use recently developed
spline tools as the basis for new algorithms for computing invariant manifolds
of iterated maps and vector fields, which should greatly improve the speed,
accuracy, and simplicity of such computations in comparison with current
methods.

This project is concerned with (1) the stability of nonlinear waves and the
interaction between nonlinear waves in a variety of physical systems, and (2)
the application of mathematical tools from computer-aided geometric design
(CAGD) to problems in dynamical systems. The first project deals with nonlinear
waves that arise in the modeling of systems from many areas of physics and
engineering, with an emphasis here on models derived from optics. It will study
how and under what conditions such waves may become unstable, for example how
they might break apart. It will also study what happens when such waves collide,
applying powerful mathematical (topological) techniques to simplified models in
order to gain a deeper understanding, as well as studying whether such reduced
models are valid. The second project will study new, and more efficient, ways to
compute invariant manifolds, which are fundamental objects in understanding
chaos. It will integrate research from the field of computer graphics into a new
context important for mathematical physics. The goal is to use types of curves
and surfaces developed for application to software for designing automobiles and
aircraft, and for computer animation used in movies and television, for an
unexpected scientific purpose.