* 0807687
* Multi-Wavelength Studies of Compact Objects: Physics, Populations, and Origins
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Reba Bandyopadhyay, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Womack
* 07/31/2011
* USD 463,736.00

The overall goal of this project is to understand the physics, populations and
origins of black hole X-ray binaries - particularly those systems known as
"microquasars" - and the physical conditions/processes which lead to the
formation of relativistic jets in some of them. While astronomers have studied
relativistic outflows from black hole systems for several decades, the details
of the mechanism which accelerates and collimates such a jet at nearly the speed
of light out of the black hole potential well remains a mystery. The scientific
path taken here employs multi-wavelength studies of the physics of compact
objects (particularly microquasars) and the populations and origins of compact
objects in our Galaxy and beyond. With the addition of more than 2000 new X-ray
sources recently discovered in the Galactic Center there is an opportunity to
expand the sample size of accreting compact objects in general, and black hole
binaries in particular, by an order of magnitude, enabling the use of population
statistics to constrain the origin and evolution of even rare classes of X-ray
binary such as microquasars. Furthermore, it is now possible to study the
environment in which many of these systems form, to examine the feedback process
between X-ray binaries and their environment. This combination of both detailed
studies of individual sources and broader investigation of their origins and
properties via population studies provides a powerful synergistic approach to
addressing both problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Towards this end, several
programs will be carried out by Drs. Eikenberry and Bandyopadhyay, including a
search for new microquasars and other compact systems using 13 nights of
guaranteed time with FLAMINGOS-2 on Gemini South. The resulting spectra of
approximately 2000 candidate infrared counterparts to new X-ray sources in the
Galactic center are expected to yield between 200 to 300 new binaries with
compact object secondaries. Also included in this work will be the development
of an infrared extinction map of the Galactic center using data from the UKIDSS
Galactic Plane Survey (which will be necessary to accurately reddening-correct
the photometry of stars observed with FLAMINGOS-2). Multiwavelength studies of
the black hole candidate GRS1915+105 will be carried out and used to
develop/refine Dr. Eikenberry's "magnetic bomb" model of relativistic jet
formation and its relation to the Accretion Ejection Instability model. Dr.
Eikenberry's multi-wavelength program to find X-ray sources in young clusters
(in which the cluster properties are used to constrain the progenitor
characteristics) will also be continued.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program will
enable the education and training of four graduate students who will be involved
in the project. The project will also support an ongoing hands-on outreach
program at local Title 1 public schools with large minority populations.