* 0807975
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Systematics and evolution of the vampire moths and their fruit-piercing relatives using morphological and molecular data (Lepidoptera: Noctuidae: Calpinae).
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2009
* Marc Branham, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 06/30/2009
* USD 11,267.00

An award is made to the University of Florida to assess evolutionary
relationships and the evolution of feeding habits in vampire moths. Skin
piercing and blood feeding are restricted to a single group of moths. Ten
Calyptra species have been documented feeding on blood under both natural or
laboratory conditions; the remaining species are obligatory fruit piercers. This
study will examine the evolutionary relationships between fruit-piercing and
blood-feeding moths using morphological and DNA data. The phylogeny will test
the hypothesis of a directional progression of feeding types from fruit piercing
to skin piercing and blood feeding in these moths and determine whether
mouthpart morphology is correlated with feeding behavior.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studies of the evolution of behavior in insects have
primarily focused on the evolution of communication, mating systems and
sociality. This project will examine the evolution of feeding behavior, which is
not only poorly studied across animal groups in general, but could provide
valuable insights into the evolution of animal behavior through its use as a new
and novel system that likely evolved under unique ecological, physiological and
developmental constraints. Scientific products of this study will include web-
accessible original species descriptions, illustrations, and an updated
classification. This information will be valuable for educational outreach and
future studies in physiology, ecology, and evolutionary biology.&lt;br/&gt;