* 0807215
* Collaborative Research: Toward an Integrative Understanding of Galaxy Clusters:  AMR MHD/N-body Simulations of Thermal and Nonthermal Processes
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Jack Burns, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2011
* USD 250,000.00

Galaxy clusters are the largest gravitationally bound structures in the universe
and, therefore, are potent cosmological probes. Perhaps surprisingly, their
baryonic (and observable) matter is principally in the hot, diffuse plasma
located between the galaxies, i.e., the intracluster medium, not in luminous
matter like stars. This intracluster medium is composed of thermal and
nonthermal components. The thermal gas undergoes both cooling and heating (via
feedback from supernovae and active galactic nuclei) in the central regions. The
nonthermal component consists of cosmic rays, generated via shocks and active
galactic nuclei, and magnetic fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite their
importance, the nonthermal constituents have received relatively little study in
part because of the challenges in the numerical modeling needed to follow the
relevant physics. In an effort to begin to close this gap in our understanding
of galaxy cluster environments, Dr. Burns and collaborators will apply their
recently developed adaptive mesh refinement magnetohydrodynamic N-body code to
the problem. Most notably, this new tool is capable of evolving both cosmic rays
and magnetic fields in the large-scale cosmological environment. Here it will be
employed to simulate both thermal and nonthermal processes within galaxy
clusters. These simulations will iterated upon until convergence is achieved
with a combination of thermal and nonthermal physics that best reproduces
available observations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Postdoctoral fellows and graduate
students will be trained through active participation in all aspects of this
work. The data from these simulations and the tools for converting the outputs
into standard observational formats will be made available to the astronomical
and broader community through an on-line archive. Dr. Burns and collaborators
will also construct course modules showing concepts of cosmological gas and
N-body particle dynamics via their numerical simulations for classes ranging
from introductory astronomy to graduate astrophysics. These visualizations will
also be developed into new planetarium shows. &lt;br/&gt;