* 0807817
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Enemy release and nutrient enrichment: Population- and community-level effects in experimental wetland plant communities
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Chris Peterson, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 06/30/2009
* USD 11,662.00

Invasive species can have detrimental effects on native species and ecosystems.
It has been argued that exotic species are problematic because they have left
behind the pathogens, predators, or herbivores (enemies) that suppressed them in
their native range. However, many exotic plants seem to become invasive only
when essential resources such as soil nitrogen are abundant. This work will test
the hypothesis that an invasive wetland plant species, which escaped from its
enemies, will gain a progressively larger competitive advantage and have a
progressively greater suppressive effect on native species as soil nitrogen
becomes more abundant. The broader implications of this research are twofold.
Terrestrial ecosystems are experiencing increased nitrogen enrichment, but the
implication of this to plant species invasions are poorly known. An
understanding of the interaction of enrichment and enemy release is necessary
for effective management of invasive species Second, specialized pathogens or
herbivores are often introduced to control the worst invaders (i.e., biological
control), but the effectiveness of such programs has been sporadic. If a
biological control is inherently dependent on soil fertility then land managers
can better prioritize release sites for biological control agents and increase
the likelihood of success for those programs. Additional broader impacts of this
project include training undergraduates in field ecology, and conducting
community education programs through partner organizations. This project also
will support the thesis research of a doctoral student.