* 0807811
* Adaptive Finite Element Methods for Multiscale Problems Governed by Geometric PDE
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Ricardo Nochetto, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2012
* USD 510,119.00

Nochetto&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0807811&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The adequate numerical
treatment of continuum phenomena&lt;br/&gt;exhibiting disparate space-time
scales is a formidable&lt;br/&gt;mathematical and computational challenge.
Modern algorithms&lt;br/&gt;should be able to resolve fine scales for certain
physical&lt;br/&gt;quantities without overresolving others, thereby optimizing
the&lt;br/&gt;computational effort and making realistic 3d
simulations&lt;br/&gt;feasible. Mathematical models in biophysics (such
as&lt;br/&gt;biomembranes in both fluid and gel state), in materials
science&lt;br/&gt;(such as crystal surface morphologies and bilayer actuators),
and&lt;br/&gt;in shape optimization (including both fluid and solid
mechanics)&lt;br/&gt;are typical yet quite distinct examples addressed in
this&lt;br/&gt;project. Their multiscale structure manifests in
rapid&lt;br/&gt;transients and slow motion regimes in time, as well as point
and&lt;br/&gt;line singularities (interfaces) and thin layers in space.
Large&lt;br/&gt;domain deformations, perhaps leading to topology changes,
is&lt;br/&gt;another intriguing feature. The goal of this project is
to&lt;br/&gt;design, test, and analyze reliable and efficient adaptive
finite&lt;br/&gt;element methods for these multiscale problems, most governed
by&lt;br/&gt;geometric partial differential equations, with space-time
error&lt;br/&gt;control based on a posteriori error estimation. This
project&lt;br/&gt;builds upon, and in fact extends and enhances, the work of
the&lt;br/&gt;prior NSF Grant DMS-0505454. It is organized in a number
of&lt;br/&gt;small but interrelated topics permeated by the roles of
geometry&lt;br/&gt;and adaptivity throughout, from issues in numerical analysis
and&lt;br/&gt;computation to applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project
blends quite delicate analytical,&lt;br/&gt;computational, and modeling issues
in several areas of research&lt;br/&gt;of strategic importance such as
nanotechnology, materials and&lt;br/&gt;manufacturing, biotechnology, and high
performance computing. &lt;br/&gt;Designing smart electro-mechanical devices as
well as&lt;br/&gt;understanding key functions of lipid membranes in
living&lt;br/&gt;organisms, both at the nano and microscales, require powerful
and&lt;br/&gt;flexible computational algorithms capable of dealing with
large&lt;br/&gt;shape variations. This project develops such tools. It is
a&lt;br/&gt;collaborative and interdisciplinary project involving a number
of&lt;br/&gt;scientists in the US (four of them engineers and physicists)
and&lt;br/&gt;abroad, as well as several students and postdocs. Because
a&lt;br/&gt;substantial effort is devoted to education and human
resource&lt;br/&gt;development, most resources are used to partially
support&lt;br/&gt;students and postdocs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;