* 0807710
* Collaborative Research: Star Formation, Feedback, and the ISM: Time-Resolved Constraints from a Large VLA Survey of  Nearby Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2013
* Evan Skillman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Knezek
* 05/31/2013
* USD 292,645.00

Drs Skillman and Dalcanton will map the neutral hydrogen gas in a variety of
nearby galaxies with high resolution on the sky and in velocity, through a Large
VLA Survey that is already under way. These galaxies were chosen from a set that
Dalcanton has observed with the Hubble Space Telescope as part of a Treasury
(large) proposal. The Hubble images can resolve individual blue stars in these
galaxies, tracing the history of star formation through the past gigayear across
the face of the galaxy. Maps of the distribution of neutral hydrogen and of the
gas motions will be combined with that star formation history, and with infrared
images from the Spitzer Space Telescope and ultraviolet images from GALEX. The
investigators will trace how the star-forming history is related to local
properties of the gas, and how starbirth has influenced the gas. To examine the
expected relation between star formation and gas flow, the group will 'observe'
hydrodynamic simulations carried out by collaborators at the University of
Washington.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The group will produce calibrated data cubes
and moment maps (showing the gas surface density, its velocity field and the
velocity dispersion) for the neutral hydrogen gas. These will be released to the
community in 2011, after graduate students working on the project have finished
their thesis work. Both of the PIs have strong records as undergraduate research
mentors, and will involve undergraduate students in this research. The project
will provide PhD dissertation material for at least two graduate students, one
in Washington and one in Minnesota. The grant will support Dr. Skillman's
Universe in the Park program, in which students take telescopes to State Parks
during the summer months for public viewing, and make presentations on various
aspects of astronomy.