* 0807396
* Impact of Perturbations on Ultra-Short Solitary Waves in Optical Media
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2013
* Tobias Schaefer, CUNY College of Staten Island
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2013
* USD 91,953.00

The goal of the research that will be supported by this award is to contribute
to the next generation of mathematical and computational tools for studying
ultrashort solitary waves in optical media. In particular, this research will
help characterize the impact of perturbations. For this purpose, the awardee
will study three models: the classic cubic nonlinear Schr¨odinger equation with
higher order terms and two recently developed models of ultra-short pulses in
nonlinear media that both possess solitary wave solutions, namely the short-
pulse equation (SPE) derived by Sch¨afer and Wayne in 2004 and the nonlocal
short-pulse equation (NSPE) derived by Chung and Sch¨afer in 2007. In the first
part of the project, the stability of the solitary waves with respect to
perturbations of the initial conditions will be studied. The second part will
focus on extensions of these models to more complicated linear and nonlinear
response functions. The third part of the project will be devoted to the
characterization of the soliton?s response to stochastic variations of the
media. As a part of this work, methods to coarse-grain noise in systems with
multiple time scales will be developed. All three parts will require a
combination of analytical and numerical techniques. A C++ based computational
library will be developed to implement the new methods and will be made
available freely on the Internet. More broadly, the research will be important
not just for optics, but for a variety of scientific areas in which
nonlinearity, nonlocality, and randomness meet. As part of the project,
undergraduate students will participate in the research, and course material for
a new class on the mathematics of optical communications will be developed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years, experimental success in the creation and
detection of ultra-fast optical pulses has opened the door to a new range of
optical phenomena that take place on very small scales and hence are extremely
fast. Current optical technology allows to design optical devices whose
structures are more complex than standard optical fibers. These new devices
exhibit remarkable phenomena never seen in standard optical fibers. High bit-
rate telecommunications, laser surgery and ultra-broadband generation will
benefit from these advances. These potential new applications generate the need
for novel mathematical models that describe the such ultra-fast phenomena
correctly in a variety of situations. The focus of this research is the question
whether such light pulses will remain stable as they propagate through non-
perfect wave guides. The research will use a class of mathematical models that
was developed by the awardee and his collaborators in 2004.