* 0807090
* Students United in Classes, Community, Engineering, Service and Study Abroad (SUCCESS) Scholars Program
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2013
* Raymond Moore, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Ron Buckmire
* 06/30/2013
* USD 591,995.00

The SUCCESS Scholars Program offers competitive scholarships and
academic/career-building support activities to academically talented,
economically disadvantaged students from underrepresented populations (women,
ethnic minorities, and persons with disabilities), rural communities, and
Nebraska's six community colleges who wish to pursue an engineering degree at
the University of Nebraska-Lincoln. This program allows the College of
Engineering to increase its scholarship pool to offer an additional 11
scholarships to new freshmen, 30 scholarships to continuing students, 12
scholarships to transfer students, 16 awards for study abroad, and 20 research
fellowship awards. These scholarships help recruit and retain the target
populations and support the existing STEP program, which helps transition
engineering students from Nebraska's community colleges to the University of
Nebraska-Lincoln. Also, this program allows the college to develop four new
initiatives including seminars, faculty mentoring sessions, a study center, and
formalized service activities that build upon and complement existing student
development initiatives including a learning community and peer mentoring. The
project builds a more diverse student population and a cohort of scholars with
an enhanced sense of academic community which positively impacts student
learning, confidence, performance, and retention of scholars from the target
populations; thereby creating scholars more prepared for the next phase in their
life (graduate school or an engineering career).