* 0807265
* Multi-scale analysis of field behavior inside heterogeneous media for local and nonlocal continuum theories
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Robert Lipton, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/2012
* USD 322,529.00

Lipton&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0807265&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The investigator develops new
mathematical and computational&lt;br/&gt;tools for the quantitative description
of multi-scale phenomena&lt;br/&gt;seen in composite structures. The effort
focuses on properties&lt;br/&gt;related to failure initiation. Failure is often
precipitated by&lt;br/&gt;extreme excursions of the local fields at the level of
the&lt;br/&gt;microgometry. Three projects are carried out that seek to
make&lt;br/&gt;new connections between the excursions of local
deformation,&lt;br/&gt;strain, and stress fields as functions of applied
boundary loads&lt;br/&gt;and initial conditions. The first project examines load
transfer&lt;br/&gt;between length scales for hierarchical structures when
the&lt;br/&gt;substructure is known only in a statistical sense. The goal
is&lt;br/&gt;to provide new variational tools for teasing out
relationships&lt;br/&gt;that connect the local field response to the applied
long&lt;br/&gt;wavelength loads. The objective is to use these relationships
to&lt;br/&gt;discover explicit criteria on the applied loads that
are&lt;br/&gt;necessary for failure initiation inside composite media.
The&lt;br/&gt;second project seeks to understand how field fluctuations
inside&lt;br/&gt;heterogeneous media depend on the boundary data in the
presence&lt;br/&gt;of residual stress. The goals of this project are to:
i)&lt;br/&gt;quantify the roles of boundary data, microgeometry and
residual&lt;br/&gt;stress on the penetration of high stress zones
inside&lt;br/&gt;statistically defined media and ii) understand the effect
of&lt;br/&gt;residual stress on the decay of high frequency boundary
data&lt;br/&gt;inside the composite domain. Understanding these
phenomena&lt;br/&gt;facilitates the design of tough composite structures for use
in&lt;br/&gt;aviation and infrastructure. The third project investigates
the&lt;br/&gt;dynamics of heterogeneous media using nonlocal models for
elastic&lt;br/&gt;interactions. The goal is to develop a multi-scale
peridynamic&lt;br/&gt;formulation for modeling deformation fields inside
fiber&lt;br/&gt;reinforced laminates. This formulation provides the
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;framework and associated numerical methods necessary to
capture&lt;br/&gt;the dynamic interactions between small and large length
scales. &lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that the basic mathematical work and
subsequent&lt;br/&gt;numerical investigations can resolve new dynamic phenomena
that&lt;br/&gt;contribute to the delamination and failure of fiber
reinforced&lt;br/&gt;laminates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The investigator develops
new mathematical and computational&lt;br/&gt;tools for the quantitative
description of multi-scale phenomena&lt;br/&gt;seen in composite structures.
Composite materials are rapidly&lt;br/&gt;becoming the materials of choice for
structural applications. &lt;br/&gt;This is due to their light weight and
superior stiffness&lt;br/&gt;properties. In order to accelerate their deployment
an improved&lt;br/&gt;understanding of their strength properties based upon
their&lt;br/&gt;microstructural geometry is required. This proposal focuses
on&lt;br/&gt;properties related to failure initiation. Failure is
often&lt;br/&gt;precipitated by extreme excursions of the local fields at
the&lt;br/&gt;level of the microgometry. The proposal consists of
three&lt;br/&gt;projects that make new connections between the excursions
of&lt;br/&gt;local deformation, strain, and stress fields as functions
of&lt;br/&gt;applied boundary loads and initial conditions. The projects
are&lt;br/&gt;chosen to address issues of practical interest that if solved
can&lt;br/&gt;accelerate the use of light weight composite materials
for&lt;br/&gt;applications in aviation and infrastructure. &lt;br/&gt;