* 0807894
* Long-Time Behavior and Stability of Infinite-Dimensional Dynamical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Milena Stanislavova, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2012
* USD 141,199.00

In this project, the PI will apply spectral and variational methods, as well as
the techniques of Fourier analysis, to study some outstanding open problems in
the theory of Hamiltonian and dispersive partial differential equations. The
first part of the project focuses on the long-time behavior of the solutions of
the Kuramoto-Sivashinsky and Burgers-Sivashinsky equations. Questions to be
addressed concern the global well-posedness, the existence of attracting sets,
and the regularity of the solutions. The PI will continue her work on developing
a systematic approach to the questions of existence and regularity of attractors
for dissipative partial differential equations in the case of unbounded domains.
Of particular interest are the two-dimensional Navier-Stokes equation and the
"alpha models" from fluid dynamics. An innovative approach, using modulation
equations and spectral decomposition techniques will be used to study the
existence and stability of solitary waves, standing waves, and similar
particular solutions in the vicinity of the central manifold for a class of
parabolic problems. In solving these problems the PI will use a variety of
techniques including evolution semigroups, spectral and frequency analysis. The
goal here is to investigate the Green-Naghdi system, the coupled-mode system
from nonlinear optics as well as to establish nonlinear stability and complete
invariant manifolds description for a class of abstract Hamiltonian partial
differential equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal deals with a variety
of problems concerning solutions of a large class of partial differential
equations of mathematical physics. Such equations are viewed as dynamical
systems on an infinite-dimensional space. Of particular interest are the
Kuramoto-Sivashinsky and Burgers-Sivashinsky equations, the two-dimensional
Navier-Stokes equation, and the ?alpha models? of fluid dynamics. The PI will
use a variety of techniques, including spectral analysis, variational methods,
the techniques of Fourier analysis, and evolution semigroups. The Hamiltonian
partial differential equations addressed in this project arise in numerous
physical situations - some have their origins in the study of quantum mechanical
systems and nonlinear&lt;br/&gt;optics, others in fluid dynamics and combustion.
Understanding the local behavior of solutions nearby a special solution is an
issue of paramount importance for the applications, since only waves that are
stable can be expected to be physically realizable. On the other hand,
identifying instability or the source of it is of great practical importance.
Any progress on these questions will not only be important mathematically, but
will find immediate applications in physical sciences. Another goal of the PI is
to involve some undergraduate students in this fascinating area of research. The
PI also plans a topics class on nonlinear dynamical systems jointly with other
faculty of the Mathematics and Physics Departments.&lt;br/&gt;