* 0807304
* MaxBCG Galaxy Clusters: Laboratories for Galaxy Evolution and Tools for Cosmology
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Timothy McKay, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas S. Statler
* 06/30/2012
* USD 378,072.00

Dr McKay and his group will study a set of rich clusters of galaxies, the
'MaxBCG catalog', which they have identified from the galaxy database of the
Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS). They will reprocess the images from the SDSS to
obtain better measures of the galaxy brightness. They will use the Magellan
telescopes to measure galaxy motions within the cluster, to estimate the mass of
each cluster. Measuring weak gravitational lensing -- the way in which the
cluster's gravitational pull distorts the path of light from distant galaxies
lying behind it -- will provide additional mass estimates. The results of this
study will relate measures of the optical richness (the number and brightness of
its member galaxies) of each cluster to its mass.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
results of this work will be used to test theories of cosmic structure
formation, which can predict how the mass that galaxy clusters should build up
through cosmic time. Galaxy clusters are widely used in probing dark energy and
in cosmological tests of General Relativity, so this research will have a broad
scientific impact. Dr. McKay and his group have an excellent record in mentoring
undergraduate researchers, and will involve both undergraduate and graduate
students in this work. He will also teach a research seminar for incoming
undergraduates in which they will perform analysis projects based on public SDSS
data.