* 0807727
* Supernova and Supernova Remnant Studies
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Roger Chevalier, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Womack
* 08/31/2013
* USD 250,986.00

Professor Chevalier and collaborators will undertake four projects that are
expected to greatly improve our understanding of the late evolution of massive
stars and how/why they end their lives in supernovae. Key to three of these
efforts is the study of how supernova ejecta interacts with material shed from
stars before the explosion. (1) Type IIn supernovae, with relatively narrow
emission lines, represent supernova interaction with up to several solar masses
of clumpy circumstellar material that was lost shortly before the explosion. New
models for radio and infrared emission, together with inferences from other
multiwavelength data, will be combined with hydrodynamic models to better
constrain the mass loss, which apparently is episodic, and to place the
supernovae in the context of massive star evolution. A revision of the standard
view of the final evolution of massive stars may well be required as a result of
this work. (2) Type IIP (plateau light curve) supernovae have the highest
occurrence rate of core collapse supernovae, but are curiously not well
represented among young supernova remnants. The hypothesis that this is due to a
low-density surrounding, as expected for stars in the progenitor mass range,
will be evaluated through hydrodynamic simulations. The results will be compared
to observations of a number of young remnants, including the Crab Nebula. (3)
Hydrodynamic models, together with calculations of particle evolution and
nonthermal X-ray and radio emission, will be used to set constraints on the mass
loss density around normal Type Ia supernovae. The limits are expected to be the
strongest for constraining the progenitor system. A fourth project will examine
nonradial instability in the late phases of massive star core collapse, which
may be a crucial part of the supernova explosion mechanism. A linear analysis of
the instability will be used to settle a discrepancy in previous studies and to
investigate the physical mechanism for the instability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These projects have broad implications for astrophysics in
that they are relevant to the late evolution of massive stars, the return of
heavy elements to the interstellar medium, and physical processes at high energy
densities. The research will also build and maintain ties between the University
of Virginia and Stockholm Observatory. The results will be broadly disseminated
at conferences and colloquia. A graduate student and an undergraduate student
will be involved in carrying out the research and will learn techniques used in
theoretical astrophysics. Finally, the topic of exploding stars is one that
captures the public imagination and the research results will be integrated into
undergraduate courses and public lectures.&lt;br/&gt;