* 0807440
* Research in Financial Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* K. Ronnie Sircar, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2011
* USD 219,000.00

The work supported by this award has three main components addressing some
central concerns in the mathematical analysis of financial problems,
specifically credit risk, construction and calibration of measures of risk, and
asymptotic approximations for derivatives valuation problems. The first
component analyzes option prices, or implied volatility surfaces, in the
presence of multiscale stochastic volatility, combining singular and regular
perturbation expansions from fast and slow volatility factors, and a WKB-type
analysis for the short-time behaviour. The second component studies the
inference of risk measures from market data. Under many standard financial
models, good time-consistent convex risk measures are characterized by solutions
of backward stochastic differential equations and quasilinear parabolic partial
differential equations (PDEs), for which calibration is an inverse problem. The
goal is design of asymptotic and numerical methods to translate market values of
instruments contingent on extreme events into risk measures. The third component
is to develop new models and algorithms for valuing and managing credit risk.
The class of top-down models is a convenient macroscopic description of the
number of defaults, and our study involves asymptotics for wave-type PDEs with
random coefficients. The relationship with constituent bottom-up (microscopic)
models needs to be understood, and the challenge is to design effective
approximations to pass between the two levels of
detail.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project develops mathematical and
computational tools for understanding and modeling credit risk and volatilities
in extreme regimes, and seeks to construct appropriate risk measures. The broad
goal is better quantitative assessment and management of market volatility and
default risk, especially in times of heavy turmoil like the present. This is
particularly important given that poor understanding and weak regulation of
risks related to credit-linked instruments allowed untamed speculation and
securitization that&lt;br/&gt;spurred the onset of the current crisis. While
such re-insurance products can be used for the good, their design and use has to
be informed by tools of stochastic analysis and statistics. This research will
contribute to this tool set.