* 0807134
* Academic and Professional Development for Lower Division Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Students: Transition to Upper Division, Research and the STEM Workforce
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2008,01/31/2014
* Andrea Richa, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Krupczak
* 01/31/2014
* USD 600,000.00

Intellectual Merit. The project provides 32 scholarships per year to
academically talented, financially disadvantaged lower-division computer
science, engineering, and mathematics (CSEM) students, especially women and
underrepresented minorities. These scholarships, together with a well-
established infrastructure and student-centered programs, exploiting a
community-of mentors, enable selected students to maintain full-time enrollment
and achieve degree completion. The project is administered through the
university's SUMS Institute (Strengthening Understanding of Mathematics and
Science). The function of SUMS is to: (1) recruit and select program students
from across the state; (2) provide activities that increase retention, support
student academic/professional development through degree completion, and prepare
students for graduate school and future employment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The program helps ensure a successful
transition to upper-division work, research, graduate school, and the STEM
workforce. Building on prior and current projects, program activities are
designed to transition lower-division students from S-STEM funds to cutting-edge
student-funded research projects. Toward this end, 10 NSF-LSAMP-WAESO and 5 NASA
Space Grant slots are available for mentor-guided undergraduate research
projects. Intel, Microchip, and NASA provide technical mentors. Prior CSEMS
programs average over 87% retention with over 35% of recent upper-division
students going on to graduate school full-time -- nearly double the national
rate. The project is expanding and enhancing the continuum of services available
to students of diverse gender, ethnic, social, and economic backgrounds, clearly
supporting the university's commitment to provide a high quality education to
all students. It also introduces students to exciting new research developments
spanning all CSEM disciplines and encourages them to earn a technical graduate
degree.