* 0807128
* Fostering Outstanding Cohorts in Undergraduate Science (FOCUS) Scholarships
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* Diana Mason, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* John Krupczak
* 08/31/2014
* USD 600,000.00

The project establishes scholarships for beginning undergraduate students with
financial need who are majoring in biology, biochemistry, or chemistry. This
project provides scholarships for the first two years of undergraduate study to
three cohorts of 24 students each, serving a total of 72 individuals over four
years. Recruitment is targeting matriculating high school students, with
selection based on a combination of academic preparedness, including mathematics
proficiency, and eligibility for need-based financial aid. Scholarship amounts
range from $1,000 to $7,000 per academic year dependent upon the financial need
of the recipient, with an average award of approximately $3,600 per year.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cohort building includes having recipients co-enroll in
class sections in each semester and attend a special "careers in sciences"
seminar course during their sophomore year. In the careers course, students are
given direction on career building activities, including connecting with
academic support services, selection of research mentors, applying for
internships, and exploring ethical issues in science. Students in the program
meet regularly with graduate student mentors from their major area of study, who
are available as tutors and role models, and they associate with research
faculty through a mentoring program, organized lab tours, and social events.
During their second year, FOCUS cohort members are assisted in connecting to
opportunities available to juniors or seniors, such as scholarship
opportunities, research experiences, and the UNT McNair Post-baccalaureate
Achievement program. The peer and mentor community connections extend beyond the
scholarship period to provide continued academic and social support throughout
the undergraduate degree program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit
&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed project includes bringing
together a team of experienced educators and student service professionals to
foster a cohort of undergraduate science majors. By building on existing
programs at the university, the investigators are developing a sustainable
program for the purpose of creating a peer community that encourages students to
explore research opportunities and continue into a successful science career.
This project is evaluating the effectiveness of cohort-building and mentoring
activities on retention of participants in the biology, biochemistry, and
chemistry majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact of this program include the development of a cohort model for student
success that can be exported to other institutions. This scholarship program
assists students from a wide variety of backgrounds in obtaining their
bachelor's degree by providing needs-based financial assistance along with
academic and social support in their first two years. An increase in recruitment
and retention of science majors from diverse backgrounds benefits society by
providing critical personnel for the advancement of science and technology.