* 0807395
* Collaborative Research:   Time-Dependent and Inhomogeneous Flows of Entangled Polymeric and Micellar Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2008,12/31/2011
* L. Pamela Cook-Ioannidis, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 12/31/2011
* USD 205,633.00

Cook&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0807395&lt;br/&gt;McKinley&lt;br/&gt;DMS-
0807330&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; In this collaborative project, the investigators
and a&lt;br/&gt;colleague study the motion of complex fluids, especially flows
of&lt;br/&gt;wormlike micellar fluids and of monodisperse polymer solutions
in&lt;br/&gt;a variety of geometries and under a variety of forcings.
&lt;br/&gt;Surfactant systems consist of amphiphilic molecules
with&lt;br/&gt;hydrophilic heads and hydrophobic tails. Under suitable
chemical&lt;br/&gt;conditions these molecules can self-assemble in aqueous
solution&lt;br/&gt;into long aggregates known as worm-like micelles. These
long&lt;br/&gt;flexible structures entangle to form a network and lead
to&lt;br/&gt;viscoelastic properties similar to those of polymer melts
and&lt;br/&gt;concentrated solutions, but with the added complexity that
the&lt;br/&gt;worms continuously break and reform (i.e. they are
"living&lt;br/&gt;polymers"). External deformations can enhance the local rate
of&lt;br/&gt;micellar breakage, thus the macroscopic flow affects
the&lt;br/&gt;microscopic structure which in turn further modifies the
global&lt;br/&gt;velocity field. Due to these multi-scale interactions
these&lt;br/&gt;fluids exhibit flow inhomogeneities even in simple geometries.
&lt;br/&gt;Development and analysis of new constitutive models
and&lt;br/&gt;comparison with experimental results is generating new
insight&lt;br/&gt;and understanding into the multi-scale nature of these flows
and&lt;br/&gt;of the influence of the evolution in the microscopic structure
on&lt;br/&gt;the macroscopic measurables. The governing mathematics is
that&lt;br/&gt;of a nonlinear system of partial differential
equations&lt;br/&gt;describing conservation of mass and linear momentum, coupled
to&lt;br/&gt;equations governing the number densities of the
entangled&lt;br/&gt;molecules and constitutive (stress) equations for each
species. &lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the investigators study a pair of two-
species&lt;br/&gt;network models that they recently proposed: a two species
model&lt;br/&gt;with chain scission and reforming effects (the VCM
model)&lt;br/&gt;physically appropriate for wormlike micellar solutions, and
a&lt;br/&gt;simplified non-interacting model (PEC+M model) appropriate
to&lt;br/&gt;monodisperse entangled polymer solutions. The
investigators&lt;br/&gt;study the time evolution of the solutions in strong
extensional&lt;br/&gt;flow and in rapidly time-varying flow using a combination
of&lt;br/&gt;asymptotics and computation as well as experiments.
Approximate&lt;br/&gt;closed form solutions are generated to enable an
understanding of&lt;br/&gt;the flows and of sharp spatial transitions
(microstructural&lt;br/&gt;boundary layers). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The
investigators study the material properties of complex&lt;br/&gt;fluids such as
those constituting shampoos, liquid detergents,&lt;br/&gt;molten plastics, and
fluids utilized in enhanced oil recovery. &lt;br/&gt;On the microscopic scale
these polymeric fluids consist of large&lt;br/&gt;aggregates or macromolecules
and the shape and orientation of&lt;br/&gt;these molecules control the
properties of the fluid and how it&lt;br/&gt;performs in the desired
application. It is very difficult to&lt;br/&gt;characterize these fluids
experimentally because their flow&lt;br/&gt;properties, unlike those of
Newtonian fluids such as water,&lt;br/&gt;become inhomogeneous even in simple
geometries. This means that&lt;br/&gt;the usual types of measurements (in which
the fluid properties&lt;br/&gt;are measured at the flow boundaries) are not
sufficient to&lt;br/&gt;understand and characterize the material response.
The&lt;br/&gt;investigators have formulated a new equation of state --
a&lt;br/&gt;mathematical model -- that more fully describes
the&lt;br/&gt;microstructural properties of these fluids and how they flow.
&lt;br/&gt;They now investigate the predictions of this model in
various&lt;br/&gt;complex flows and compare this with experimental findings.
This&lt;br/&gt;in turn enables them to develop new means to probe
and&lt;br/&gt;characterize the properties of the fluids. The complex
fluids&lt;br/&gt;listed above are used commercially in a variety of
geometries&lt;br/&gt;that may involve both stretching flows (such as the motion
of a&lt;br/&gt;jet, flow out of a nozzle) as well as shearing flows (for
example&lt;br/&gt;pumping of the fluids in a pipe). To ensure that
their&lt;br/&gt;analytical and experimental results are relevant to
researchers&lt;br/&gt;in industry, the investigators investigate both steady
and&lt;br/&gt;time-dependent examples of both types of flow conditions.