* 0807929
* 2008 Electordeposition on Electrodeposition, New London, NH, July 27 - August 7, 2008
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2008,02/28/2009
* Thomas Moffat, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Alan Ardell
* 02/28/2009
* USD 12,000.00

TECHNICAL: This grant will partially support the 2008 Gordon Research Conference
on Electrodeposition. The conference will be held on July 27-Aug 1, 2008 at
Colby Sawyer College in New London, New Hampshire. The conference will focus on
cutting edge topics at the intersection of electrochemistry and materials
science. Detailed lectures and in-depth discussions will occur on nucleation and
growth, and stress effects in thin film growth, the making of metal/molecule
contacts for molecular electronics, the exploration of materials relevant to
energy conversion processes as well as new methods and avenues for
electrochemical processing. Close attention will also be given to emerging
applications and technical opportunities associated with electrochemical
processing. NON-TECHNICAL: The meeting will bring together material scientists,
electrochemists, solid-state physicists and surface scientists to explore
important questions relevant to materials synthesis and characterization of
growth related processes at immersed electrode/electrolyte interfaces. The
conference will promote education and the pursuit of research relevant to the
process of electrodeposition that plays a central role in several emerging
applications in microelectronics (ULSI and 3-D systems) and
microelectromechanical (MEMS) systems. The meeting will provide a premier forum
for encouraging interactions and collaborations that transcend national borders.
Indeed, the Electrodeposition GRC is rapidly becoming known as the "Conference"
on the subject. In addition to the formal lectures, all attendees, and students
in particular, will be encouraged to present posters. This activity will be
organized into four focused sessions that represent a core element of the
conference. The meeting will thereby foster student development as well as
international exchange among a wide range scientist whose interests span several
distinct disciplines. Every available mechanism will be made to expand the
participation of woman, racial and ethnic minorities and other individuals who
have traditionally been under-represented in this field. The conference will be
advertised broadly by the GRC organization with a more focused advertising
campaign by the Chair and Vice Chair aimed at the materials and electrochemical
research community as represented at universities around the world and several
professional organizations such as the Materials Research Society, The
Electrochemical Society and The International Society of Electrochemistry.