* 0807567
* The Turbulent Origin and Injection of the Elements
* MPS,AST
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2013
* Francis Timmes, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Womack
* 06/30/2013
* USD 513,958.00

The production of chemical elements, luminous energy, and kinetic energy by
stars is fundamental to the evolution of galaxies and the baryonic content of
the cosmos. A recent National Academy report, "Connecting Quarks with the
Cosmos: Eleven Science Questions for the New Century" identified the creation of
the elements, particularly those beyond iron, as one of the most important
problems facing modern science and concealing the answers to one of the most
fundamental questions that humans strive to answer: "What is the Universe made
of?". Massive stars hold a key to this mystery by serving as the main engines
for creation of elements in the cosmos. However, there are known systematic
effects and missing physics that inhibit creation of "standard abundance
candles". Models of massive stars have long used spherical symmetry with mixing
length treatments of convection and parameterized explosions. Recent
breakthroughs in understanding 3D, compressible, multi-fluid, convection with
nuclear burning have provided an improved treatment of convection and non-
convective mixing for stellar evolution. In addition, observations of individual
core-collapse supernovae suggest some fraction of them are strongly
asymmetric.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Here, Dr. Young and collaborators will
undertake a systematic survey of massive star evolution (1) that uses new
results from 3D convection studies and (2) whose supernova abundance yields are
calculated from 3D explosion models. These yields and evolutionary tracks will
be validated with existing and future abundance determinations of stars and
stellar populations. Methods and techniques of the analysis will be combined
into an efficient pipeline comprised of analytical methods, stellar evolution
models, multi-dimensional collapse and explosion simulations, and post-
processing of the explosions with large nuclear reaction networks to establish
detailed abundance levels. The results of this study are expected to
significantly improve quantitative interpretation of abundance determinations
being conducted by current and future instruments such as Spitzer's "Surveying
the Agents of a Galaxy's Evolution" and NASA's "Space Interferometry
Mission".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will have impacts on several areas
of physics and astronomy as well as promoting national/international
partnerships. Undergraduate and graduate students will be involved and exposed
to a trans-disciplinary scientific process. Results from this work will be
incorporated into Dr. Young's large classes for undergraduate non-science majors
and disseminated to the public through talks and articles. Finally, the software
developed during this project will be released as stand-alone software or as
packages for use with extant software.