* 0807672
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Numerical studies of double-diffusive convection in the interior of giant planets
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Jonathan Fortney, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas S. Statler
* 08/31/2012
* USD 271,980.00

AST-0807672/0806431&lt;br/&gt;Garaud/Radko&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The competing
effects of destabilizing thermal gradients and stabilizing compositional
gradients (i.e. double-diffusive convection) play a major role in the structure
and evolution of giant planets. They relate to the low observed heat flux of
Uranus, the high metallicity of the envelopes of Uranus and Neptune, the erosion
of the cores of Jupiter and Saturn, and the large radii of some observed
transiting exoplanets. Extensive studies in the context of global oceanic mixing
are not applicable because of the wide discrepancy between the governing
parameters in the two cases. This collaborative project will perform state-of-
the-art three-dimensional high-resolution numerical simulations of double-
diffusive convection in the relevant parameter regime, analyze them to extract
practical flux parameterizations, and modify an existing planetary evolution
code (CEPAM) to account for the effects. This improved technique will then be
used to address two particular questions: (i) How do the revised heat flux laws
affect the thermal evolution and structure of the planets, and (ii) How are
chemical elements mixed across their compositional interfaces. Progress here
would be an invaluable step towards a better understanding of the global
evolution of giant planets everywhere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is
interdisciplinary between geophysical and astrophysical fluid dynamics, and will
naturally benefit both subjects, as well as training a graduate student.
Dissemination to the scientific community will be enhanced by publication of a
monograph on Double-Diffusive Processes by Dr.Radko.