* 0807640
* Collaborative Research: Multivariate positive definite polynomials and their applications via SDP
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Oleg Musin, The University of Texas at Brownsville
* Standard Grant
* Michael H. Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2011
* USD 95,212.00

Musin DMS-0807640 Barg DMS-0807411

This project is devoted to the study of point allocations on the real sphere
and related configurations using methods of distance geometry, coding theory,
and semidefinite programming. The properties of the point sets studied include
restricting the minimum angular separation between any pair of distinct points
in the set or the degree of the cubature formula supported by it. Recent
advances in these problems include a solution by the investigator of the kissing
number problem in 4 dimensions, a new proof for the kissing number problem in 3
dimensions, and a new approach to bounds on codes using semidefinite
programming, due to Schrijver, Bachoc, and the investigator. The kissing problem
in x dimensions is the question of how many unit spheres can touch (kiss) a unit
sphere in x dimensions. The new ideas developed in these works pave the way for
further advances in the problems of bounding the size of codes and in a number
of other problems in distance geometry.

The main problems to be addressed in the project are related to bounding the
size of optimal sets of points on a sphere when the sets have a certain
property, and the links between the bounding problem and multivariate positive
definite polynomials. Interesting properties of the point set include having a
minimum angular separation that exceeds a given value between any two points in
the set (this is relevant for signal processing problems), and supporting an
exact cubature formula for spherical harmonic functions of a given degree.
Applications of the point sets studied include communication theory, numerical
analysis, the meshing problem, data representation, and localization in sensor
networks.