* 0807577
* First Science with CHARA Fringe Tracker: Imaging Planet-forming Disks around Young Stars
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2013
* Rafael Millan-Gabet, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Womack
* 07/31/2013
* USD 512,607.00

Dr. Monnier will build on recent advances in interferometry to develop an
important new tool for studying young stellar objects: "model-independent"
imaging with milli-arcsecond angular resolution. The project will be carried out
using the newly commissioned Michigan Infra-Red Combiner, which links all six
telescopes of the Georgia State University's Center for High Angular Resolution
Astronomy (CHARA) optical interferometer at Mt. Wilson in California. CHARA's
imaging capabilities will be extended even further using a new fringe tracker
also developed by Dr. Monnier. This will be used to "phase up" the array at one
wavelength while observing in another - a kind of adaptive optics for
interferometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific focus of this project is to
exploit the new order-of-magnitude improvement of sensitivity for imaging the
inner disks of young stellar objects in the process of planet formation. Initial
observations of young stars using a two-telescope combiner at CHARA have already
revealed surprisingly strong emission from inside the dust destruction radius,
tentatively associated with hot gas. Other evidence is also accumulating that
the inner regions of accretion disks are quite dynamic and time-variable, and
imaging will provide a uniquely powerful tool for discovering the source of
these changes. This research promises to uncover connections between jet
eruptions and disk instabilities, likely critical for understanding planet
formation and subsequent migration. Because orbital time scales are less than
about a year in the inner disk, the multi-epoch studies to be carried out should
reveal the orbital motion of any clumps or
inhomogeneities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Imaging is a general-purpose capability
that is lacking in visible and infrared interferometry, and is only now possible
with current facilities and new beam combination techniques. The software and
data analysis tools developed in this project will be available to the whole
community and can be applied to diverse areas of stellar astronomy beyond this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The advances in infrared interferometry have been
made possible through the improvement in infrared detectors. As experimentalists
and IR camera builders, Dr. Monnier and his team will share these exciting
developments with the greater public through an innovative portable exhibit
concept based around today's new thermal infrared cameras. Partnering with the
Ann Arbor Hands-On Museum, a portable visible-infrared stereo camera system,
deployable in a variety of teaching environments, will be developed. This
engaging learning tool will allow students of all ages to explore their Universe
with "new eyes."