* 0807545
* Conference and Mittag-Leffler Institute Program on Geometry, Analysis and General Relativity
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2008,05/31/2009
* Gregory Galloway, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2009
* USD 49,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0807545&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Gregory J. Galloway&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Mittag-Leffler
Institute in Djursholm, Sweden is running a&lt;br/&gt;semester long program on
Geometry, Analysis, and General&lt;br/&gt;Relativity from August to December,
2008. The program will start&lt;br/&gt;off with a conference at the Royal
Institute of Technology (KTH)&lt;br/&gt;in Stockolm, August 25-29, 2008. This
will be a comprehensive&lt;br/&gt;program focusing on analysis and geometry
problems revolving&lt;br/&gt;around the Einstein equation, the the field
equation of general&lt;br/&gt;relativity. The purpose of this award is to help
U.S. researchers&lt;br/&gt;and students with travel expenses to Sweden, and with
local&lt;br/&gt;expenses pertaining to their participation in the KTH
conference.&lt;br/&gt;The Einstein equation is one of the most important
geometric&lt;br/&gt;partial differential equations, in both the Lorentzian and
the&lt;br/&gt;Riemannian settings. Spectacular progress has been made
in&lt;br/&gt;recent years in the study of the Einstein equation, wih
progress&lt;br/&gt;being made on many fronts. These developments have brought
into&lt;br/&gt;focus the deep connections between the Einstein equation
and&lt;br/&gt;other important geometric PDE's, including the wave map
equation,&lt;br/&gt;the Yang-Mills equation, the Yamabe equation and the Ricci
flow&lt;br/&gt;equation. The main aim of this Mittag-Leffler Institute
program&lt;br/&gt;is to bring together the leading contributors to
these&lt;br/&gt;developments to promote collaboration in the study of the
global&lt;br/&gt;structure of solutions to the Einstein equation and
related&lt;br/&gt;geometric PDE's.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rapid progress on
experimental and numerical aspects of&lt;br/&gt;gravitational physics has been
made in recent years, and it is of&lt;br/&gt;increasing physical importance to
understand effects such as&lt;br/&gt;gravitational radiation, gravitational
collapse and inflation,&lt;br/&gt;where the strong field features of the
Einstein equation play a&lt;br/&gt;fundamental role. The results of the
collaborative research and&lt;br/&gt;analysis to be carried out during the
program will have a&lt;br/&gt;significant bearing on these fundamental physical
problems.&lt;br/&gt;Participation of graduate students and recent PhD's is a
key&lt;br/&gt;component of the program, and is crucial to the
continuing&lt;br/&gt;vitality of the area. Further details concerning
this&lt;br/&gt;Mittag-Leffler program and the kick-off conference at KTH may
be&lt;br/&gt;found at: http://www.mittag-
leffler.se/programs/0809f/&lt;br/&gt;http://www.math.kth.se/ag08/&lt;br/&gt;