* 0807012
* Materials World Network:  Cooperative Activity in Materials Research between US Investigators and their Counterparts in Chile
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2008,06/30/2013
* Sidney Nagel, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 06/30/2013
* USD 524,000.00

A group of materials researchers at the University of Chicago will continue
collaborative research with counterparts at the Universidad de Chile and the
Universidad de Santiago. The core activity of this ?Chicago-Chile Materials
Collaboration" is to provide ten-week internships for six selected Chilean
students each year at the U. of Chicago, and for a like number of University of
Chicago students at the Chilean universities. The project also sponsors visits
by faculty in both directions. The research centers on the consequences of
strong deformation in soft materials. This project enhances existing tandem
research efforts in granular motion under vibration and collision. It extends
collaboration on buckling of liquid-supported molecular films engendered under
the previous grant. It further investigates a broad spectrum of problems,
including the interaction between foci of curvature in a crumpled sheet, the
stochastic nature of abrupt stress relaxation events in crumpled sheets and in
magnets, puzzling kinetic growth patterns resembling Laplacian growth in
molecular films and in drying suspensions, anomalies in the collective motion in
confined colloidal suspensions and in sedimenting suspensions, the storage and
transport of magnetization information in disordered magnets, the connection
between molecular events and organized crawling motion in eucaryotic cells.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the manifest excellence of the Chilean partners'
research and the excellent academic preparation and motivation of the Chilean
students, these faculty and students are under-represented on the scientific
scene. This pool of under-recognized talent represents a major opportunity. The
Chicago researchers benefit by tapping this talent pool. Chicago student
participants benefit by experiencing the creative scientific culture of the
Chilean partners. During the first grant period, these internships made a major
impact on many of the students' careers. As in the last funding cycle, the
experience of working on current research problems with leaders in this research
is expected to trigger a new level of performance and activity in these
students. The program is also expected to spawn new collaborations between
senior researchers at the partner institutions, as in the past funding
cycle.&lt;br/&gt;