* 0807614
* LaURGE - Louisiana Undergraduate Recruiting and Geoscience Education
* GEO,GEO
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Jeffrey Nunn, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 08/31/2012
* USD 149,979.00

Louisiana State University in Baton Rouge is developing new strategies for
exposing K-12 students in Louisiana to geoscience education and career
opportunities. Currently, only about 1% of Louisiana students take geoscience in
high school as opposed to approximately 99% who take biology. This lack of
exposure to geoscience in high school makes it difficult to recruit and retain
undergraduate majors, particularly those from underrepresented groups. To
address this challenge, PI Nunn and co-investigator Agnew are developing
tailored workshops for high school Biology and Physics teachers at Louisiana
State University in Baton Rouge, LA and Centenary College in Shreveport, LA.
Both workshops begin with a field trip, followed by inquiry-based lesson plans
focused on topics that can be incorporated into the relevant biology or physics
course. Biology teachers directly observe and collect sedimentary strata and
fossils in the field, then explore lesson plans on evolution in the fossil
record, geologic time, and biogeochemical cycles. Supporting lesson plans and
resources, including several thousand Eocene and Miocene shark teeth,
collections of common minerals, rocks, fossils, and crude oils, are provided to
the teachers for classroom implementation. The workshop for Physics teachers
begins with a field trip where stream valleys have created hundreds of feet of
relief and a series of waterfalls, allowing participants can see exposures of
sedimentary rocks and contacts between sedimentary layers. Lesson plans in
Physics are being built around wave phenomena and their application to Earth
processes (e.g., greenhouse effect, earthquakes, seismic reflection and
refraction). Teachers also have an opportunity to use ground penetrating radar
and other equipment to image subsurface features. Lesson plans and related
instrumentation that can be used in inquiry-based exercises, such as building
structures that are resistance to ground motion during earthquakes, are provided
for subsequent classroom implementation. The goals of the proposed program are
to: interweave geoscience education into the existing curriculum for high school
Biology and Physics classes in order to reach a greater number of students;
provide teachers of those classes with lesson plans that promote interest in
geoscience, foster critical thinking by students, relate what is learned in
class to the real world, and are consistent with current knowledge/research in
geoscience; and provide teachers with equipment/supplies that make these lesson
plans the highlights of the course. The project is being coordinated with
ongoing diversity enhancement programs at LSU including the NSF-funded
Geoscience Alliance to Enhance Minority Participation (GAEMP) and the Geoscience
Diversity Enrichment program funded by Marathon Oil
Company.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;