* 0807682
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Testing the role of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi in plant adaptation to serpentine soil
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2010
* Shannon Schechter, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 05/31/2010
* USD 7,288.00

Plant adaptation to soil physical and chemical environments, or edaphic factors,
is known to influence plant distribution, diversification, and speciation.
However, the mechanisms of plant adaptation to edaphic factors are not fully
understood. Traditionally, the study of edaphic adaptation has focused on the
direct effects of soil conditions on plant growth and reproduction. A new
theoretical and experimental framework will be explored, in which plant
adaptation to edaphic factors is mediated through arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM)
fungi. The goals of this research are to determine if adapted plant ecotypes
require specific AM fungal taxa, if serpentine soils shape AM fungal
assemblages, and if AM fungi impact plant growth and fitness in serpentine soil.
Findings thus far show that the plant ecotypes associate with distinct AM fungal
assemblages in the field. This project uses serpentine, a naturally toxic soil,
to test the role of common root symbionts, arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi, in
plant adaptation to extremely stressful soil environments. Broader impacts
include contributions to taxonomy and education, and potential applications to
conservation and bioremediation. Previously unknown fungal species are likely to
be found associated with plants on serpentine soils. Undergraduate students and
a PhD student will be trained in an important area of microbial biology.
Collection and identification of fungi that are key components of a fragile,
botanically important ecosystem could dramatically improve success of
restoration efforts of locally endangered or rare species. Fungal species with
unique physiological capabilities may be useful for bioremediation of toxic
sites.