* 0807649
* Theory of Large-Scale Structure: Understanding Non-linearities, Bias, and Systematics in the Baryon Acoustic Oscillations as a Probe of Dark Energy
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Eiichiro Komatsu, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2012
* USD 327,918.00

AST-0807649&lt;br/&gt;Komatsu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will develop
theoretical tools to extract the maximum cosmological information from the
observed power spectrum of galaxies at high redshifts, obtaining the primordial
spectrum on scales and with accuracies not achievable by studies of the cosmic
microwave background. These results will have far-ranging implications for a
variety of planned and proposed studies, both ground- and space-based.
Theoretical work of this sort on non-linear gravitational growth and
astrophysical effects was a primary recommendation of the Dark Energy Task
Force. The tools to be developed will take into account the key non-linear
effects: (a) non-linear matter clustering, (b) non-linear and stochastic galaxy
bias, and (c) non-linear redshift space distortion. These effects will be the
dominant systematic errors in future dark energy constraints from galaxy
surveys. This project will improve the accuracy of perturbation theory, and find
the maximum wave-number below which one can use perturbation theory
reliably.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work integrates research and education
naturally by involving two graduate students in cutting-edge research. The
simulation data will provide an attractive and efficient tool for providing
research experiences to undergraduate students.