* 0807556
* RUI: Radio Astronomical Investigations of  the Interstellar Medium, Relativistic  Gravitation, and Pulsars
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2013
* Joel Weisberg, Carleton College
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Womack
* 07/31/2013
* USD 332,335.00

Here, Dr. Weisberg will undertake a radioastronomical research program
encompassing three major themes. The first two use pulsars as tools for the
study of other physical phenomena - namely the interstellar medium and
relativistic gravitation. The third focuses on studying the emissions and
evolution of pulsars themselves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pulsars possess several
unique properties that make them ideal probes of the interstellar medium.
Specifically, their emissions are pulsed, polarized, and pointlike. Their
pulsing allows for dispersion delays to be measured, which leads to interstellar
electron density determinations. Their high polarization permits the measurement
of Faraday rotation, which yields galactic magnetic field measurements along the
line of sight. That they are pointlike ensures that the signal probes a needle-
thin column along the line of sight. In this part of the project, five principal
spectrometric and polarimetric investigations will be undertaken that take
advantage of these three properties to advance the understanding of a wide
variety of phenomena in the interstellar medium, including the characteristics
of neutral atomic, molecular, and ionized regions, especially on the smallest
scales &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The first binary pulsar, PSR B1913+16, has proved
to be an outstanding laboratory for the study of relativistic gravitation.
Although the accuracy of probing gravity wave emission is now limited by
systematic effects, there are still new and interesting relativistic phenomena
that will be studied here. The 'Shapiro' gravitational propagation delay is
expected to become measurable over the next decade, which will lead to two
additional relativistic tests which can constrain otherwise viable gravitational
theories. The 'geodetic' spin axis precession causes the line of sight to slowly
drift across the pulsar, thereby permitting a rare glimpse of the emission beam
in the direction orthogonal to its usual presentation. The additional
observations which are supported here will uniquely help to further constrain
the beam shape, a basic quantity that will be useful for emission mechanism
studies. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The details of the pulsar emission mechanism and
of the nature of pulsar interiors are still unclear forty years after the
discovery of these objects. A series of experiments to measure their polarized
emissions will be carried out by Dr. Weisberg and students with an eye toward
establishing the beam geometry, and studying and creating empirical emission
models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The observations will be carried out with the
Arecibo, Green Bank, and Parkes telescopes. Carleton College undergraduate
students will be integrally involved in all aspects of data acquisition and
analysis, including participation in two month-long trips to the Australia
Telescope National Facility.