* 0807592
* Asymptotic Performance of Error Correcting Codes
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Mikhail Stepanov, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2011
* USD 106,475.00

Stepanov&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0807592&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The objectives of the
project are to study iterative&lt;br/&gt;decoding convergence and the dynamical
structures near the fixed&lt;br/&gt;point of the belief propagation decoding of
low-density&lt;br/&gt;parity-check codes. This will result in development of
an&lt;br/&gt;effective method of error correcting code performance
analysis&lt;br/&gt;based on the idea of instantons or most probable
message&lt;br/&gt;distortions causing the decoding error. The motivation for
the&lt;br/&gt;dynamics of iterations study comes from an observational
fact:&lt;br/&gt;nonconvergence of the iterations and the consequent
decoding&lt;br/&gt;error is because the iterations circle around the fixed
point. &lt;br/&gt;In contrast to the currently available method, the
newly&lt;br/&gt;developed instanton search method is applicable to the case of
an&lt;br/&gt;infinite (or very large in practice) number of iterations
in&lt;br/&gt;decoding. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; During our everyday activities we
send and receive a huge&lt;br/&gt;amount of information. In many situations it
is important that&lt;br/&gt;the information is transmitted without the slightest
error. To&lt;br/&gt;decrease the probability of the transmission error people
for&lt;br/&gt;ages have introduced some redundancy in their messages,
e.g.&lt;br/&gt;repeating the message several times or using a phonetic alphabet.
&lt;br/&gt;Practically all modern electronic devices would not
operate&lt;br/&gt;properly without that kind of error correction. Recently it
was&lt;br/&gt;shown that a certain class of error correcting codes (low-
density&lt;br/&gt;parity-check codes) is extremely effective in suppressing
errors. &lt;br/&gt;These codes have a problem, though. We can not guarantee
their&lt;br/&gt;good performance in applications that demand a very
small&lt;br/&gt;probability of error, e.g. computer hard disk drives. A
careful&lt;br/&gt;analysis of the problem source is needed before we can adopt
this&lt;br/&gt;type of code in demanding industrial applications and enjoy
the&lt;br/&gt;benefits these codes provide. In this project the
investigator&lt;br/&gt;studies ways to achieve good performance of these codes
in&lt;br/&gt;practical applications. &lt;br/&gt;