* 0807116
* African-American Women in Computer Science (AAWCS) Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Edward Jones, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 06/30/2012
* USD 552,000.00

The African-American Women in Computer Science (AAWCS) scholarship program
builds an academic and financial support structure for increasing the retention,
recruitment, and graduation of African-American women students in the field of
computer science. While open to all qualified students, the specific target of
this project is African-American female students. The CIS Department has access
to a large pool of middle and high school students. The project has a unique
environment providing participants with multiple categories of support, creating
an educational pipeline flow from first-year college student through the
completion of the undergraduate degree. The project utilizes existing
institutional strength in creating a comprehensive plan to increase and retain
the number of African-American women in computer science, providing them with
encouragement, reinforcement, and research and professional experiences. AAWCS
involves the scholars in a variety of interventions, including an Opening
Orientation Ceremony for first-year students enrolling in CIS, a monthly seminar
series on topics ranging from research areas to career opportunities, and a
Peer-Team program with students being grouped together to develop academic
collaborations and peer-assistance while matriculating through the computer
science curriculum. AAWCS leverages the existing resources of several
intervention programs already in place in creating a strong and effective
recruitment and development component. AAWCS seeks to financially support up to
twenty women annually, depending upon grade point average and evidence of
financial need. Awards are renewable throughout the life of the project.
Furthermore, research on effective approaches for increasing the number and
improving the success rate of African-American women in computing are carried
out and shared by the project coordinators.