* 0807070
* Track 1 Pilot Project: Pathway to Success - Research and Internship Opportunities for Students
* GEO,GEO
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Gordana Vlahovic, North Carolina Central University
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 08/31/2012
* USD 150,000.00

The Geospatial Research, Innovative Teaching and Service (GRITS) Center at North
Carolina Central University (NCCU) is formalizing partnerships with academia and
businesses, with the goal of strengthening the capabilities of the geospatial
undergraduate and graduate programs at NCCU and increasing research and
practical training opportunities for NCCU students. The award will establish two
summer graduate research internships, one at the Center for Remote Sensing and
Mapping Science at the University of Georgia and one at the Center for
Earthquake Research and Information at the University of Memphis. In addition,
the GRITS Center will also create three summer internships for NCCU
undergraduate students at the City of Durham Stormwater Division, and regional
offices of the USDA Forest Service and the North Carolina Conservation Fund.
This project seeks to address the major disparity that exists in terms of
academic fields in which African Americans earn doctorate degrees (in Earth
sciences in 2005 only two out of 379 Ph.D. degrees were obtained by African
Americans) by strengthening the competitiveness of the instructional programs at
Historically Black Colleges/Universities. This project directly impacts 8
students, but opens research avenues and professional opportunities for many
more future geoscience majors at NCCU.