* 0808269
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Local Adaptation of Symbiotic Fungi to Serpentine Soils
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2010
* Sara Branco, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 06/30/2010
* USD 12,000.00

Extreme environments are known to exert strong selection on organisms, leading
to population-level differentiation at local scales. This research will examine
local adaptation in symbiotic fungi to serpentine soil, an extreme environment
with high heavy metal content that is known to have caused evolutionary changes
in plants. Symbiotic fungi collected from serpentine and non-serpentine oak
forests in northeastern Portugal will be grown in both soil types in a
controlled reciprocal experiment that will elucidate the ability of fungi to
tolerate serpentine environments. &lt;br/&gt;Results from this study will
provide critical new insights into the ecology and evolution of symbiotic fungi
and plants in extreme environments, and they will add to our understanding of
serpentine ecosystems. Broader impacts of this study include graduate training
and relevance to biological conservation, bioremediation, and restoration.
Serpentine soils host multiple plant endemics, many listed as threatened.
Providing information on the symbiotic fungi occurring in these habitats will be
critical for informing and guiding biodiversity conservation and management
measures. This study will also provide valuable information on how fungi cope
with heavy metal hotspots. This is extremely useful for the field of
bioremediation, since the ability of heavy metal tolerant symbiotic fungi to
withstand polluted areas (such as mine waste deposits) has major implications
for the establishment and maintenance of plant communities, which then affects
recovery of entire terrestrial ecosystems. Also, fungi living in serpentine
soils are excellent candidates for model systems for investigating mechanisms of
heavy metal tolerance.