* 0808464
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The role of the Z-chromosome in the reproductive isolation of Passerina buntings (Aves: Cardinalidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Robb Brumfield, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 06/30/2009
* USD 12,000.00

Studies of hybridization between model organisms have been extremely important
to our understanding of the formation of new species, but are unlikely to fully
capture how speciation and hybridization proceed in natural systems. In the
proposed project, the researchers investigate the genetic basis of reproductive
isolation between Indigo (Passerina cyanea) and Lazuli (P. amoena) buntings
(Aves: Cardinalidae), which form a hybrid zone where their breeding ranges
overlap. Preliminary data suggest that different genetic loci (mitochondrial,
nuclear autosomal, nuclear Z-linked) exhibit differential introgression across
the hybrid zone and implicate the Z-chromosome as having a relatively large
impact on avian speciation. Here, patterns of genetic introgression of multiple
Z-linked loci will be combined with theoretical predictions to test hypotheses
aimed at identifying genes contributing to reproductive isolation between these
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond the impact the research will have on our
understanding of the evolution of reproductive isolation between closely related
species, the data collected will also allow for assessments of range expansion
in P. cyanea. Observational data suggests the breeding range of P. cyanea is
expanding westward, perhaps at the expense of P. amoena, such that an accurate
knowledge of the patterns of hybridization between them may be important for
conservation purposes.&lt;br/&gt;