* 0808112
* FossilPlot: Data-Driven Web-Based Software and Teaching Modules for Undergraduate Education On the History of Life
* GEO,GEO
* 06/15/2008,05/31/2011
* Daniel Ames, Idaho State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 05/31/2011
* USD 150,000.00

Idaho State University is developing FossilPlot, a free-access, internet-based
software tool and set of reusable teaching modules that aims to enhance active
and quantitative learning of the fossil record at the undergraduate level.
Founded on the Sepkoski Database, the program gives educators and their students
the ability to compile any combination of 36,000 marine animal genera to create
graphs illustrating faunal diversity and their geologic ranges over the
Phanerozoic. Teaching modules are designed for specific teaching targets in
Historical Geology and Introductory Paleontology courses, and are organized to
complement teaching activities in the classroom, laboratory and field trip
setting. The FossilPlot program and teaching modules are created by a team of
faculty, Masters and Doctoral students with specialties in subject matter
content, instructional design, and software engineering to ensure alignment
between teaching targets and software content, and to produce a user-friendly
interface that facilitates learning objectives. The FossilPlot program and
teaching modules will be implemented and assessed by a focus group of professors
and students at Idaho State University, the University of Utah, the College of
Wooster (Ohio), the University of Witwatersrand (South Africa), and the
Katholieke Universiteit Leuven (Belgium). Feedback from the assessments will
inform modifications to the program and result in an updated version of
FossilPlot by the completion of the project.