* 0808812
* Order and Defects in Soft Matter Architecture
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2013
* Mark Bowick, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 04/30/2013
* USD 240,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
theoretical and computational research in contact with experiment on the
interplay among order, defects and geometry in soft matter systems on curved
surfaces and interfaces with a focus on crystalline, hexatic, vector and nematic
order.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Topological defects frequently appear even in the
ground state of ordered systems on curved surfaces. Some defects are required by
certain topologies such as the sphere and others form to lower the total energy
of the system. Defect regions are natural places for biological activity,
chemical linking, unusual elastic response and aggregation of disorder. This
project will develop a thorough understanding of the preferred types of defect
configurations for crystalline, hexatic, vector and nematic order on a variety
of curved surfaces. This will pave the way for the first-principles design of
entire libraries of mesoscale components (mesoatoms) that could serve as the
building blocks of novel mesomolecules or bulk materials via self-assembly or
controlled fabrication.&lt;br/&gt;A suite of tools from the fields of geometry,
topology, statistical mechanics and computational science will be employed in
this investigation which will be closely coupled with experimental groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The techniques and tools developed in the course of the
proposed research, including methods of analysis, simulation applets, and
databases, would be made freely available to researchers across
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI plans to involve undergraduates,
graduate students and postdoctoral associates in his research program. A
particular effort will be made to recruit and retain Physics majors,
particularly women, by involving them in soft condensed matter research
projects. The PI also plans to bring his research into the classroom through a
new Soft Matter undergraduate and to the wider community through public lectures
in the Saturday Morning Physics program and the Syracuse chapter of Cafe
Scientifique as well as visits to local K-12 schools. Demonstrations of soap
bubble arrays on curved surfaces developed as research projects can be used in
both the classroom and public lectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research and education in contact with experiments that lies at the intersection
of condensed matter physics, mathematics, and biology. The PI will study how
particles organize themselves on curved surfaces and at the interfaces between
two materials or media. For example, experiment has been able to place small
particles with an electrostatic charge on the spherical surface of a water
droplet suspended in oil. The particles attempt to organize themselves in a
regular geometric pattern. But because they are on a sphere rather than a flat
surface, ?scars? form where the ordered array on one side does not match up with
that on the other. As shown by the PI, theory is at least able to make useful
predictions about features of the self-organized system. The PI will study a
wider variety of systems with an aim to understand the ?scars? or defects in
ordering that emerge and how geometry might be used to control how particles
self-assemble into desired structures. The structure of the protein coat on a
virus is another example of interest to the PI. In this case, molecules might
preferentially bind to areas where there are defects on curved surface of the
virus protein coat suggesting strategies for drug development. The general
challenging problem of how interacting particles arrange themselves on curved
surfaces has been of general interest in the field of mathematics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The techniques and tools developed in the course of the
proposed research, including methods of analysis, simulation applets, and
databases, would be made freely available to researchers across
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI plans to involve undergraduates,
graduate students and postdoctoral associates in his research program. A
particular effort will be made to recruit and retain Physics majors,
particularly women, by involving them in soft condensed matter research
projects. The PI also plans to bring his research into the classroom through a
new Soft Matter undergraduate and to the wider community through public lectures
in the Saturday Morning Physics program and the Syracuse chapter of Cafe
Scientifique as well as visits to local K-12 schools. Demonstrations of soap
bubble arrays on curved surfaces developed as research projects can be used in
both the classroom and public lectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;