* 0808581
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: What is the fate of a silent forest?  The role of avian seed dispersal and insectivory in plant recruitment on Guam.
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Joshua Tewksbury, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2010
* USD 12,000.00

Birds in forest systems eat insects and consume fruit, dispersing seeds
throughout the forest. If birds are critical to the functioning of a healthy
forest, then the current global decline in birds may lead to a domino effect,
causing the breakdown of forests worldwide. This study aims to determine the
importance of birds to forest communities using a natural experiment: the
research compares patterns in seed dispersal and control of insects between the
island of Guam, where all birds have been functionally extirpated by the
invasive Brown Treesnake, and the islands of Saipan, Tinian and Rota, which have
relatively healthy bird populations. Techniques used will include seed trapping,
seed and seedling additions to simulate dispersal and experiments in paired
areas with and without birds (where netting is used to keep out birds).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research addresses basic ecological questions
including whether dispersal is important for determining forest tree species
diversity and whether insectivorous birds can control insect populations in
forest systems. Given that forest products provide hundreds of billions of
dollars to the global economy each year, and insects are the largest pests and
vectors of disease, the results from this work will inform management from local
to global scales.&lt;br/&gt;