* 0808499
* Dissertation Research: Mechanisms Maintaining Sympatric Morphological Divergence in Ilyodon Furcidens
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2008,03/31/2011
* Cameron Ghalambor, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 03/31/2011
* USD 9,112.00

A fundamental goal of evolutionary ecology is to understand the processes that
maintain population-level diversity. Theoretical models suggest that the
interaction between divergent natural selection and sexual selection can
maintain within-species diversity, ultimately leading to speciation. This
project seeks to identify the mode of divergent selection on trophic morphology
and to test if sexual selection on the same trait also contributes to population
divergence. The live-bearing fish Ilyodon furcidens vary in feeding morphology,
and males have striking color variation that is correlated with morphology.
Comparative analyses are used to test the hypothesis that variation in dentition
and gill-raker number results from diet specialization and, when coupled with
variation in mating success, causes population divergence. Additionally, mate
choice experiments will identify female preferences and test the hypothesis that
assortative mating maintains the resulting population variation.

This research will improve understanding of adaptive evolution, particularly of
how local processes lead to evolutionary diversification. By integrating the
fields of animal form and function, population biology, and behavioral ecology,
this work empirically explores the roles of natural and sexual selection in
within-population divergence. Both U.S. and Mexican undergraduates will be
trained in laboratory and field research techniques, and the results will be
disseminated to the scientific and broader community via publication and a
website.

