* 0808205
* Can cohort experiences increase interest and participation in earth and environmental sciences at an urban undergraduate institution?
* GEO,GEO
* 09/01/2008,03/31/2012
* Laura Rademacher, University of the Pacific
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 03/31/2012
* USD 149,676.00

The University of the Pacific (PACIFIC) Department of Earth and Environmental
Science and Office of Student Life are collaborating to develop a Residence for
Earth and Environmental Living and Learning (REELL) community and supporting
curriculum. This residential learning community (RLC) will focus on learning
outside the traditional classroom boundaries. RLCs are commonly developed around
small, relationship-driven units that foster a sense of community between
students, faculty, and the institution. The fundamental goal of the REELL
community is to increase interest and participation in the geosciences and
awareness of environmental issues. Undergraduate residents of the REELL
community will conduct five core activities each academic year, including: (1)
an inter-campus exchange with a neighboring university with an Earth and
Environmental program (CSU Chico); (2) a proposal-driven research project; (3) a
guest speaker series; (4) outreach to local, minority-serving K-12 schools and
the Sly Park Environmental Education Center; and (5) the dissemination of
project results and materials. This project is expected to lead to the
establishment of a self-sustaining RLC that will enhance the research and
education infrastructure and complement PACIFIC's long-term goals and generate
results and materials that will assist in the development of other Earth and
Environmental RLCs beyond PACIFIC.