* 0808725
* Seeking Evidence for Reactive Assimilation in a Hybrid Pluton
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2010
* James Beard, Virginia Museum of Natural History Foundation
* Standard Grant
* William P. Leeman
* 06/30/2010
* USD 44,645.00

The PI seeks funding to identify source components in hybrid mixed plutonic
rocks and to understand the mechanisms by which they are incorporated. He
proposes that the fundamental process involves assimilation by disaggregation
and reaction of crystalline materials with silicate melts. In particular,
wholesale melting of assimilant may not be required. Instead, solids formed
during partial melting (e.g. dehydration melting) of the assimilant are
incorporated into the magma as the xenolith disaggregates. Reactions during
assimilation and crystallization promote both chemical mixing and physical
disintegration of xenoliths and are largely responsible for the cryptic
character of bulk assimilation. The goal of this project is to identify
mesoscale and microscale regions within igneous rocks that reflect varying
degrees of crust vs. mantle input. The work will focus on petrographic and
mineralogical heterogeneities that may preserve evidence of fine-scale, cryptic
mixing even if original textures and mineralogy have been modified by reactive
processes during assimilation and crystallization. The work is specifically
aimed at the identification and characterization of minerals - either
phenocrysts or xenocrysts - that predate the hybridization event as well as
reactant minerals that carry a hybrid signature. The PI proposes to investigate
these processes in the Martinsville Igneous Complex (MIC) in southern Virginia,
a gabbro-diorite complex with a hybrid isotopic signature. The MIC is well-
suited for this study because; 1) isotope chemistry is strongly correlated with
major and trace element chemistry within the MIC; 2) the system (a basaltic
intrusion into pelitic rocks) is geologically well-characterized, highly
contrasting, and simple and; 3) minerals and mineral clots have been identified
in the pluton that are tentatively interpreted as being derived from the country
rocks. Additionally, petrographically distinctive phases, including zoned, dusty
plagioclase in the pluton and blue quartz in the country rocks provide obvious
analytical targets. Data to be acquired unclude a suite of whole rock analyses,
and mineral chemical and zoning data including major and trace elements and
oxygen isotopes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The PI will incorporate
information from this study into his ongoing program of K-12 teacher training,
which already includes a large component on the origin and composition of
granitic magmas. If this proposal is supported, additional support will be
sought to create an inquiry-based exhibit on igneous rocks that emphasizes the
results of the proposed research. This museum is a focal point for school
visitation and alternative learning in an economically depressed region
(Enterprise Zone) where approximately 50% of the school-age population is
African-American and Hispanic.&lt;br/&gt;