* 0808292
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Mutualisms in trophic cascades: the effects of parasites of bumble bees on pollination
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2010
* Lynn Adler, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 04/30/2010
* USD 10,500.00

This research will investigate whether mutualisms can mediate trophic cascades,
and specifically whether parasites of bumblebees can affect plant populations,
via three approaches. First, theoretical models will be used to explore how the
interreliance of mutualists changes the effects of antagonists on mutualist
populations. Second, a multi-site survey will be conducted, correlating
incidence of bumble bee parasitism with reproduction of five plant species that
vary in their dependence on bumble bees for pollination. This design tests the
prediction that there will be stronger negative correlations between parasitism
and plant reproductive success for plants that are more dependent on bumble
bees. Finally, studies of bumble bee behavior using cage experiments will be
used to investigate the impacts of parasitism on foraging behavior and
pollination efficiency, and to establish whether changes in behavior due to
parasitism can affect pollination. Mutualisms, ecological interactions between
two species in which both benefit, are becoming recognized as major structuring
forces in biological communities. A key concept in community ecology is that of
the trophic cascade, in which predators affect plants through effects on
herbivores. However, this concept has never been explicitly applied to
mutualisms. Predators and parasites have the potential to negatively affect both
their prey and their prey's mutualist partners. Furthermore, the potential for
trophic cascades through mutualist interactions will likely be influenced by the
degree to which partners rely on each other. Broader impacts include training of
a Ph.D. candidate and potential application to agriculture. Parasites have had a
dramatic effect on populations of managed honeybees, yet we are only beginning
to understand how they can impact native pollinators. This research will enable
better understanding of antagonists of pollinators, thus helping us preserve
their $200 billion value to the world economy.