* 0808515
* Global Structure Discovery on Sampled Spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,08/31/2014
* Leonidas Guibas, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 08/31/2014
* USD 849,012.00

Over the past decade, the precipitous drop in the cost of disk storage and the
build-up of world-wide high-bandwidth fiber optic communications has made
massive amounts of data of different modalities (text, images,&lt;br/&gt;video)
easily available to everyone over the Web. In science, engineering, business,
and medicine, high-bandwidth sensors, large-scale simulations, and data
collection bots generate immense data sets that need to be analyzed. Making
sense of all this disparate data in becoming increasingly challenging and
difficult. Unlike traditional databases where data is carefully massaged to
adhere to rigid schemata, much of the above data comes unstructured, is often
dynamic rather than static, can contain large amounts of noise or even errors,
and can be incomplete. This project aims to develop general, rigorous and
efficient techniques for analyzing massive and distributed sets of unstructured
data. The basic aim is to exploit certain ideas from computational topology and
geometry in the study of the global structure of large, distributed data sets --
and especially to develop data representations and transformations that makes
this structure more apparent. Topology studies the connectivity of spaces, so it
is global by its very nature. It is able to determine certain connectivity
invariants in a way that is unaffected by deformations of an object and does not
require explicit parameterizations of the object geometry. Its strength lies, in
a sense, in its relative insensitivity to geometric properties, which permits it
to discern underlying combinatorial information about how the geometric object
is constructed, and therefore detect some qualitative properties.
&lt;br/&gt;This type of global analysis can be quite important in understanding
the overall structure of data sets. Geometry, though more local by nature, can
also be used to study global structure by discovering how parts of an object
relate to another, or how parts of different objects can be similar. For
example, the Erlanger program of Felix Klein has fueled for over a century
mathematicians' interest in invariance under certain group actions as a key
principle for understanding geometric spaces. &lt;br/&gt;Such invariances or
symmetries can also be key to understanding and reasoning about data
sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methods proposed here can be applied in many
different settings where massive unstructured data sets arise. In science or
engineering, large-scale distributed simulations can produce immense data sets;
as an example, consider the Folding@Home project at Stanford that generates
protein folding trajectories using hundreds of thousands of CPUs throughout the
world. In business, companies such as Google and Yahoo! have to mine billions of
web clicks to develop algorithms for matching ads to web page content or to
individual users. In medicine 3D imaging is becoming commonplace. Medical
imaging diagnostic systems, distributed throughout medical offices nationwide,
should be able to efficiently share information about shapes of organs and
thereby collectively learn about whether certain variations are associated with
different diagnostic outcomes or treatment successes. In all these cases,
understanding the global structure of the data can provide valuable scientific,
engineering, or medical insights, enabling better business decisions, or leading
to more effective medical treatment planning.&lt;br/&gt;