* 0808401
* Dissertation Research: Ecological opportunity and the rate of evolution in neotropical Anolis lizards
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2011
* D. Luke Mahler, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 05/31/2011
* USD 11,984.00

Why do species differ? Scientists have long hypothesized that ecological
pressures drive species to play different roles through the action of natural
selection. This study seeks to test the role of ecology in driving a group of
lizards to adopt an astonishing array of lifestyles and body forms. With a
combination of genetic, statistical, and field techniques, the investigators
will calculate the rate of evolution in lizards that evolved with high versus
low levels of ecological opportunity. If lizards with more ecological
opportunity evolved faster, we may conclude that ecological conditions regulate
diversification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Anolis lizards are a model system for the
evolution of diversification, but this study is the first of its kind. The
investigators will employ novel and more powerful statistical techniques to
detect differences in the rate of evolution. Also, data from this study
(representing over 350 species) will placed into public repositories so that
others may use them to further explore evolutionary patterns. The lizard genus
Anolis has been featured widely in textbooks and public media to educate about
evolution, and the findings of this study will improve public understanding of
evolutionary concepts. In addition, undergraduates will participate in the
research project.