* 0808675
* Connecting Research and Teaching Through Product Realization:  The Pittsburgh Quality of Life RET Site
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2008,11/30/2011
* Michael Lovell, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 11/30/2011
* USD 489,700.00

This award provides funding for a 3 year continuing award to support a Research
Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering Site program at the University of
Pittsburgh entitled, "Connecting Research and Teaching Through Product
Realization: The Pittsburgh Quality of Life RET Site," under the direction of
Dr. Michael Lovell.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program is a renewal of a
successful RET Site, which retains the best elements of the existing RET,
integrates new elements of best practicces observed in other RET programs, and
embraces a new Quality of Life (QoL) engineering research theme. A total of 33
high school science teachers (11 per year for three years) will be recruited
from high needs urban high schools in the Pittsburgh area. They will spend 8
weeks in the summer working in engineering labs performing fundamental
scientific research and then translate that research into innovative products,
involving topics related to Quality of Life Technology. The major research
thrust in the QoL theme will focus on innovations in computation, robotics,
machine learning, communication, and miniaturization technologies that transform
the lives of people with reduced functional capabilities. Other program
activities will include redesigning design-based-learning (DBL) units that will
be implemented in their classrooms, workshops and classroom visits by faculty
mentors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The site will directly impact 33 teachers and
4,500 students from high need urban high schools in the Pittsburgh region, with
a particular focus on high schools comprised almost entirely of minority and low
socio-economic status students. By focusing on QoL, the RET Site will improve
awareness and develop technology for a growing segment of the population that is
often overlooked--people with reduced functional capabilities due to aging or
disability.&lt;br/&gt;