* 0808677
* Organization, Dynamics and Translocation at Fluid Interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Gary Blanchard, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 07/31/2012
* USD 375,000.00

In this research supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, the
organization and dynamics of supported lipid bilayer films are investigated.
Lipid bilayers are essential to life and supported bilayer structures are of
critical importance in biosensing applications. These molecular layers have been
studied widely but the connection between molecular interactions within these
films and their macroscopic behavior remains to be established. Prof. Blanchard
and his group at Michigan State University focus in this research on
understanding the structure, dynamics and phase separation behavior in
unilamellar vesicles and supported lipid bilayers as a function of layer
composition and substrate chemical structure. The group evaluates, including
with fluorescent probe molecules, the molecular interactions within model
bilayers and between the bilayer and substrate that are responsible for bilayer
organization and dynamics. A common thread to all of these efforts is the
hypothesis that bilayer dynamics and organization are mediated by structural
defect sites within the bilayers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The larger purpose of
this research program, beyond understanding lipid bilayer organization and
dynamics, is to educate students at the cutting edge of interfacial science to
train a globally competitive cohort of students that reflects the demographic of
the Nation for careers in science. This research serves as a vehicle in that
effort. Results from this work will form undergraduate research reports, MS
theses, PhD dissertations and will be reported in the peer-reviewed literature.
This research program is geared for participation by undergraduate and graduate
students, and the PI's home institution is strongly supportive of the inclusion
of undergraduates in research, ensuring early exposure to multidisciplinary
science. The MSU Graduate Program in Chemistry and the Institution as a whole
has a long-standing commitment to the inclusion of under-represented groups, and
for the past seven years the Blanchard research group has been more than 50%
female. The group has an ongoing International collaboration with Professor
Pawel Krysiñski (University of Warsaw) that focuses on the use of biological and
biomimetic interfaces for chemical sensing. The Krysiñski group expertise
dovetails with the Blanchard group, and this collaboration enhances the breadth
of both labs. Students from both groups work regularly in the collaborator labs,
fostering a global scientific outlook for both US and Polish students and
accelerating the movement of fundamental knowledge.