* 0808619
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Thrice through Beringia?  Unraveling the evolution of North American pikas
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2010
* Link Olson, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Scott D. Snyder
* 06/30/2010
* USD 9,314.00

The ice-free corridor between Russia and Alaska, known as Beringia, has
facilitated transcontinental species exchange and provided a refugium for many
species during the last ice age. It is therefore an important arena for testing
theories regarding dispersal and survival of many species. Climate has shifted
rapidly in this region, and recent warming trends are predicted to be strongest
in the Arctic. Small mammals, such as the collared pika, provide important
information on the effects of climate change. Collared pikas are found only on
talus slopes in Alaska and northwest Canada. This is one of only two species of
North American pikas, and their range is far to the north of the other species.
When the fossil record of pikas is contrasted with genetic data, a history of
recent range contraction and subsequent rapid expansion is suggested for
collared pikas. This is consistent with the idea that collared pikas entered
their northern habitat from refugia in the south, and not from
Russia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the research of a doctoral
degree candidate at the University of Alaska, Fairbanks. The study has
implications for understanding the persistence and evolution of lineages in
arctic and subarctic ecosystems. It will help determine the rate of faunal
turnover in northern regions, and distinguish between chance events and
recurrent evolutionary trends. This project also provides an important empirical
context for understanding the long-term effects of climate change on the
demographics of an iconic alpine mammal.