* 0808039
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Evaluation of the direct and indirect effects of predators on life history evolution in a Trinidadian killifish
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2010
* David Reznick, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 05/31/2010
* USD 11,965.00

The direct consumption of prey by predators has potent ecological and
evolutionary consequences. Yet, predators also have indirect effects. Predators
often decrease prey density which indirectly increases food availability to
surviving individuals. These ecological interactions could also influence
evolutionary change because theoretical frameworks suggest that resource
availability shapes the evolution of life histories (i.e. age at maturity,
number of offspring). This research investigates the potential link between the
indirect effects of predators and the evolution of prey in natural fish
populations on the island of Trinidad. Trinidadian killifish, Rivulus hartii are
located in communities that differ in the presence of competitors and predators.
Since large changes in population density and likely food are correlated with
the presence of additional fish species, evolution in Rivulus is likely
influenced by the direct and indirect effects of these interspecific
interactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will improve our understanding
for how evolution works in nature, particularly with respect to interactions
between evolutionary and ecological processes. The specific topic is life
history evolution, but the generalities of this research are more far-reaching.
This is because evolution in a natural setting will almost always involve the
direct effects of organisms as they interact, but also their indirect
consequences on the rest of the community, with resultant evolutionary change
ultimately determined by interactions between these direct and indirect effects.
This work also offers numerous opportunities for undergraduates to obtain
research experience.&lt;br/&gt;