* 0808511
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Diversity of xenobiotic genes may suggest local adaptation and bioremediation potential of microbial communities
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2010
* Juan Bouzat, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 02/28/2010
* USD 12,000.00

Bacteria have evolved a broad array of genes for the break-down and remediation
of environmental contaminants. Greater diversity of genes involved in the
metabolism of contaminants may facilitate a more complete remediation of these
toxic compounds from polluted environments. However, to date few studies have
thoroughly examined the diversity of these genes across contaminated ecosystems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is for a Doctoral Dissertation Improvement
Grant for the continued research education and training of Matthew Hoostal, a
graduate student at Bowling Green State University. In his studies,
environmental DNA techniques will be utilized to survey the diversity of various
organochlorine and mercurial remediation genes in polluted and unpolluted
sediments of Lake Erie. Lake Erie, with an east-west gradient of increasing
contaminants, provides an excellent system for testing the efficacy of
functional gene diversity indices as indicators of ecosystem function and
restoration. Diversity indices will be developed to test whether the targeted
remediation genes possess greater functional diversity in contaminated compared
to uncontaminated sediments. Indices of gene diversity may provide important
information for management agencies to implement appropriate remediation
strategies. This project underscores the value of environmental DNA techniques
to assess the potential for metabolic response through natural processes
generated by microbial communities. The implementation of these techniques would
help in the prioritization of polluted sites in need of ecological restoration.