* 0808480
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Transport, sorption, and degradation of Cry1Ab toxin derived from genetically engineered corn crop byproducts in agricultural streams
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2010
* Jennifer Tank, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 06/30/2010
* USD 11,499.00

Streams within agricultural landscapes receive genetically engineered corn
leaves containing distinct and traceable compounds (hereafter 'Cry1Ab') through
wind and surface runoff. Once in streams, Cry1Ab leaches from corn leaves; yet
the dispersal of this leached material and its influences on stream ecosystems
have not been determined. In terrestrial ecosystems, the fates of leached Cry1Ab
have been studied in detail and include sorption to soil particles and
degradation by soil microbes. Cry1Ab may behave similarly in streams; however,
effects may be more widespread because stream flow may transport the material
downstream. In this study, water samples collected along streams will be
analyzed for Cry1Ab to determine its spatial distribution in the environment. In
the laboratory, mesocosm experiments will determine the sorption capacity and
degradation of the Cry1Ab in aquatic environments. Genetically engineered crops
are being introduced at a rate that outpaces our scientific understanding of the
potential effects that this new technology may have on stream organisms and
habitats. Compared to terrestrial systems, we have a limited knowledge of how
genetically engineered corn affects aquatic ecosystems. Cry1Ab does enter
streams and may be transported downstream with unknown ecosystem consequences.
It is essential to consider the effects of such materials in aquatic ecosystems,
in order to fully understand the impacts that widespread planting of genetically
engineered crops will have on our surface waters and the organisms they contain.