* 0808278
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Landscape Patterns in the Biodegradability of DOC and DON Within and Among Arctic Hillslopes
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2008,04/30/2010
* Jacques Finlay, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 04/30/2010
* USD 11,524.00

Dissolved organic matter is an important source of energy and nutrients for
plants and microorganisms found in tundra soils and streams. As the arctic
climate warms, the fate of carbon currently stored in very cold or frozen soils
will be controlled by the balance of microbial mineralization (release of carbon
to the atmosphere) and plant productivity (storage of carbon in plants and
soils), both of which are influenced by the availability of dissolved organic
matter. Two major controls on dissolved organic matter transport are the ability
of microbes to decompose specific dissolved organic compounds
(biodegradability), and stabilization of dissolved organic matter by soil
particles. However, landscape patterns in biodegradability and stabilization of
dissolved organic matter have not been well studied in high-latitude watersheds.
Related dissertation research has focused on the stabilization of dissolved
organic matter by mineral soil components in arctic watersheds. The research
proposed in this project will examine spatial patterns of dissolved organic
matter biodegradability by characterizing the chemical composition of dissolved
organic matter (an important control on biodegradability), and determining rates
of microbial dissolved organic matter decomposition within and among hillslopes
in arctic Alaska. In addition to inclusion in publications, the results will be
disseminated through the Arctic Long Term Ecological Research database. This
study will increase our understanding of how carbon and nutrients move in the
tundra, especially in view of changes expected from regional climate warming.