* 0808878
* The 2008 Graduate Student Topology Conference, March 2008
* MPS,DMS
* 03/15/2008,02/28/2009
* Randy McCarthy, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Yongwu  J. Rong
* 02/28/2009
* USD 20,000.00

Building upon the success of the tri-annual MidWest topology seminars, graduate
students in Geometry and Topology from several MidWest institutions began an
annual Graduate Student Topology Conference. Now in its sixth year, the
University of Illinois will be hosting the conference in 2008. The plenary
speakers will be Mike Hopkins from Harvard and Yael Karshon from Toronto. In
addition, 27 talks by graduate students, run in parallel sessions, will be
delivered. The grant is primarily to provide travel assistance for participants
and speakers. The conference will run two days and provide ample opportunities
for informal discussions and new introductions to occur. Historically, these
conferences have provided an excellent opportunity for positive support and
fruitful collaborations to begin. The result has often been to increase
student's success rate both in school and during the critical transition soon
after finishing ones doctorate. Because of the traditionally high participation
rate among usually under represented demographics at these conferences combined
with the conferences effectiveness as an aid to students during a critical
transition period, partially supporting the approximately 160 participants is an
effective investment in the science.

The Graduate Student Topology Conference is a two-day event in which graduate
students from across the country meet to share their work, gain experience
presenting at conferences, and hear from some of the most distinguished geometry
and topology professors in the nation. Now in its sixth year, the conference
draws around 160 graduate students from across the United States. The University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign will be hosting the conference in 2008, with
grant funds primarily aimed at providing travel assistance for participants. The
conference consists of twenty-seven talks given by graduate students, in
addition to two plenary talks by visiting professors; this year the plenary
talks are given by Mike Hopkins from Harvard University and Yael Karshon from
the University of Toronto. Through its unique combination of research and
expository talks, the Graduate Student Topology Conference creates a supportive
environment to encourage future researchers and to allow them to make contacts
amongst one-another that can lead to future collaboration. Additionally, the
experience of presenting at a conference allows speakers to refine their
speaking skills and grow into more effective communicators. The conference also
encourages communication among different geographic regions. Participants come
from very diverse schools all across the country and include graduate students
at all years of study with a high participation rate among usually under
represented demographics.