* 0808631
* Nonlinear Geo metric Equations of Monge-Ampere Type and Canonical Metrics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/10/2007,06/30/2010
* Jian Song, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2010
* USD 82,332.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0604805&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Jian Song&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal concerns existence
and regularity problems of the&lt;br/&gt;nonlinear Monge-Ampere type equations
from geometry and physics.&lt;br/&gt;The problem of finding canonical metrics on
a compact Kahler&lt;br/&gt;manifold has been the subject of intense study over
the last few&lt;br/&gt;decades. In his solution to Calabi's conjecture, Yau
proved the&lt;br/&gt;existence of a Kahler-Einstein metric on compact Kahler
manifolds&lt;br/&gt;with vanishing or negative first Chern class. An
alternative&lt;br/&gt;proof of Calabi's conjecture is given by Cao using
the&lt;br/&gt;Kahler-Ricci flow. However, most projective algebraic
varieties&lt;br/&gt;do not have definite or trivial first Chern classes.
Recently&lt;br/&gt;Perelman has made major breakthrough in Hamilton's program as
an&lt;br/&gt;approach to the Poincare conjecture and Thurston's
geometrization&lt;br/&gt;conjecture. The principal investigator proposes to
study the&lt;br/&gt;canonical metrics on the canonical models of projective
varieties&lt;br/&gt;of positive Kodaira dimension by applying the Kahler-
Ricci&lt;br/&gt;flow. Such canonical metrics are constructed by the
deformation&lt;br/&gt;of the Kaher-Ricci flow on minimal projective surfaces
of&lt;br/&gt;positive Kodaira dimension. These generalized Kahler-
Einstein&lt;br/&gt;metrics can be considered as an analytic version of the
abundance&lt;br/&gt;conjecture in algebraic geometry and will also lead to
new&lt;br/&gt;advances in the understanding and application of the
Ricci&lt;br/&gt;flow. In Donaldson's far reaching program, the geometry of
the&lt;br/&gt;infinite dimensional symmetric space of Kahler metrics in a
fixed&lt;br/&gt;class is related to the existence and uniqueness of
constant&lt;br/&gt;scalar curvature Kahler metrics. The principal investigator
also&lt;br/&gt;intends to study the uniform approximation problem of
the&lt;br/&gt;Monge-Ampere geodesics in infinite dimensional symmetric space
by&lt;br/&gt;those in the finite dimensional Bergman spaces on
toric&lt;br/&gt;varieties. The precise understanding of this problem will
give&lt;br/&gt;new insight into the conjecture proposed by Yau between
the&lt;br/&gt;relation of constant scalar curvature Kahler metrics and
certain&lt;br/&gt;stability in the sense of geometric invariant theory.
The&lt;br/&gt;principal investigator will also apply the moment map point
of&lt;br/&gt;view and study various geometric flows arising from
Kahler&lt;br/&gt;geometry as well as symplectic geometry proposed
by&lt;br/&gt;Donaldson. The first is the J-flow, which is the gradient flow
of&lt;br/&gt;functional related to the Mabuchi energy. The second is a
moment&lt;br/&gt;map flow in a hyperkahler four manifold. The
principal&lt;br/&gt;investigator intends to study the question of convergence
and&lt;br/&gt;singularities os such parabolic flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since
the discovery of the general relativity, geometric analysis&lt;br/&gt;has become
crucial to both mathematicians and physicists.&lt;br/&gt;Problems in this
proposal arise naturally from our attempts to&lt;br/&gt;understand nonlinear
differential equations from geometry and&lt;br/&gt;physics. The solutions to
these problems will contribute to&lt;br/&gt;various fields of sciences such as
physics and cosmology in the&lt;br/&gt;deep understanding of our universe. The
method of analyzing the&lt;br/&gt;singularities of nonlinear equations will have
wide applications&lt;br/&gt;in engineering and economics.&lt;br/&gt;