* 0808659
* Algebraic and Geometric Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2008,05/31/2012
* James Davis, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2012
* USD 149,524.00

There are a web of conjectures about the surgery theoretic classification of
high-dimensional manifolds, culminating in the Farrell-Jones Conjectures in K-
and L-theory. The conjectures are closely related to splitting manifolds along
codimension one submanifolds. This splitting problem is in turn related to nil
groups in algebraic K- and L-theory. This project has several different aspects.
One is to solve the connected sum problem -- when is a manifold which is
homotopy equivalent to a connected sum itself a connected sum? Another is to
provide a strengthening of the Farrell- Jones Conjecture in L-theory, similar to
that achieved by Davis-Khan- Ranicki in K-theory. Yet another is to classify
involutions on a torus, using the computation of the L-theory of the infinite
dihedral group and the proof of the Farrell-Jones Conjecture in L-theory for
crystallographic groups, joint with Connolly. There are some middle and low
dimensions problems too, involving mapping tori of self- homotopy equivalences
of lens spaces and a certain aspect of link
concordance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal, as usual in geometric topology, is
to use a variety of algebraic, geometric, and analytic techniques to find and
compute invariants for classification. Geometric topology is the study of
manifolds. An n-dimensional manifold is a set of points locally modeled on
n-dimensional Euclidean space. For instance, a 2-manifold is a surface and looks
like a plane near each point. Many physical phenomenon are represented by
manifolds, and as such, understanding the global structure of a manifold, and
what possible manifolds exist, is fundamental to the sciences, as well as to
mathematics. Manifold theory connects with most areas of mathematics, as well as
with physical phenomena such as cosmology, string theory, and classical and
quantum mechanics.