* 0808273
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Is there niche partitioning among arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi?
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2010
* Brenda Casper, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 06/30/2010
* USD 11,897.00

Two-thirds of the known 250,000 vascular plant species live in mutualisms with
arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF) that grow in association with roots. AMF
acquire sugar from plants while increasing nutrient or water uptake or providing
protection from heavy metals found in some soils. Most individual plants support
more than one species of AMF. Although all AMF species were once thought to
provide similar functions, there is growing evidence that different AMF species
perform different functions and that the importance of any one species may be
conditional on soil environment and on the identity of co-occurring fungi. This
project will conduct experiments with plants, AMF, and soil from natural
serpentine grasslands to determine whether there are functional differences
among AMF species. The function of AMF will be measured by their effect on plant
growth and plant nutrient and metal content. This project will also develop and
test an innovative new approach to measuring AMF abundance, based on
fluorescent-labeled antibodies that can be created to label the species
uniquely. This technique could prove transformative to the study of plant and
AMF ecology in natural and agro-ecosystems. Serpentine grasslands are a globally
rare and threatened ecosystem with soils naturally high in toxic heavy metals.
Understanding the role AMF play in helping plants cope with heavy metals will be
helpful in the restoration of both serpentine sites and polluted soils. This
project will also support the research training of a doctoral student in plant
ecology.