* 0808605
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Harvest-induced changes in life history traits: insights from the brook trout (Salvelinus fontinalis)
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2012
* Priyanga Amarasekare, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 04/30/2012
* USD 12,000.00

Investigating the evolutionary response of natural populations to human
disturbance has important evolutionary implications, as well as
conservation/management significance. This research is motivated by an
intriguing pattern observed in brook trout (Salvelinus fontinalis) in southern
Quebec lakes. Individuals living in lakes where fishing is permitted mature
earlier and at smaller sizes than those from lakes without fishing. This
research attempts to explain this pattern. It uses a novel combination of
mathematical models, field surveys and DNA studies to test for harvest-induced
evolution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has practical applications for
fisheries management. The decision to harvest fish above a certain size, as well
as how many individuals to harvest, depends on whether the fishery can recover
to its original state. If changes in age/size at maturity caused by harvesting
are not genetic, then simply ceasing (or at least reducing) fishing is likely to
allow the population to recover. However, if changes have a genetic basis, then
a new approach to establishing fishing policies is needed. The researcher will
share his findings with policy stakeholders and will develop new, open-source
computational tools that fishery management professionals can use to develop
policies that mitigate the evolutionary effects of harvesting natural
populations.&lt;br/&gt;