* 0808047
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Phenotypic plasticity, sexual size dimorphism and Rensch's rule in freshwater turtles.
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2010
* Claudia Ceballos, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 05/31/2010
* USD 11,976.00

Body size influences animal fecundity, survival, and consequently, population
success, particularly in cold-blooded vertebrates such as turtles. Body size can
differ between sexes (sexual size dimorphism or SSD) and with latitude, but the
exact causes and consequences of such differences in vertebrates remain obscure.
This project will explore (1) broad-scale geographic and taxonomic patterns of
SSD in turtles and (2) environmental effects on the growth of two turtle species
exhibiting contrasting SSD (male-larger versus female-larger SSD) in North and
South America. It will advance our understanding of the importance of plastic
responses to environmental conditions (temperature, quality and quantity of food
availability) in shaping SSD patterns within and across species, and with
latitude. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project enhances ISU's international
dimension though the training of a Colombian PhD student, and through the
collaboration with a Venezuelan NGO (FUDECI). This project has implications for
the conservation headstart programs of endangered understudied turtles, and it
will build local research capacity. The continued participation of female
minority students from the Honors and the Program for Women in Science and
Engineering at ISU in this project helps integrating research and education, and
enhances the participation of underrepresented groups in science.