* 0808770
* III-CXT-Large: Collaborative Research: Interactive and intelligent searching of biological images by query and network navigation with learning capabilities
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Eamonn Keogh, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2012
* USD 1,125,109.00

A fundamental and hard question in biology is identification of organisms. This
proposal focuses on identification of nematodes, which are particularly
difficult to identify, with the average identification requiring significant
time and high level of expertise. Nematodes have direct and significant effect
on humans, other animals, and agriculture. Four species of nematode parasites
infect over 2 billion people worldwide, and one type of nematode causes one-
third of the total estimated worldwide annual yield losses to all soybean
pathogens. The current limiting factors for identification are the lack of tools
and automation, the need for image comparison off-line and a need for
significant expertise. To enable seasoned researchers as well as students to use
resources, the team will build on image searching work, using a set of images
that will make nematode identification a simple process of point and click. In
addition to enabling research by harnessing data and experience of experts, the
work may make biology more accessible. The team will build a computer-assisted
interactive navigator that will intelligently assist and learn from the user.
The work can be extended to many other biological data sets. The research
challenges include extraction of features and similarity functions, and the
mining, clustering, and anomaly detection for image and non-image data. Graduate
students are engaged in the research and outreach involving high school students
is also planned.