* 0808361
* Dissertation Research:  The Role of Anthropogenic Acidification in Stream Nitrogen Cycling: Understanding Stress Effects on Ecosystem Function
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2010
* Herbert Valett, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 06/30/2010
* USD 11,778.00

This research will investigate how stream acidification caused by acid rain
influences the biological removal of nitrogen from surface waters. Understanding
environmental controls on nitrogen uptake is essential as human activities
continue to increase stream concentrations of nitrogen pollutants. While stream
acidification is known to have negative effects on fish and invertebrate
communities, there is little understanding of acid effects on nitrogen cycling.
The investigators will study nine streams in Shenandoah National Park, VA, that
differ in chronic pH to infer how nitrogen uptake processes change with
acidification over time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers use a basic
concept of stress response - a shift in resource allocation away from growth and
towards maintenance - to guide investigations at both organismal and ecosystem
scales. Laboratory experiments are designed to measure biomass-specific rates of
nitrogen uptake, respiration, and enzyme activity by leaf biofilms from all
streams. Isotopic techniques will be used to measure the nitrogen demand of
streams in situ, and these rates will be combined with whole-stream rates of
respiration and microbial biomass in an effort to interpret ecosystem behavior
in the physiological context of stress response. Finally, the investigators will
use isotopic techniques in four streams along the pH gradient to measure
nitrogen demand under experimentally-increased levels of nitrogen concentration
to predict future stream uptake potential.&lt;br/&gt;