* 0808565
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:Integrating comparative phylogeography with ecological modeling to investigate Late Quaternary biogeography in four species of kangaroo rats (genus Dipodomys)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2010
* Brett Riddle, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 06/30/2010
* USD 11,516.00

This project addresses the role of climatic changes during the Pleistocene
glacial-interglacial cycles on the distribution and evolution of species in the
Great Basin of western North America. The investigator uses reconstructions of
climatic conditions of the last glacial maximum (approximately 21,000 years
before present) to reconstruct species distributions during this cold period and
contrasts them with modern distributions. She then formulates hypotheses about
the changes in distributional locations and sizes through time and tests these
hypotheses using genetic data. She applies this methodology to four species of
kangaroo rats (genus Dipodomys) distributed within the Great Basin of North
America and evaluates the response of each species to climatic changes over the
past 21,000 years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to effectively test
general theories on how Great Basin organisms responded to past climatic change.
Understanding the relationships between climatic changes, distributional
changes, and population structure can provide an important foundation for
conservation efforts. For example, regions where high genetic diversity has
accumulated may represent areas where species have persisted through past
episodes of climate change, and should therefore be prioritized as potential
protected areas as the Earth experiences future episodes of human-induced
climate change.