* 0808383
* "Dissertation Research: "Anaerobic ammonium oxidation:a new pathway for N2 losses from humid tropical forest soils?"
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2010
* Whendee Silver, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 05/31/2010
* USD 12,000.00

Denitrification to nitrous oxide (N2O) and dinitrogen (N2) is one of the most
poorly understood portions of the land-based nitrogen (N) cycle. This microbial
process can release N to the atmosphere as N2O, a potent greenhouse gas and a
catalyst for stratospheric ozone depletion, or N2, an inert gas. This
dissertation research focuses on understanding the controls on denitrification
to N2 and N2O in tropical forest soils, one of the largest natural sources of
N2O globally. In preliminary experiments, evidence of N2 production from
anaerobic ammonium oxidation (anammox) was detected, as was evidence of iron
reduction coupled to anaerobic ammonium oxidation and denitrification. The
presence of these new pathways is likely to change the general understanding of
ecosystem-scale N cycling. This research will determine the significance of
these new N2 production pathways in upland soils. This will be achieved with
laboratory experiments employing 15-N tracer methods similar to those
successfully used to show the importance of anammox in marine
environments.&lt;br/&gt; This project will include several science outreach
activities in the local community and on the UC-Berkeley campus. These include
active contributions to Techbridge Girls, a local program introducing girls to
careers in technology, science and engineering, and Community Resources for
Science, which helps elementary school teachers use scientific resources for
hands-on classroom activities. At UC-Berkeley, project personnel will
participate in the Undergraduate Graduate Mentorship Program. Research results
will be disseminated at national scientific conferences and incorporated into
Ecosystem Ecology lectures on N cycling at UC-Berkeley. &lt;br/&gt;