* 0808099
* Extragalactic Globular Clusters and Galaxy Formation
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2008,02/28/2013
* Jean Brodie, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 02/28/2013
* USD 332,514.00

AST-0808099 Brodie

Globular star clusters are powerful probes of the formation epochs, assembly
mechanisms, and subsequent evolution of galaxies. This is because of the
association of globular cluster formation with star-forming episodes in a
galaxy's history, and because globular clusters survive as largely unaltered
bright beacons, particularly in galaxy halos. Globular clusters are also simple
stellar populations, and thus more easily analyzed and understood. To exploit to
its fullest the unique ability of globular clusters to clarify outstanding
issues, including the distribution of dark matter and the star formation
histories of early-type galaxies, there must be a synergy between theoretical
models and observations, particularly at low redshift where galaxies may be
studied in suitable detail. This approach of galactic archaeology has recently
been gainfully applied in the Local Group, and it is timely to extend it to
distances of dozens of megaparsecs, and thus to a more representative cross-
section of the Universe. This project will focus on two key areas: 1) Galaxy
assembly and the role of dark matter, that is, how and when do the building
blocks of galaxies combine, and 2) Stellar populations, that is, how and when do
stars form within these building blocks? It involves an unprecedented systematic
survey of the fundamental properties of globular cluster systems, and how they
relate to their host galaxies, with a particular focus on early-type galaxies.
This is the first constructive integration of globular cluster and galaxy
research in a cosmological context.

This survey will couple innovative observations using a suite of the world?s
most powerful ground-based facilities with a team of world-leading researchers
spanning a wide range of sub-disciplines. The landmark dataset on the chemo-
dynamical properties of nearby galaxies will be scientifically fruitful for
years to come. In addition, partnership with a national, non-profit organization
called Science Buddies will greatly enhance the impacts of this work. The
current vigorous and successful program of professional and public outreach will
continue, with a proven record of successfully including women, undergraduates,
and minorities in forefront research.