* 0808177
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  EVOLUTION, ECOLOGY AND PERSISTENCE IN FRAGMENTED FORESTS: A TALE OF TWO MARTENS (MARTES AMERICANA)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2009
* Merav Ben-David, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 05/31/2009
* USD 11,750.00

Habitat fragmentation is a major concern of conservation biology because its two
primary components, habitat loss and the conversion of contiguous habitats into
smaller isolated patches, threaten biodiversity worldwide. Dispersal, the main
process connecting animal populations inhabiting isolated habitat patches, is
hard to quantify for small to medium-size, wide-ranging species. This project is
developing a novel, noninvasive method for quantifying dispersal rates of
American martens (Martes americana), an obligate forest carnivore. Because the
ratios of stable isotopes of hydrogen, carbon, and nitrogen of the diet are
incorporated into the tissues of consumers, martens that have consumed
isotopically enriched baits will have distinct isotopic label in their hairs. By
applying unique combinations of artificially enriched isotopic markers to
different forest stands, the isotopic signature of hair collected from hair
traps, will reflect the forest patch where the individual originated. In feeding
trials with five captive martens, consumption of one dose of isotopically
enriched baits elicited a distinct label in hair. Validation of the use of
isotopic labeling of martens in the field will allow the rigorous quantification
of dispersal rates for this and a variety of other species.

This project is part of a larger study evaluating the relation between
evolutionary history and responses of organisms to human-induced fragmentation.
Martens from the two distinct lineages (M. a. americana and M. a. caurina) are
habitat specialists and sensitive to forest fragmentation. During the
Pleistocene, the two marten lineages evolved in a contiguous southeastern forest
refugium (americana) and a glacially fragmented southwestern refugium (caurina).
Currently, these animals occur on separate islands in the Alexander and Queen
Charlotte (Haida-Gwaii) Archipelagos, which have varying levels of habitat
fragmentation from industrial logging. Because old-growth reserves in the
Tongass National Forest may not be large enough to maintain viable populations,
dispersal among forest stands is vital for persistence of martens. Thus, the
distribution of martens in the Tongass National Forest on fragmented and
unfragmented islands creates a natural laboratory to test whether caurina
martens have higher dispersal capabilities and are therefore better suited to
persist in modern-day fragmented landscapes than americana. In addition,
information gathered will be applied to the re-designing of the conservation
strategy of the Tongass Land Management Plan. An important question to be
addressed in the upcoming revision of the Forest Plan is whether different
conservation measures for martens should be implemented on different islands of
the Alexander Archipelago.