* 0808945
* Bionanocomposites through Protein-Mediated Assembly of Nanoparticles
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2008,01/31/2013
* Vincent Rotello, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 01/31/2013
* USD 422,000.00

With the support of the Organic Dynamics Program in the Chemistry Division,
Professor Vincent Rotello at the University of Massachusetts- Amherst will
develop robust and versatile strategies for the protein-mediated assembly of
nanoparticles in which the protein and the particle play equal roles in terms of
both assembly and materials properties. Previous studies on the self-assembly of
nanoparticles using proteins, produced structured aggregates that displayed
controlled optical and magnetic properties. This research will extend this study
focusing on both the self-assembly process and the properties of the assembled
materials. These properties are intermediate between bulk material and molecular
compounds and strongly depend on the particle size and the shape of the
nanoparticles. When assembled into organized ensembles, these materials gain
collective properties that are often quite different from the isolated
particles. This collective behavior is highly dependent on issues such as
interparticle spacing and nanocomposite morphology. Combining nanocomposite
behavior with the structural properties of proteins including size, shape, redox
state, and structural stability provides a means to control this ensemble
behavior. This collective modulation paves the way for pragmatic technological
applications such as biosensors, as well as more ambitious prospects such as
biocomposite devices and biological computing.

This research by Professor Rotello at the University of Massachusetts- Amherst
is highly multidisciplinary featuring tools and techniques from the fields of
chemistry, materials science, physics, and biology. One of the primary goals of
nanoscience research is the preparation of controlled assemblies of
nanoparticles, providing useful building blocks for devices such as biosensors,
switches and high-density magnetic storage arrays. The graduate and
undergraduate students working on this research will gain an integrated
understanding of these diverse methodologies, enhanced through weekly meetings
to discuss research. Further training as well as dissemination of research will
be provided by sending the students to National Meetings including the Materials
Research Society and the American Chemical Society. Finally, Professor Rotello
has developed a multimodal partnership with Professor Jos√© Rivera (U. Puerto
Rico, Rio Piedras) designed to enhance the development of minority researchers
at many levels. This partnership includes faculty mentoring by Professor Rotello
(with visits between UPR and UMass) and the regular exchange of graduate and
undergraduate students between our respective groups as a tool for broadening
their scientific and cultural education.