* 0808847
* Mathematical Foundations of Multiscale Graph Representations and Interactive Learning
* CSE,CCF
* 05/15/2008,07/31/2014
* Mauro Maggioni, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2014
* USD 791,095.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;The analysis of large high-dimensional data sets and graphs
is motivated by many important applications, such as the study of databases of
images and documents, and the modeling of complex dynamical systems (e.g.
transaction data, weather patterns, molecular dynamics). This research involves
the development of novel mathematical techniques for extracting and visualizing
information from large data sets. The data layout, visualization, and human
interaction are centered around multi-scale representations, which make it
possible to access the data, the derived information and the inference processes
associated with it at multiple levels of resolution. The human interaction
affects both the geometry and the inference processes on the data, depending on
the task at hand. The successful development of these techniques will have
substantial impact on any application data which lends itself to a graph
representation, such as citation networks, social networks, transaction data
correlations, and many aspects of biological systems like gene expression and
metabolic pathways. It will also reveal new and interesting multiscale geometric
structures of high-dimensional data sets and graphs, and lead to a better
understanding of how to extract information from them.&lt;br/&gt;This research
develops novel multiscale embedding techniques and algorithms for graphs and
data sets, based on diffusion processes on graphs. Such processes are used to
generate multiscale embeddings of a graph, at different scales, as well as to
perform learning tasks, with and without human interaction. These multiscale
embeddings have strong quantitative guarantees in terms of metric distortion. At
the same time, multiscale bases are constructed which have provable capabilities
of sparsely representing functions on the graph, making them very well suited
for both visualization and learning. We demonstrate the above on data sets
ranging from gene networks to document corpora.&lt;br/&gt;