* 0808562
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Learning through Eavesdropping: Field Experiments on Song Learning in Birds
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2008,05/31/2010
* Michael Beecher, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 05/31/2010
* USD 11,990.00

LEARNING THROUGH EAVESDROPPING: FIELD EXPERIMENTS ON SONG LEARNING IN
BIRDS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Eliot A. Brenowitz, P.I.&lt;br/&gt;DDIG: Proposal #:
IOS-0808562&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The complex and beautiful songs of birds have
always intrigued humans. For the Oscine passerines (songbirds), these songs are
even more interesting because they must be learned. Song learning in birds has
been extensively analyzed in the laboratory and has become a major model system
for studying the ecology, evolution, neurobiology, and genetics of learning in
animals. In addition, there are many parallels between the vocal learning of
birds and humans, including the importance of social factors, making bird song
one of the best models for studying human language learning. This research is an
experimental field study investigating the role of social factors in bird song
learning. Laboratory work of the last few years has suggested, surprisingly,
that a young bird is more influenced by singing interactions he eavesdrops on
than by direct interactions he has with adult song tutors. Recent fieldwork,
using radio telemetry to follow juvenile birds in the wild and observe their
interactions with adult tutors, also corroborates the importance of
eavesdropping on singing interactions. The present study will use radio and
heart rate telemetry to experimentally examine the behavioral and physiological
response of juvenile song sparrows to different types of simulated singing. This
research will investigate the importance of eavesdropping in song learning by
assessing the response of juvenile birds to playback of different types of adult
singing contests compared with solo adult singing. The results from these field
experiments will compliment previous and ongoing laboratory research in
elucidating the social factors that shape song development in this model vocal
learning system. In addition to its scientific impacts, this work will be of
considerable educational value, through dedicated training of undergraduates and
through formal educational experiences and countless informal interactions with
the general public at the field site (a busy urban park).