* 0808447
* Dissertation Research: The evolution of reproductive isolation across the genus Mimulus
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2008,08/31/2010
* James Sobel, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 08/31/2010
* USD 11,970.00

The stunning biodiversity found on Earth ultimately arose through the
fundamental process of speciation. While biologists have long been fascinated by
species origination, there are many important unanswered questions. Among these,
a central question to speciation research is what kinds of barriers most
commonly drive the process, and particular debate has surrounded the relative
importance of pre- versus postzygotic barriers. Prezygotic barriers are those
that limit hybrid formation, while postzygotic barriers involve reduced hybrid
fitness. The proposed study will examine the strength of multiple forms of
reproductive isolation in ten recently diverged species pairs in the genus
Mimulus (monkeyflowers). A variety of field, greenhouse, and laboratory methods
will be employed to examine prezygotic barriers including differences in
habitat, timing of reproduction, pollinators, and gametic compatibility.
Postzygotic barriers will be assessed by performing experimental hybridizations
in the laboratory and greenhouse. Additionally, patterns of current and
historical gene flow will be examined and compared to measures of current
isolation. This project will also serve to train undergraduates, including
individuals from underrepresented groups. In addition, the results of this study
will be used to enhance secondary school teaching in the local school
district.&lt;br/&gt;