* 0808148
* Modeling the Enceladus Plumes:  Source Mechanisms and the Possibility of Liquid Water
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Andrew Ingersoll, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas S. Statler
* 07/31/2011
* USD 407,552.00

AST-0808148&lt;br/&gt;Ingersoll&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a
comprehensive numerical model of the formation and dynamical evolution of the
Enceladus water vapor and ice particle plumes (EPs). Since the nature of the
reservoir that produces EPs is hotly debated, including eruptions from chambers
of liquid water, sublimation and venting of hydrate clathrate, and vapor
diffusion through ice pores, the model proposed here will simulate different
origins and allow comparison to available observations. The model describes the
dynamics of compressible gas and of boiling liquids expanding through narrow
channels, particle growth in the expanding vapor, condensation and sublimation
on the walls, heat transfer and vapor diffusion in the surrounding ice, and
feedback between these different elements. This work will advance our knowledge
of the subsurface structure of Enceladus and of processes occurring on icy moons
elsewhere in the solar system, producing the first complete model of the EP
dynamics and thermodynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The search for liquid water
has broad societal impact by capturing the imagination of the public and of
young people who might be considering scientific careers. Enceladus is a
potentially important island of habitability: this project tests the hypothesis
that liquid water exists below the surface and at what depth it might exist, and
whether there is a source of chemical energy to support life.