* 0808860
* Visually-Motivated Characterizations of Point Sets Embedded in High-Dimensional Geometric Spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2014
* Leland Wilkinson, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 06/30/2014
* USD 660,381.00

The proposed research exploits an idea of John Tukey that was never published.
Called scagnostics (a Tukey neologism for "scatterplot diagnostics"), the
original idea leads to a more general characterization of high-dimensional point
sets using visually-based geometric and graph-theoretic measures. These measures
comprise a canonical set of 9 features of pointwise data typically observed by
experienced statisticians. Computing these measures on all possible 2D axis-
parallel orthogonal projections in a p-dimensional space results in a p(p- 1)/2
× 9 matrix of measures. The objective of the proposed research is to generalize
scagnostics to a new approach called Visual-Model-Based Transformations (VMBT).
Visually-based transforms, together with multivariate analyses, can reveal
visual patterns that are of interest to analysts. When interesting patterns are
discovered in transform-space, one can invert the map and infer patterns in the
raw data space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scagnostics exploits an important aspect of
visualizations. A visualization can be thought of as a visual representation of
an underlying mathematical model. Even simple charts of raw data rest on a model
that helps (one hopes) to reveal some interesting aspect of the data. We often
take these models for granted when we view familiar graphs. However,
understanding mathematical models underlying visualizations can help us to
devise more effective models for revealing structure in more complex datasets.
Visual-Model-Based Transformations are a class of models that may prove
especially effective for this purpose. Such models are motivated by visual
structures perceived and processed by analysts. Given this visual motivation
behind their design, visual models are likely to reveal features of data that
are quite different from those appearing in common statistical and scientific
graphics.