* 0808294
* Dissertation Research: Systematics and Biogeography of the Neotropical Genus Psiguria (Cucurbitaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2010
* Pamela Steele, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 06/30/2010
* USD 12,000.00

Psiguria is a genus of Neotropical vines in the cucumber family with a
distribution between Central and South America, including two species endemic to
the geologically complex Caribbean islands. These islands have strikingly high
levels of biotic diversity, but studies on the classification, evolution, and
geographic history of the biota are seriously deficient in those focusing on
plants. Psiguria has a mutualistic association with its pollinators, Heliconius
butterflies, making it a model system for investigating co-evolution. An
evolutionary history of the butterflies has been proposed, but is lacking for
the plants. This study will provide a phylogeny for Psiguria and then test
hypotheses of co-evolution. This study will provide a basis for resolving
biogeographic history and a phylogenetic framework for ecologists and
evolutionary biologists to address important questions about plant-insect
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results will provide important scientific
contributions beyond the systematics of Psiguria. The phylogenetic framework
will provide a basis for ecologists and evolutionary biologists to ask questions
about the multitude of associated organisms in the biological network including
interactions with insect species in agricultural pest families. Knowledge gained
from studying these interactions will add to our understanding of the related
negative insect interactions with agriculturally important members of the
cucumber family. Training of undergraduate students and interaction with a K-12
education program will expose students to research on evolution and conservation
in tropical America. &lt;br/&gt;