* 0808323
* Dissertation Research: The Effect of Seaweed Subsidy on an Ant-plant Mutualism
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2010
* Thomas Schoener, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 06/30/2010
* USD 11,470.00

There is evidence that large storms, such as hurricanes, are becoming more
frequent due to global climate change. One consequence of increased storm
activity is that more material from the ocean ends up on land, for example,
seaweed deposited onto beaches. This transfer of biomass represents a flow of
resources from the marine to the terrestrial ecosystem. Understanding the
ecological responses to this flux of marine resources can help predict how
increasing hurricane frequencies will affect coastal ecosystems. This research
project investigates how seaweed, which is deposited on land in large amounts by
storms, influences an ecologically important interaction between ants and trees
on islands. In this mutually beneficial interaction the trees provide food in
the form of nectar for the ants, and in return the ants protect the trees from
attack. Without their ant guards, trees are eaten by a variety of other insects,
with potentially devastating consequences. Ants will be excluded from trees on
islands with seaweed added or removed to determine how marine resources
influence the positive effect of ants on plants. The investigators will include
a diverse group of undergraduate students in this research and have a strong
record of working with both male and female undergraduates representing a
variety of ethnic backgrounds. This project will also support the research of a
doctoral student in community ecology.