* 0808789
* Effects of and Recovery from a Major Regional Disturbance in an Arctic Landscape, the Anaktuvuk River Fire of 2007
* GEO,OPP
* 01/15/2008,12/31/2008
* Gaius Shaver, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 12/31/2008
* USD 80,000.00

This is an investigation of the initial impacts and recovery of the landscape
affected by the Anaktuvuk River fire that occurred on the North Slope of Alaska
in July-September 2007. The PIs will begin documenting recovery of the landscape
including terrestrial and aquatic components. The "Anaktuvuk River" fire burned
over 350 square miles (&gt;90,000 ha) of North Slope tundra between late July
and late September, with most of the burning at the end of September when air
temperatures were near or below freezing and most plant growth had ceased. This
would be a very large fire in any year, and it was the largest in Alaska in
2007, but this fire was on the tundra where small fires occasionally burn but
large ones are quite rare. The fire was large enough that it appears to include
several complete 1st-3rd order watersheds. The area burned in this one fire was
greater than the total area burned by all known fires on the North Slope since
1950. Most of this land is in the foothills region, including diverse tundra
vegetation, streams, lakes, and wetlands at elevations of 200-600 m. This team
will begin immediate planning for a survey and sampling program to begin in
April or early May 2008 to continue through the following summer. Products of
the research will include a unique data set on distribution, intensity, and
patchiness of the burn, with documentation of initial impacts on element cycles
and terrestrial and aquatic communities. Where possible with available
instrumentation, impacts on surface energy balance and CO2 exchange will also be
documented.