* 0808910
* Theoretical Development of Nonlinear Surface-Selective Spectroscopies of Hydrogen-Bonded Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2008,04/30/2012
* Vladimir Chernyak, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 04/30/2012
* USD 410,000.00

Vladimir Chernyak of Wayne State University is supported by an award from the
Theoretical and Computational Chemistry program for research to develop methods
to characterize surface-selective spectroscopic information, particularly for
hydrogen-bonded systems. The work is specifically focused on the development of
models for ultrafast dynamics of these systems and includes: (i) the development
and validation of time-resolved, even-order nonlinear spectroscopic techniques
capable of background-free detection of the surface signal; (ii) development of
efficient signal processing algorithms; and (iii) development of reduced-
dimensionality classical and semi-classical stochastic models for ultrafast
dynamics including quantum effects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydrogen bonding is
one of the fundamental non-covalent interactions that occur in chemistry and
biology and is responsible for many unique properties of molecular assemblies.
Understanding the general dynamical features of complex hydrogen-bonded systems
will help us understand biomolecular systems in general and will also aid in
developing new technological applications that rest on an improved understanding
of this important chemical interaction. The theoretical approaches and methods
for processing experimental data that are being developed in this work are
critical for interpreting experiments but may also be extended to other types of
studies such as single-molecule spectroscopy, optical fiber communications and
light and energy conversion in a variety of technological applications. Chernyak
is involving under-represented minority high school students in his research
group through a "High School Student Apprentice Program" run by the Detroit
Public School System. The work is, thus, having a broader impact both on the
development of new technology and on the training of a diverse scientific
workforce.