* 0808107
* PREPARES: Partnering Researchers and Educators to create Problem-based curricula that Adapt Research in Engineering for Students
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2012
* Ruben Carbonell, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 04/30/2012
* USD 504,071.00

This award provides funding for a 3 year continuing award to support a Research
Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering Site program at North Carolina
State University entitled, "PREPARES: Partnering Researchers and Educators to
create Problem-based curricula that Adapt Research in Engineering for Students,"
under the direction of Drs. Ruben Carbonell and Valerie Brown-Schild.

The Kenan Fellows Program for Curriculum and Leadership Development (KFP), will
partner with North Carolina's New Schools Project (NCNSP) and HBCU Elizabeth
City State University to expand the current, successful RET funded model to four
of North Carolina's most economically disadvantaged school districts. Each
summer for two consecutive years, four pairs of teachers (Fellows) paired with
faculty mentors, from four of 10 high-need "STEM High Schools" being redesigned
by NCNSP will particpate in a seven-week summer institute. The summer program
will include participation in a research project, professional development and
curriculum/instructional program design. The collaboration will continue during
the academic year through the development and piloting of materials and
participation in KFP activities.

During year three of the program the Fellows and Mentors will provide
professional development to at least 40 additional STEM teachers from the NSNSP
STEM High Schools, distribute high quality instructional materials that
translate engineering research into high school curricula, and further extend
project benefits through their exemplary leadership and mentorship. This project
will impact a total of 64 STEM high school teachers.