* 0808435
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The effects of drift and gene flow on adaptive potential in a structured plant population
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2008,04/30/2010
* Alice Winn, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 04/30/2010
* USD 11,968.00

Theory suggests that a population that is organized into spatially separated
groups will respond to environmental change differently than a single spatially
uniform population of the same size. This theory has not been tested in natural
populations because of the technical difficulty of measuring the processes that
are invoked to account for the difference between spatially subdivided and
uniform populations. The proposed work takes advantage of a novel combination of
approaches to measure the roles of chance loss of genetic diversity on the
ability of small populations to adapt to environmental change, and the potential
for the movement of individuals among small populations to ameliorate this
effect. The research will examine patterns of adaptive potential in spatially
separated groups of a plant population, and patterns of movement among groups
using field experiments and the analysis of molecular marker
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focal species for this project, Hypericum
cumulicola, is a federally listed endangered plant, and the results of the
proposed work will contribute to understanding the requirements for its long-
term persistence. More generally, the findings from the research will be
applicable to numerous populations that have become spatially subdivided by
human activities and face inevitable environmental change.&lt;br/&gt;