* 0808842
* Competing Orders in Frustrated Magnets and Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2013
* Oleg Starykh, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 04/30/2013
* USD 210,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research
to investigate competition between different ordering tendencies in low-
dimensional strongly correlated electron systems such as frustrated quantum
magnets and fabricated and self-assembled nanostructures. Both of these areas
are at the forefront of modern condensed matter physics. The research has 3
objectives:&lt;br/&gt;1.) Develop a consistent theoretical description of spin
excitations in spatially anisotropic quantum antiferromagnets. This description
will include both fractionalized high-energy spinons of one-dimensional chains
as well as low-energy magnons of the weakly ordered ground state. Particular
attention will be paid to a kinematic binding mechanism when a composite spin-1
pair, formed by two spin-1/2 spinons, lowers the energy via delocalization along
the direction transverse to the chains. Effects of symmetry-lowering
Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction, thermal fluctuations, and external magnetic
field will be included. The PI also aims to investigate the singlet sector of
multi-spinon continuum which can be probed by resonant inelastic x-ray
scattering, phonon-assisted optical absorption, and Raman
scattering.&lt;br/&gt;2.) Determine the phase diagram of two families of
spatially anisotropic triangular antiferromagnets. Both systems exhibit strong
competition between collinear spin fluctuations, dimer ordering tendencies and
classical spiral instability, but differ in the role that phonons play.
Anisotropic response of this material to the applied magnetic field will be
analyzed, and experimental properties of the field-induced ordered phases will
be calculated by a combination of the renormalization group, chain mean-field
theories and interacting spin waves and large-N Schwinger boson techniques. In
addition, a careful analysis of symmetry lowering anisotropic Dzyaloshinskii-
Moriya interaction in the quasi-one-dimensional geometry will be carried
out.&lt;br/&gt;3.) Analyze spin-orbit induced instabilities of low-dimensional
interacting electrons subject to significant structure inversion asymmetry as
appropriate for various electrostatically confined and/or surface
nanostructures. I will investigate the limit of strongly correlated electron
Wigner crystal where spin-orbit effects are bound to dominate over exponentially
weak exchange interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate students involved in
the project will be trained in modern theoretical techniques such as
bosonization, renormalization group, quantum field and many-body theories. The
project will involve summer research opportunity for undergraduate students.
Qualitative discussion of the research on the general physics level will be
given during regular undergraduate physics seminars at the University of Utah.
In addition, a web site with a graduate student level description of the
outlined research topics and their interconnections will be developed in order
to communicate results to a broader audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education at a frontier of condensed matter physics. The research is focused on
understanding unusual magnetic properties revealed by experiments on recently
discovered materials, for example herbertsmithite and
volborthite.&lt;br/&gt;These materials have the necessary ingredients to become
magnets, but do not exhibit magnetism. On the scale of atoms, there is a
competition between the interactions that would favor aligning the fundamental
building blocks of magnetism and the geometrical arrangements of the atoms. This
frustrates the tendency to magnetic order. Experiments continue to deliver more
examples, enabling the test of theoretical ideas that new states of matter will
arise from failed magnetism. The discovery of new states of matter opens the
door to new materials with desirable properties and new materials-related
phenomena that may form the basis for future technologies or may solve existing
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will lay the foundations for
understanding these materials and for future experiments that will better
understand the unusual properties of these frustrated magnets.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate students involved in the project will be trained
in modern theoretical techniques of condensed matter physics. The project will
involve summer research opportunity for undergraduate students. Qualitative
discussion of the research on the general physics level will be given during
regular undergraduate physics seminars at the University of Utah. In addition, a
web site with a graduate student level description of the outlined research
topics and their interconnections will be developed in order to communicate
results to a broader audience.&lt;br/&gt;