* 0808297
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:Effects of vector population structure on immune function and pathogen susceptibility
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2010
* Peter Armbruster, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 06/30/2010
* USD 7,129.00

Reduced genetic diversity has been shown to decrease immune function in several
species. This study will test the hypothesis that reduced genetic diversity
leads to decreased immune function and increased potential for disease
transmission in the Asian tiger mosquito, a species that is a significant vector
of human pathogens. In order to test this prediction, a standard immune function
test and experimental infections with pathogens will be conducted for non-inbred
mosquitoes, and for mosquitoes that have been inbred in order to reduce genetic
diversity. The prediction is that immune function will be lower and pathogen
susceptibility will be higher for inbred as compared to control mosquitoes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mosquito-vectored diseases, including malaria, yellow
fever, and dengue fever, represent some of the most significant public health
challenges facing modern society. Although it is well established that local
populations of mosquitoes can vary extensively in their ability to transmit such
diseases, the underlying causes of this variation are not well understood. By
investigating the relationship between genetic diversity, immune response and
pathogen susceptibility, this study will have important implications for
understanding vector-pathogen interactions and factors affecting the
transmission of vector-borne disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;