* 0808577
* Dissertation Research: Interacting Impacts of Multiple Pathogens on Population Dynamics of an Endangered Amphibian
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Daniel Doak, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 06/30/2011
* USD 12,000.00

Emerging infectious diseases threaten numerous wildlife populations, many of
which are already experiencing declines. Precipitous declines of amphibians are
of broad concern, and several diseases have been implicated in wholesale
extinction events. However, diseases rarely act alone. Rather, multiple diseases
and other factors such as habitat loss or invasive predators can impact a
population in concert, magnifying effects on host populations. This research
will investigate the effects of multiple emerging pathogens on the California
red-legged frog, in Central Coastal California. The impacts of three pathogens
will be measured separately and in combination to understand if the pathogens
have synergistic impacts on the host population. This work will also examine how
two other amphibian species that co-occur with California red-legged frogs may
act to maintain the diseases in the region. This project will help to develop
models and techniques that can be used generally to approach these complex
ecological questions, with the goal of establishing more effective and timely
interventions for at-risk species threatened by emerging diseases. Further, this
project offers many opportunities for educational outreach; investigators will
partner with several local science outreach programs to reach a diversity of
audiences. Undergraduate and high school students also will be involved in the
field and lab activities. This project will support the thesis research of a
doctoral student.&lt;br/&gt;