* 0808590
* Dissertation Research: The influence of rainfall pulses and disturbance on the invasion of coastal sage scrub
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2010
* Diane Pataki, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 05/31/2010
* USD 12,000.00

Climate change models predict that, in mid-latitude regions, rainfall event size
will increase and storm frequency will decrease. These changes may strongly
influence whether exotic species can invade native habitats, particularly in
systems that are simultaneously impacted by disturbance. In semi-arid coastal
sage scrub (CSS), exotic annual grasses threaten the highly diverse native
community. In addition, fire disturbance is increasing in frequency. The
proposed research will test the prediction that larger, less frequent, rainfall
events increase the relative competitive ability of the native shrubs after
fire, slowing the conversion of CSS to annual exotic grassland. These larger,
less frequent events should favor species like the shrubs with deeper roots and
greater tolerance to dry periods. To test these predictions, rainfall
distribution will be manipulated (increasing event size and decreasing
frequency) in burned and unburned CSS. Subplots planted with CSS, grasses, or a
competitive mixture will be used to evaluate species' relative performance under
the rainfall manipulations. Greenhouse measurements of species' soil moisture
requirements will supplement field experiments to provide a strong test of
ecological theory and a base for predictions of community response to multiple
global change factors. The results will be used to inform conservation and
restoration decisions in CSS and other systems subjected to increased invasion
pressure, altered disturbance regimes, and changed precipitation patterns. In
addition to influencing natural area management, the project will train
undergraduate students though independent research and promote community
awareness through meetings, presentations, and publications.