* 0808474
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Molecular and metabolic dissection of the symbiosis between a native prairie grass and its fungal root endophyte
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2010
* Ari Jumpponen, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 05/31/2010
* USD 11,057.00

Plants host a range of microbes that live inside their cells. The beneficial
mycorrhizal fungi may be the best known example of such microbes: over 80% of
all land plants host these fungi in their roots. The mycorrhizal fungi often
improve plant growth, nutrient uptake, water use efficiency, and resistance
against pathogens. Therefore they have a great potential in crop management.
Recent research suggests that, in addition to the mycorrhizal fungi, another
group of fungi, the endophytes, may be equally abundant. Preliminary results
indicate that these endophytes range from detrimental plant pathogens to
mutualists that significantly improve plant growth and performance. While the
improved plant growth is important and interesting, it may be even more
important to understand why some endophytic fungi so greatly improve the plant
growth while others do not. This reasearch employs modern molecular tools such
as large-scale microarray and metabolite analyses to improve our understanding
of why a native tallgrass prairie grass (Andropogon gerardii) responds
positively to colonization by these endophytic fungi. Hypotheses related to
improved water use efficiency, greater photosynthetic activity and improved
nutrient uptake/transfer will be tested. The results of this research program
will expand our understanding of the mechanisms behind the host-microbe
interactions and will assist in the search for biological crop management tools.
In addition to graduate student training, classroom exercises that empirically
test the variability among individual endophytes or the underlying mechanisms of
the plant responses will be incorporated to provide novel undergraduate learning
experiences.