* 0808979
* US-India Workshop:  Frontiers in Scalable Nanostructured Interface Materials, Bangalore, November 2008
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2008,05/31/2012
* Timothy Fisher, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 05/31/2012
* USD 58,901.00

0808979&lt;br/&gt;Fisher &lt;br/&gt;This award provides support for two US-India
workshops on Frontiers in Scalable Nanostructured Interface Materials. The first
will take place at the Jawaharlal Nehru Center for Advanced Scientific Research
in November 2008 and will be followed by a second to be held at Purdue in late
2009. US PI Timothy Fisher, Director of the Birck Nanotechnology Center will
convene the workshops with C.N.R. Rao, Honorary President of the Jawaharlal
Nehru Center for Advanced Scientific Research, Bangalore.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshops will bring together leading scientists from
both countries to discuss developing applications that build on a large body of
solid fundamental work on nanoscale interfaces and that are expected to create
opportunities for dramatic improvements in a wide range of technologies from
electronics to structural composites. Interfacial transport across and through
nanostructures represents the major remaining barrier to broader applications.
The workshops'primary purpose is to identify the most promising applications and
the associated remaining obstacles to practical realization. Enhancing
opportunities for collaboration between the U.S. and India is both important and
timely considering the scale of national investments and opportunity to leverage
unique intellectual and material resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These
workshops will be catalytic in promoting international collaboration as well as
developing future research directions in the subject area. It is expected that
collaborative proposals will be developed that are suitable for submission to
the Materials World Network, Partnerships for International Research and
Education, and Cyber-enabled Discovery and Innovation. The select group of U.S.
participants is well balanced among established technical experts, highly
accomplished junior faculty, and exceptional students including underrepresented
minorities. The Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and
Transport Systems is co-funding this activity.