* 0808579
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Cognitive constraints on adaptation: Chick recognition as host defense against conspecific brood parasitism
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2008,05/31/2010
* Bruce Lyon, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 05/31/2010
* USD 12,000.00

Bruce Lyon (PI) and Daizaburo Shizuka&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
#:IOS-0808579&lt;br/&gt;Cognitive constraints on adaptation: chick recognition
as host defense against conspecific brood parasites&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Parents
typically preferentially care for their own offspring over the offspring of
others when they can tell them apart. Some birds, that are commonly called brood
parasites, exploit parental care by laying their eggs in the nests of others. An
outstanding question is why victims of this type of reproductive parasitism
provide care for the offspring of other individuals or even of other species,
particularly when the offspring vary dramatically from their own. This
recognition failure is especially surprising considering that hosts of brood
parasites have often evolved the ability to recognize and reject brood parasite
eggs that look much like their own. In this study, Shizuka and Lyon develop a
theoretical model to show how a constraint in the general process of learning to
recognize offspring may explain why brood parasitic offspring are accepted in
some species, but not others. The experimental portion of the study will then
address whether this model can apply to American coots (Fulica americana), a
waterbird. Female coots lay eggs in each other's nests, and many of these
parasitic eggs hatch along with the host's eggs. Preliminary data suggests that
some parent coots recognize parasitic chicks and treat them differently from
their own. The experiments will determine (a) whether coots can recognize and
discriminate between host and foreign chicks, (b) what general type of learning
mechanism is used to develop recognition, and (c) whether chick vocalizations
are the cues used in recognition. By integrating a theoretical model with
experimental manipulations of cognition, this study will contribute to a greater
understanding of how the mechanisms organisms use to solve ecological problems
can constrain adaptive evolution. The project will train undergraduate students
in field research and molecular methods, and the findings will be incorporated
into an Ecology Talk program for local K-12 students.