* 0808607
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The role of selection, gene flow, and range limits in determining adaptive phenotypes
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2010
* Kevin Rice, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 05/31/2010
* USD 11,975.00

Species range limits can be areas of high or low adaptive diversity depending on
genetic variation, the strength of natural selection, and the amount and nature
of gene flow from nearby populations. In this study, field experiments are used
to understand the role of gene flow and selection in the adaptive diversity of
Mimulus laciniatus, a Sierra Nevada annual plant with a restricted, well-defined
geographic range. Preliminary data reveal climate adaptations at low- and high-
elevation range limits. Experiments to determine the nature of selection along
these range limits are ongoing while experimental matings will provide an
understanding of the role of gene flow, from both far and nearby populations, on
adaptive potential at range edges. Finally, genetic markers (microsatellites)
are being used to estimate gene flow and population sizes across the species
range.

In addition to providing basic insights about evolution at range limits, this
research will inform species management and conservation efforts at a time when
climate change is resulting in increasingly warmer habitats. Mountain systems
host an impressive diversity of plant species. Developing an understanding of
how genetic diversity, gene flow, and climate adaptation interact may contribute
to strategies aimed more broadly at conserving these unique floras.
Additionally, this project continues to support undergraduates, including many
members of underrepresented groups in science; students participate as research
assistants and often develop their own independent research projects.



