* 0808983
* Development of Pummerer-Based Oxidative Cyclization Chemistry for Natural Products Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Ken Feldman, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2012
* USD 405,000.00

Spirocycles formed from formal oxidative cyclization onto indole or imidazole
cores comprise a diverse family of naturally occurring alkaloids that exhibit a
wide range of promising biological properties, including anticancer and
antibiotic activity. Consequently, total synthesis studies may impact on these
larger health concerns by providing the natural products in macroscopic
quantities along with structural analogues for lead development as
pharmaceutical agents. In this continuing project, the application of a new
approach to these stereochemically challenging types of targets will be
explored. This chemistry stems from recent advances in Pummerer oxidation
chemistry developed during the former grant period. Targets include
dibromoagelaspongin, palau'amine, and the
axinellamines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award through the Organic and
Macromolecular Chemistry Program of the National Science Foundation supports the
research of Professor Ken Feldman in the Department of Chemistry at the
Pennsylvania State University. Professor Feldman's research efforts focus on the
development of new strategies and new chemical reactions for the efficient
construction of complex, biologically active natural products. Successful
prosecution of these research objectives may lead to new drug leads, which in
turn will impact favorably on the pharmaceutical enterprise in the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;