* 0808572
* Enhancing the Quality of NSF Proposals from Accredited Engineering and Computer Science Programs of Minority Serving Colleges and Universities
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2008,12/31/2008
* Patrick Carriere, Southern University
* Standard Grant
* Russell L. Pimmel
* 12/31/2008
* USD 205,673.00

Engineering - Other (59)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is providing support
for two grant writing workshops for faculty members from accredited engineering
and computer science programs at minority serving colleges and universities
(MSIs). The goal of the workshops is to enhance the quality of NSF proposals,
primarily proposals for education development efforts, submitted by these
institutions. The workshops, through structured and informal interactions with
NSF program directors, addresses proposal writing strategies and approaches for
dealing with broader impacts and project evaluation. These efforts are intended
to increase the number of proposal submitted by these institutions, the number
of collaborative proposals among the participating institutions, and the success
rate of the submitted proposals. Participation in the workshops also is expected
to increase the number of faculty members from these institutions in the NSF
review process. After the workshops, the participants are sharing their
knowledge and insights on proposal writing with colleagues on their campuses in
order to widen the impact. Evaluation efforts, led by an expert from the
planning and assessment office at the PI's institution, are using post-workshop
attitude surveys and a later follow-up survey on proposal submission and success
rates to determine the effectiveness of the workshops.