* 0808861
* SGER: Developing a Chronology for Neoglaciation in Glacier National Park, Montana
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2008,01/31/2009
* Jeffrey Munroe, Middlebury College
* Standard Grant
* Ezekiel Kalipeni
* 01/31/2009
* USD 7,000.00

The glaciers of Glacier National Park are retreating rapidly and may disappear
entirely within the next few decades. This situation has galvanized public
attention, because glacier retreat provides an iconic manifestation of global
climate change, because it is intuitive that glacier retreat is a response to
rising temperatures, and because national parks are revered as places where
geoecosystems are considered protected in their natural state. Relatively little
is known about the history of glaciers in Glacier National Park between the end
of the Ice Age (roughly 20,000 years ago) and the Little Ice Age, which ended
about AD 1860. more specifically, little is known about when the park's glaciers
formed and how they fluctuated before the historic period. To rectify this
shortcoming, the U.S. Geological Survey provided logistical support in the
summer of 2007 for the retrieval of sediment cores from a lake below Agassiz
Glacier, a large glacier in the northwestern corner of the park. This Small
Grant for Exploratory Research will provide support to measure sedimentary
properties in lake cores already extracted from an important site in Glacier
National Park. The cores will be analyzed for organic matter, biogenic silica,
mineral phosphorous content, and grain-size distribution. Color
spectrophotometry will be applied to assist in identifying changes in core
sedimentology. Terrestrial organic fragments suitable for AMS 14C dating will be
removed and stored for future analysis. In addition, samples from the uppermost
few decimeters of the two surface cores will be submitted for 210Pb dating to
develop a chronology for sedimentation during the past 200 years or so. Overall
this multi-proxy approach involving multiple lab methods and geochronologic
tools will allow development of a detailed Holocene history of the Agassiz
Glacier.

This project will use known relationships between sediment deposition and
glacier behavior, plus refined dating techniques, to develop a detailed
chronology for Holocene glaciation in Glacier National Park. The disappearance
of glaciers in that national park has drawn much popular attention in debates
about climate change, even though no studies have dated past shifts in glacial
ice to put the recent melting into perspective. The organic matter and biogenic
silica content of the sediment should vary inversely to glacier extent because
colder, more turbid water would decrease productivity in the lake. In contrast,
mineral phosphorous should be directly proportional to glacier extent because a
larger glacier would generate more silt containing phosphorous. Grain-size
analysis will be used to quantify the abundance of rock flour in the sediment as
a proxy for glacier presence/absence, and for glacier extent. The resulting
improved understanding of Holocene glacial fluctuations will also aid efforts to
reconstruct climate variability in this region over millennial, centennial, and
decadal timescales. This project also will provide ecological and management
information for the national park because glaciers are crucial components of the
ecosystem, providing reliable sources of water to streams and wetlands during
periods of drought, and driving disturbance and succession patterns through
their advance and retreat.

