* 0808596
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Patterns and Mechanisms of Spatial Population Synchrony for Snowshoe Hares
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2010
* L. Scott Mills, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 06/30/2010
* USD 11,985.00

Snowshoe hare populations show regular dramatic 20 to 50-fold changes in numbers
over a ten-year span in most of Alaska and Canada. These changes occur at
approximately the same time across the continent. In the contiguous U.S.,
however, fluctuations in hare numbers appear to be disconnected among
geographically distant populations. This study will analyze data about snowshoe
hare numbers from across the range to validate or refute the long-held belief
that northern (Canada and Alaska) and southern (northern contiguous U.S.) hare
populations have different population dynamics. The researchers will use
statistical methods designed to identify regional clusters of synchrony for
snowshoe hares. This information will be combined with genetic analysis and
computer models to evaluate the relative importance of three major factors
proposed to influence regional hare dynamics and synchrony: habitat
fragmentation, specialist hare predators such as Canada lynx, and regional
climate patterns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Snowshoe hares are important prey for the
federally threatened Canada lynx and many other forest carnivores in North
America. Understanding the factors that cause hare numbers concurrently to
increase or decrease across large areas is necessary for managing snowshoe hares
and their many predators. In addition to informing current conservation, this
study will provide insight into how this ecologically important species may be
impacted by future habitat loss, increases or declines in predator numbers, and
climate change. &lt;br/&gt;