* 0808582
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Fusarium and Wild Chilies: Fungal Fruit Pathogens, Coevolution and Local Adaptation
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Joshua Tewksbury, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 06/30/2012
* USD 11,000.00

Most species depend on other species for survival and reproduction. Thus,
coevolution (reciprocal evolutionary change between species) arguably plays a
dominant role in the origin and organization of biodiversity. The proposed
research uses a novel model system to study coevolutionary dynamics: wild chili
peppers and their fruit-associated fungal pathogens. The spiciness of chilies
(caused by the antimicrobial chemical capsaicin) protects chili fruits from
fungi that can destroy seeds. Fungal strains obtained from wild chilies in
Bolivia are used in lab and field experiments to examine how the variation in
chili spiciness selects for fungal tolerance to plant defenses and drives fungal
local adaptation. Field experiments will be conducted in Bolivia to gain
information about the ecology of fungal insect vectors and their impact on
infection of fruits in the field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research examines
the coevolutionary dynamics that are likely responsible for the major property
of one of the most popular spice plants in the world: the spiciness of chilies.
The ability of chilies to inhibit food borne pathogens is believed to be
responsible for their domestication and use worldwide. Understanding the
selective pressures that favored the evolution of capsaicinoids in wild plants
may provide insight into our use of these chemicals and has applications for
medicine, food storage, crop development, and the management of plant diseases
and pests. In addition, undergraduate research assistants are mentored in
association with this project both locally and in Bolivia.