* 0808250
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Integrating Molecular, Morphological, and Paleontological Data: Phylogeny, Diversification, and Character Evolution within the Pelecaniformes
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Nathan Smith, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Charles Lydeard
* 06/30/2011
* USD 11,800.00

An award has been made to the University of Chicago under the direction of Dr.
Peter J. Makovicky to study the evolution and systematics of the Pelecaniformes
(pelicans, cormorants, and other large water birds). The project will improve
the doctoral dissertation research of Nathan D. Smith. This group of birds is an
ideal model for the study of living and fossil species. This group of birds
exhibits an exceptional fossil record and remarkably disparate morphologies, but
their evolutionary relationships are poorly known. This project will unite data
from molecules, morphology, and paleontology to examine evolutionary patterns
within Pelecaniformes. Morphology and DNA data will be used to resolve
phylogenetic relationships, and a synthesis of the fossil record will elucidate
relationships of key fossil taxa. These data will be used to investigate the
sensitivity of molecular dating methods, compare relationships supported by
molecular genetic data with those of the fossil record, and explore rates of
evolution and potential cases of morphological
convergence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has broader implications for
issues of dataset combination and divergence time estimation in systematic
biology. This study will also educate the public about paleontology, evolution,
and biodiversity. Results will be used to update exhibits of fossil birds in the
Field Museum of Natural History. Smith will collaborate with the FMNH to enhance
explanatory material accompanying the Harris Educational Loan Program, and to
create programming for the Illinois High School Transformation Project that
focuses on paleontology and evolution.&lt;br/&gt;