* 0808825
* Stabilization of Neutral Divalent Carbon Compounds with One or Two Lone Pairs of Electrons: En Route to Strong Donor Ligands
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2011
* Guy Bertrand, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 06/30/2011
* USD 444,000.00

With the support of the Organic Dynamics Program in the Chemistry Division,
Professor Guy Bertrand of the Chemistry Department at the University of
California - Riverside, will study four different classes of compounds, the
isolation of which have been impeded by the belief that they are inherently
unstable, or have eluded the synthetic skills of investigators. They are non-
heteroatom substituted cyclopropenylidenes (hydrocarbon carbenes) and their
dimers (triafulvalenes), larger ring size carbocycliccarbenes that benefit from
aromaticity, and bent-allenes. These species have not only been chosen because
they represent exciting synthetic challenges but more importantly because they
should feature interesting electronic and steric properties, which can lead to
important applications, especially as ligands for transition metal catalysts.
Over the years the success of homogeneous catalysis can be attributed largely to
the development of a diverse range of ligand frameworks that have been used to
tune the behavior of the various systems. The ultimate goal of this effort is to
provide the catalytic community with new, readily available ligands, which will
allow for the development of truly practical catalysts that will find
application in both academia and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additionally,
this project is at the interface between physical, organic and organometallic
chemistry and is therefore well suited to the education of scientists at all
levels. It is of paramount importance for the future to find catalysts able to
transform abundant and cheap molecules into useful compounds ranging from bulk
chemicals to therapeutics. The University of California- Riverside, classified
as a minority serving institution, is well positioned to provide the highest
quality educational experience for students underrepresented in science. Because
of this fact, a diverse group of students will be involved in the project. This
research will also promote collaborative research and the exchange of
undergraduates, graduates and postdoctoral fellows between UC Riverside and
several French universities.