* 0808201
* Collaborative Research:  PNe as Probes of the Early Chemical History of the Galaxy and M31
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2015
* Bruce Balick, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Glen Langston
* 06/30/2015
* USD 328,288.00

In this collaborative effort, Drs Bruce Balick (University of Washington),
Richard Henry (University of Oklahoma), and Karen Kwitter (Williams College)
will complement extant studies of the least evolved and most extended stellar
populations with observations of the metal-enriched gas ejected from early
generations of stars in the Milky Way (the "Galaxy") and our nearest sibling
neighbor galaxy, M31. The results will constrain and challenge extant models of
how all galaxies evolved or merged into others. In addition, the means by which
elements such as nitrogen and oxygen have been formed in dying stars will be
determined by measuring the historical rates of their production. The data
products will include databases of spectra and abundances of planetary nebulae
(PNe) in all galactic environments, doubling the size of the present sample
derived for of PNe near the Earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The history of galaxy
formation must be read from the shape, dynamics, and chemistry of its oldest and
least evolved "fossil" stars. These stars are found throughout the extended,
largely undisturbed outer regions of all galaxies, large and small. The
chemistry and kinematics of these stars help to constrain the models for the
early assembly of galaxies, the role of ongoing assimilation of dwarf galaxies,
the ejections of younger stars into the old thick disk and halo, the feedback of
heavy elements from the nucleus, supernovae, and AGB mass loss, the influence of
dark matter, and the rates and size scales of the formation of structure in the
early and highly chaotic universe. As a part of this research, new methods for
analyzing the data and measuring chemical abundances will be developed for faint
nebulae. These will have application throughout extragalactic astronomy in such
areas as element production rates in very early supernovae and the chemical
properties of distant quasars. In addition, all of the activities that will take
place as a part of this research program have been conceived with the goal of
providing research opportunities for undergraduate students, especially those
students from underrepresented groups. The students will be direct participants
in analyzing the data and developing creative interpretive ideas that form the
core motivation for practicing science and research, and for understanding its
role in modern society.