* 0808118
* Towards Understanding Interstellar Turbulence
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Alexandre Lazarian, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 06/30/2012
* USD 280,448.00

Although turbulence is chaotic, it can be described and understood. Turbulence
is governed by well-defined statistical laws that can be studied and then
successfully applied to solving astrophysical problems. In this project, Dr.
Alexandre Lazarian (University of Wisconsin - Madison) seeks to advance
theoretical understanding of magnetized turbulence in the interstellar medium
(ISM) by both studying these laws and comparing theory with observations. These
studies will build upon the existing research base and the enabling achievements
obtained through Dr. Lazarian's earlier work that focused on the spectra of
turbulence and its implications for cosmic rays. The present project is to
address the role of small regions within the ISM turbulence in which the
physical conditions are far from the average (called "intermittency"), as well
as the feedback of cosmic rays to the compressible turbulence. In addition, this
research will continue developing, testing, and applying new tools for
extracting turbulence spectra from observations of the velocity profiles of
spectral lines. As the result of this research, the observational community will
have new tools to study turbulence and its anisotropy, as well as the topology
of the ISM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The appearance, evolution, and overall
properties of a spiral galaxy are strongly influenced by its ISM. In turn, the
nature of the ISM and many processes taking place within it (such as star-
formation) are determined by the magnetic turbulence that stirs it. Examining
magnetic turbulence at a fundamental level is vital to understanding many
processes. Turbulence cannot be confidently understood using "brute force"
numerical approaches only; the fluid motions simulated by computers differ from
astrophysical ones by a huge difference in Reynolds numbers. In addition to the
research that will be carried out under this project, Dr. Lazarian will mentor a
graduate student as well as supervise REU and undergraduate student research
projects. Dr. Lazarian will also carry out outreach activities, such as public
lectures, and will make the statistical tools developed as a part of this
project publicly available.