* 0808851
* Updating Entomology Program at Fort Valley State University to Reflect Advances in Insects Chemical Ecology and Pathology
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2008,10/31/2012
* Dwayne Daniels, Fort Valley State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 10/31/2012
* USD 178,897.00

ABSTRACT 0808851&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fort Valley State University, a
HBCU and an 1890 Land-grant institution has an average student enrollment of
2,100 over the past five years. About 92 percent of enrolled and graduating
students are African American minorities. Minorities are under represented in
the fields of sciences, technology, engineering and mathematics. This under
representation of African Americans is more severe in certain sciences, such as
Entomology, where out of 5,000 registered members of the Entomological Society
of America only 32 are African Americans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Entomology, the
study of insects, is very important due to the impact of insects on agriculture
and public health. In the U.S. insect activities, and human activities aimed at
reducing insect population is estimated at an annual cost of about $50 billion.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project works to strengthen both the teaching and
training of students in Entomology by integrating advances in Chemical Ecology
of Insects, and Insect Pathology in the Entomology program at FVSU. We are
focusing on chemical ecology and insect pathology because these are emerging
technologies within entomology that bring with them certain important and basic
skills such as in microbiology, biotechnology, biochemistry and chemistry. This
is introduced through several objectives: (1) Enrich the academic preparations
of Entomology students by developing course reforms that include laboratory
experiences (2) Enhance quality research experience for Entomology students at
FVSU that help students get accepted into graduate programs (3) Institute
integrated pest management activities that arms students with the skills they
need to secure employment in agriculture or pest control industry.&lt;br/&gt;