* 0808095
* Laboratory Studies of the Magneto-Rotational Instability in a Plasma
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Cary Forest, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 06/30/2012
* USD 431,241.00

AST-0808095 Forest

This project will study the MagnetoRotational Instability (MRI), carrying out
the first-ever experiments with a newly constructed plasma couette flow device
which uses a novel geometry to confine and stir a hot plasma. Accretion is a
fundamental process by which virtually all astrophysical bodies form, but for a
long time it was unclear what causes the disk matter to lose orbital energy,
what it is that transports angular momentum outward and makes the disk material
fall onto the central object. The current working hypothesis is that a weak
magnetic field leads to a quickly growing magnetic instability, rendering the
disk turbulent and tremendously increasing the effective viscosity, and this is
supported by numerical simulation. Recent exciting experiments use liquid metals
to study the MRI, but a plasma experiment allows larger magnetic Reynolds number
and the variation of viscosity independent of conductivity, uses the state of
matter most likely to occur in natural accretion, investigates the transition
from weakly to strongly magnetized with only modest field strengths, and uses
measurement techniques well-developed in plasma physics. Such an experiment has
never been performed, but simple extrapolations from existing multi-dipole
confinement experiments show it is feasible. This work will characterize the
parameters of the ring cusp plasma with electrostatic stirring, search for signs
of the MRI to compare to theory, and identify plasma-specific effects beyond the
standard magneto-hydro-dynamical model.

A central part of research includes the training and mentoring of undergraduate
and graduate students, who are involved in all aspects of the project and will
be sent regularly to scientific meetings to present their results. Outreach
activities will include public lectures and press releases.