* 0808388
* Dissertation Research: Phylogeny and evolution of C4 photosynthesis in Pectis (Asteraceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2011
* Debra Hansen, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 06/30/2011
* USD 11,983.00

This study examines the evolution of Pectis, a genus of approximately 85 plant
species found in hot, dry areas of North and South America. Many Pectis species
are unusual in that they take up carbon from the air via "C4 photosynthesis"
(versus "C3 photosynthesis," which most plants use). The C4 process allows
plants to grow better in hot, dry and/or nutrient-starved conditions. C4
photosynthesis may have allowed Pectis to expand into new environments and
diversify more rapidly than its C3 relatives. Porophyllum (approx. 30 species)
is the genus thought to be most closely-related to Pectis. Of the approx. 115
species of Pectis and Porophyllum, only 32 have been surveyed for C3 or C4
photosynthesis. The goals of this project are to a) determine, using carbon
isotope analysis, whether the remaining 83 species are C3 or C4; b) determine
the evolutionary relationships between and among the two genera by comparing
their DNA; c) compare rates of diversification between C3 and C4 species; and d)
test hypotheses regarding taxonomy, biogeography, and the evolution of C4
photosynthesis in Pectis.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This study will provide the
first comprehensive understanding of the evolutionary relationships in Pectis
and will add to our understanding of the evolution of C4 photosynthesis.
Although many studies extol the adaptive virtues of C4 photosynthesis, this
study will be the first to test statistically a correlation between
photosynthesis and speciation rates.&lt;br/&gt;