* 0808200
* Variability in Jupiter's Weather and Climate
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Philip Marcus, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Thomas S. Statler
* 06/30/2012
* USD 420,003.00

AST-0808200 Marcus

Jupiter's weather is currently undergoing a great change with multiple
eruptions, the appearance of a new red spot, disturbances at, and south of, the
equator and a shrinking Great Red Spot. The rapidity of this current upheaval is
without precedent. This project will map Jupiter's velocity fields in all
regions (except the poles) with errors smaller than five meters per second,
which will result in vorticity maps with only 15% uncertainties. The velocity
field maps will be made with recently tested automated techniques of measuring
cloud motion from satellite images obtained over the last three decades by
Voyager, Cassini, Galileo and, more recently, the Hubble Space Telescope.
Numerical simulations that include the unobserved atmospheric parameters
(vertical stratification, vertical changes in wind speed, and others) will find
the 'best fit' choice by a genetic algorithm. The research should lead to a
better understanding of both short- and long-term climate change on Jupiter,
with possible application even to Earth's climate.

As well as training a graduate student and a post-doc in astrophysics, high
performance computation, and velocity extraction, the methods developed during
this research should be useful for studies of stars. The team is also trying to
develop them for bio-engineering, where they show promise for improving motion
capture studies.