* 0808281
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The role of pathogen resistance in the establishment and persistence of polyploid lineages
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2008,03/31/2010
* Benjamin Oswald, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 03/31/2010
* USD 8,980.00

Plants frequently duplicate their entire genomes, doubling their chromosome
number in a process called polyploidization. Remarkably, not only do these
polyploids often thrive, but also make significant contributions to the
biodiversity of flowering plants. However, because newly formed polyploid
lineages suffer a broad range of ecological costs, their ubiquity is puzzling.
One possibility, which is evaluated by this research, is that the success of
polyploid plants stems from increased resistance to parasites and pathogens.
This hypothesis will be tested using mathematical models and field studies of
synthetic polyploid plants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary mathematical
results demonstrate that polyploid plants should be initially more resistant
than diploids. Combined with the proposed field studies, this research will
investigate how polyploidy shapes pathogen resistance, and may provide a general
explanation for the unexpected prevalence of genome duplication within plants.
In addition, this research will provide a unique opportunity for an
undergraduate student to receive training at the interface of biology and
mathematics. This student will participate in both the mathematical modeling and
field components of the proposed research, allowing them to see how relevant
mathematical theory is developed and then tested in the field. Finally, this
research may provide a novel approach to determining the genetic basis of host
resistance to pathogens.&lt;br/&gt;