* 0808086
* InSb-Based Electron and Hole Systems for Charge and Spin Transport  Experiments
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Sheena Murphy, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 06/30/2012
* USD 495,162.00

Technical: This project is to study the growth of semiconductor quantum wells
made of indium antimonide (InSb) and to study charge and spin transport
phenomena that are enabled by these materials. It attempts to address the needs
of future computer technologies by focusing on InSb materials, which possess
high carrier mobilities, small effective masses, and large spin-orbit effects.
Such attributes imply higher operating speeds for field-effect transistors,
higher operating temperatures for ballistic transport devices, and the
opportunity for spintronic devices that could provide new routes for computation
and data storage. Both n-type and p-type quantum wells with high carrier
mobilities are required for transistors in logic applications. The electrical
properties of the proposed metamorphic heterostructures, on GaAs and Si
substrates, will be optimized in this project through defect filtering by
interlayers and judicious design of strain-balanced barrier and well layers.
Maximum strain is particularly important for p-type quantum wells, where a small
effective mass, and consequently a high mobility, relies on the degree to which
degeneracy is lifted in the valence bands. Magneto-optics experiments are
designed to characterize the effects of strain and confinement on the effective
mass of holes in InSb. The optimization of the growth of quantum wells will make
possible studies of strong spin-orbit coupling effects via weak anti-
localization experiments, carrier focusing devices, and spin
interferometers.&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical: The project addresses basic research
issues in a topical area of materials science with high technological relevance,
and is expected to provide new scientific understanding of spin-orbit coupling
of not only InSb, but zinc blende semiconductors in general. The research group
at the University of Oklahoma is one of the only two groups worldwide who are
able to grow high-quality InSb heterostructures needed by many scientists in
studying fundamental physics and materials science. This project will also
contribute to the preparation of students, including members of underrepresented
groups, for employment in areas of technological importance.