* 0808284
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Evolutionary responses of associated hormonal, behavioral, and morphological traits following colonization: integration or independence?
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2008,04/30/2011
* Jonathan Atwell, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 04/30/2011
* USD 11,928.00

When an animal?s environment changes, interrelated biological characteristics of
the animal may also change. Hormones such as testosterone [T], the secretion of
which is influenced by the environment, coordinate the expression of many traits
including sexual, aggressive, and parental behavior, ornamentation, and immune
function. Together these traits form the animal?s phenotype, and linkages
between hormones and phenotype may play a central role in facilitating or
constraining an animal?s ability to respond to environmental change. This
research takes advantage of the colonization of an urban environment by a
songbird population to compare hormone-phenotype linkages in the new urban
environment to those observed in the nearby ancestral environment. This
comparison will test whether traits observed in the two environments indicate
?evolutionarily integrated? or ?evolutionarily independent? linkages between T
and target traits. The research also will evaluate whether observed changes in
traits represent non-genetic developmental alteration or rapid (genetic)
evolution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; In an age of rapid global change and habitat
alteration, understanding how individuals and populations respond to novel
environments has become critical. The research described in this proposal will
add to the basic understanding of how and whether vertebrates adapt to novel
environments over very rapid time scales (&lt;30yrs). The research will also
enhance the training of more than a dozen future scientists, including those
from underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;