* 0808129
* Simulations of surface tension driven flows and interactions between fluid flow and solid particles
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Francois Blanchette, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2012
* USD 133,021.00

This proposal focuses on multiphase flows. The first part of the project is a
study of fluid-fluid interfaces which, on small scales, are dominated by surface
tension. Such flows are relevant to the dynamics of emulsions, bubbles, drops
and micro-fluidic devices. Highly accurate numerical simulations will be
employed to describe the dynamics of drops merging or forced through micro-
pipes. A novel approach to direct simulations of spatially varying surface
tension will be presented. The simulations will be used to explore the potential
of Marangoni flows to generate mixing in micro-drops. The second part of the
project is concerned with interactions between small solid particles and their
surrounding fluid, which are determinant in a variety of natural systems such as
rivers, oceans, and the atmosphere. Numerical simulations will explore the
mechanism by which particulate matter is eroded by an overlying fluid. The
capacity of settling particles to transport heat in an advective rather than
diffusive manner, without generating large scale fluid motion, will also be
examined. The overall goal is to develop tools to investigate these complex
physical systems and extract a fundamental understanding of basic phenomena at
play in multiphase flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research described
in this proposal will be conducted at Merced, the newest campus (opened in 2005)
of the University of California. It is the only research university of the
Central Valley, and the student body is both diverse and traditionally under-
represented at the university level. This project will provide research
opportunities to both undergraduate and graduate students. The first topic
studied involves the interaction of liquids and gases with other liquids, as is
the case in drops and bubbles. Special emphasis will be placed on obtaining an
understanding of the behavior of drops in the presence of temperature variations
in ?lab-on-a- chip? systems, which allow controlled reactions to be studied on
the micron scale. A second field of study will be the interaction of fluids with
small solid particles, such as sand and sediments. The mechanism by which fluid
flow can erode deposited particles, and the capacity of settling particles to
affect heat transport will be investigated in detail. Broadly applicable new
techniques will be developed to simulated these systems accurately and
efficiently.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;