* 0808936
* The Seismology of Shallow Intraplate Subduction Earthquakes: From Outer Rise to Interface
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2007,12/31/2010
* Jarmila Polet, Cal Poly Pomona Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 12/31/2010
* USD 74,187.00

The world's largest and some of its most destructive earthquakes occur on the
interface between subducting and overriding plates, with the degree of
interplate coupling playing an important role in their seismogenesis. Updip from
this interface, the outer rise comprises an upwarping of the oceanic lithosphere
just before it descends into the trench. Isacks and Molnar (1969, 1971), Isacks
et al. (1969) and Oike (1971) established the characteristics of the stress
regime within the subducting lithosphere and suggested that intraplate
earthquakes serve as stress gauges for the large-scale deformation involved in
subduction zones. Polet (2005) recently compiled a new catalog of outer rise
seismicity (here defined as earthquakes located seawards from the trench),
partly confirming earlier results (Christensen and Ruff, 1983; Lay et al., 1989)
by showing that normal faulting events occur preferentially after large
interplate thrust events. Compressional outer rise events were found to show a
similar temporal pattern, in contrast to earlier findings suggesting they
occurred more frequently prior to large interface earthquakes, which hints that
a more complex physical mechanism may be at work than simple elastic plate
bending (Ward, 1983; Liu and McNally, 1993). An inelastic analysis of
lithospheric stress distributions by Mueller et al. (1996) predicts seismic
behavior similar to that observed by Polet (2005). From these temporal and
spatial relationships, it is clear that the state of stress in the subducting
plate may change in response to interplate coupling. The seismicity record
should reflect this and thus shed light on the physical processes at work. The
P.I. of this project is constructing a complete catalog of intraslab seismicity,
extending the analysis of Polet (2005) to events landwards of the trench,
greater depths (150 km) and lowering the magnitude threshold from 6.0 to 5.0.
&lt;br/&gt;The next step of the research is to apply a teleseismic P-wave
modeling technique to refine the depths of the intraplate events to a higher
precision and homogeneity. Subsequently a source spectral analysis of the
Mw&gt;=6.5 earthquakes can be carried out to determine dynamic rupture
parameters. These investigations will provide us with unique insight into a
myriad of issues, including: the failure mechanism of intraplate and outer rise
earthquakes, the state of stress in the subducting lithosphere, the origin of
the hydration of the subducting plate and the mode of deformation of the outer
rise. &lt;br/&gt; Bathymetric and seismic profiles across subduction-related
trenches commonly show distinctive patterns of normal faulting on the outer
trench wall (Masson, 1991). Hilde (1983) reviewed the occurrence of outer trench
wall faulting and found it to be essentially ubiquitous. The relationship
between this type of faulting and the structure and geometry of the subduction
zone is still not clear (Hilde, 1983; Aubouin et al, 1984; Scholl et al., 1982).
Obvious factors that may control the strike of these faults include the strike
of the trench and any weakness in the subducting plate, such as the fabric
resulting from oceanic spreading. These and similar observations from
bathymetric and seismic trench profiles can be related to intraplate earthquake
occurrences and seismic moment release. Based on the catalog currently in
development, the P.I. is investigating whether the asymmetry in the fault system
previously found for the source mechanisms of tensional outer rise events
persists to greater depths, testing the hypothesis that reactivation of
preexisting weak zones, created prior to subduction, is responsible for these
events.&lt;br/&gt;The main interest of this research is in improving our
understanding of the role of intraplate seismicity in the earthquake cycle, the
mode of outer rise deformation, the relationship between seismic coupling and
intraplate seismicity and the role of pre-existing weak zones and dehydration in
the generation of intraplate earthquakes. Improved knowledge of the temporal and
spatial character of intraplate seismicity will also be an important first step
towards the development of a new generation of models of subduction zone
dynamics. The behavior of intraplate events in time, and their relationship to
the earthquake cycle, may also be significant for intermediate term earthquake
hazard assessment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;