* 0808524
* Dissertation Research:The Fate of Nitrate in Stormwater Retention Basins in an Arid Metropolitan Area
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2009
* Nancy Grimm, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 05/31/2009
* USD 7,005.00

Retention basins are a common approach to managing excess water from rain
storms. In neighborhoods with retention basins, all of the runoff from a given
area is directed into a recessed area where the water can then infiltrate into
the soil or evaporate. Many studies have shown that stormwater often has high
concentrations of nutrients and other pollutants, but few studies, especially in
arid environments, have investigated the impacts of these additions on soil
microbial processes. For this project, a storm will be simulated in two kinds of
retention basins, which will be flooded with water containing a rare isotope of
nitrogen. The use of the isotope enables tracking the nitrogen as it is
transformed by microorganisms into various compounds, some of which are more
serious pollutants than others.&lt;br/&gt; Stormwater retention basins are a
natural unit for management and planning, thus this research has a broader
impact beyond contributing to ecological theory of urban systems. Insights from
this work will create a direct benefit to society: planners, engineers, and
managers will better understand how basin design influences the ability of the
soils to improve water quality and reduce potential greenhouse gas emissions.
Sufficient knowledge of ecological processes of and within cities is necessary
for the future sustainability of urban ecological and socioeconomic
systems.&lt;br/&gt;