* 0808976
* Collaborative Research: Development of Extensional Systems in Regions of Hot, Thick Crust: Insight from Tibet
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2011
* Paul Kapp, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 07/31/2011
* USD 88,030.00

This project will investigate how modern continental extensional systems and
associated basins are developing in regions of hot, thick crust. Tibet is
underlain by the thickest crust on Earth that is arguably flowing at mid-crustal
levels, and is actively extending East-West at greater that one-third the total
North-South convergence rate between India and Asia. Recent studies show that
North-trending Tibetan normal faults and adjacent basins vary systematically in
their characteristics as a function of extension magnitude, and may provide
sequential snapshots of rift basin evolution during progressive extension.
Nascent rifts are characterized by half-graben basins bounded by high-angle
normal faults. In contrast, more evolved rifts are bounded by low-angle
detachment faults characterized by basins undergoing incision with intrabasin
drainage divides in areas of inferred maximum extension. The goal of this
research is to test the hypothesis that Tibetan rifts initiate as high-angle
normal faults and associated half-grabens that evolve into detachment faults
active at uppermost crustal levels and above which rift basin fill is uplifted
and eroded, in response to progressive tectonic unloading and isostatic rebound.
This hypothesis, along with several alternatives, will be tested in this project
along a well exposed in central Tibet by using geological and structural
mapping, cosmogenic dating, basin analysis, and low-temperature
thermochronology. The project is a multi-disciplinary and collaborative research
effort between faculty and students at the University of Kansas, University of
Arizona, University of Texas, Dalhousie University in Canada, and the Institute
of Tibetan Plateau Research in China.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
findings will have a major scientific impact by documenting in detail how modern
extensional systems develop in regions of active orogenesis that are underlain
by hot, thick crust. The results will allow testing of contrasting models for
the development of metamorphic core-complexes and low-angle normal faults, and
may shed new light on the role of mid-crustal flow in enhancing isostatic
rebound during continental extension.