* 0808964
* Mass Spectrometric Studies of Spin Control in Open-Shell Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Paul Wenthold, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 09/30/2011
* USD 390,000.00

The project involves mass spectrometry studies of the thermochemical properties
of the reactivity of open-shell molecules and ions. The proposal describes
studies designed to investigate the mechanisms through which electrons can
interact in open-shell systems. The goal of the work is to provide insight into
how to control the spin of open-shell system by strategically choosing
structural motifs that exploit the appropriate mechanistic aspects. The three
methods of controlling spin are: 1) Topological approaches : the focus of this
area is on disjoint diradicals and using connectivity to create them in either
triplet or singlet states. The role of topology will be investigated by
contrasting the properties, such as electron affinities, of structurally related
but topologically distinct bis-allylic diradicals. 2) Heteroatom substitution :
replacing a carbon in well-studied hydrocarbon diradicals with nitrogen or
oxidized nitrogen can change the ground and excited state energy orderings. This
effect will be investigated by examining the thermochemical properties of
pyridine- and pyridine-n-oxide based diradicals, determined by using energy-
resolved collision-induced dissociation studies. 3) Substitution : the
electronic state ordering of aromatic nitrenes is altered by using substituents
either on the aromatic ring or next to the nitrene center. Negative ion
photoelectron spectroscopy of substituted phenylnitrene radical anions will be
used to investigate the electron affinities and the energies of the excited
states in the neutral phenyl nitrenes. Gas-phase studies of reactivity and
structure can impact all areas of chemistry as well as other disciplines such as
material science and engineering. Mechanistic studies provide insight that can
be used to develop new reactivity methodologies. Whereas structural studies of
open-shell species such as diradicals and triradicals provide insight into
bonding and reactivity, they also provide a foundation for engineering and
material science approaches to magnetic materials. The work described in this
proposal is also an important component of the education of a diverse and
talented group of graduate students at Purdue University. This support also
allows the PI to utilize his experience with the NSF Graduate Research
Fellowship Program to encourage and activities of the undergraduate students in
the local ACS Student Affiliates and Alpha Chi Sigma chapters, particularly in
regards to developing creative ways for the students to serve and impact the
community.