* 0808466
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Assessing cloud forest ecotone sensitivity to climate change in space and time
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2011
* Shelley Crausbay, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 05/31/2011
* USD 11,917.00

By the end of this century, the striking climate and ecosystem changes currently
seen in the polar Northern Hemisphere will likely span the globe. The biodiverse
tropics, for example, are projected to warm by 1-4 degrees C. Tropical climate
change is already evident, in the form of melting glaciers, declining
precipitation, increasing temperatures, and a more frequent El Nino/Southern
Oscillation. This project investigates tropical ecosystem sensitivity to climate
change on Haleakala volcano in the Hawaiian Islands, USA. The study area
brackets a changing climatic feature, the mean trade-wind inversion, where the
cloud forest abruptly switches to shrubland. Tropical montane cloud forests,
which are rich in endemic species and provide the vital ecosystem service of
water capture and storage, are particularly vulnerable to climate change. To
reveal how climate affects vegetation patterns today, this project compares
detailed measurements of climate and vegetation in habitats ranging from mesic
alpine grassland, through montane shrubland, and across the forestline into
cloud forest. This study also uses microfossils preserved in lake sediment to
look into the past and investigate how climate affected vegetation over the past
~10,000 years. Finally, this study analyzes tree cores to determine whether
aridity controls the sharp upper cloud forest limit. This study combines
analyses across broadly different time scales to predict tropical ecosystem
sensitivity. Results from this study will guide managers from Haleakala National
Park, Hanawi Natural Area Reserve, and The Nature Conservancy who are all
actively engaged in controlling invasive species and conserving rare and
endangered species across this unique landscape.