* 0808064
* A systematic investigation of the validity of small-body thermal models through a combined analysis of infrared and radar measurements
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Michael Nolan, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas S. Statler
* 07/31/2012
* USD 361,189.00

AST-0808064&lt;br/&gt;Vervack&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
systematically investigate the validity of the small-body thermal models used to
determine size and albedo information. The commonest models generally assume a
spherical geometry and small phase angles. Continued advances in infrared
capabilities, including the Spitzer Space Telescope and the Stratospheric
Observatory For Infrared Astronomy (SOFIA), are increasing the observational
data at a rapid pace, which makes it imperative to assess quantitatively the
effect of those assumptions. This project will investigate possible biases
through combined analysis of infrared and radar observations of a number of
asteroids. Realistic shape models derived from the radar observations will be
used to calculate a more accurate thermal emission model, and comparing shape-
based models to the most common thermal models provides a quantitative analysis
of the biases those models introduce into the size and albedo estimates. In
particular, this work will examine whether more realistic shapes will reduce the
biases, and will derive a more representative thermal phase function for small,
irregular bodies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of this research is far
reaching, including helping with proper mitigation of the hazard of Earth impact
by asteroids and comets. Numerous educational opportunities for students at all
levels and for teachers will be actively pursued, including involvement in
mentoring and internship vehicles already in place at The Johns Hopkins
University's Applied Physics Laboratory. The Arecibo Observatory regularly
engages students, and conducts both student and teacher workshops. There will
also be opportunities to involve students at small universities and colleges
that otherwise might not get to participate in a large research project.