* 0808360
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Genome dynamics in parthenogenetic geckos of the Heteronotia binoei complex
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2010
* Craig Moritz, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 07/31/2010
* USD 12,000.00

Nearly all animals reproduce sexually, but a handful exhibit asexual
reproduction in which mothers produce genetically identical daughters without
input from males. This project investigates the consequences of such asexuality
in the Bynoe's gecko (Heteronotia binoei). By measuring the activity of genes
and quantifying mutations in these asexual geckos, this project will provide
important data that will address one of the longest-standing questions in
evolutionary biology: why does sex exist at all? This project will examine the
expectation that asexual lineages deteriorate genetically compared to their
sexual relatives, and examine whether there are mechanisms that can help prevent
this deterioration. An integrative approach to this question is being taken that
includes genomic analyses, physiological experiments, and biochemical
assays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project contributes to an integrative,
international (Australia-United States) endeavor to understand the origin and
evolution of asexuality in the Bynoe's gecko. This project has provided and will
continue to offer research experiences to talented undergraduate students in
both countries. Its outreach component is designed to educate the general public
in ecology and evolution in the primary schools, as well as via workshops and
through discussions with station managers in the Australian outback.