* 0808558
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Adaptation to variable ultraviolet radiation threats in alpine Daphnia populations.
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2010
* Brooks Miner, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 05/31/2010
* USD 12,000.00

How do organisms evolve via natural selection to tolerate stresses in their
environments? In this project the investigators seek to understand how
freshwater animals have evolved to tolerate harmful ultraviolet radiation in the
clear-water ponds of an alpine ecosystem. The investigators focus on the
widespread zooplankton Daphnia pulex in alpine ponds that span a range of
transparencies to ultraviolet radiation in Olympic National Park, WA. The
investigators pursue three lines of inquiry: 1) to understand how tolerance of
ultraviolet radiation varies among populations, 2) to understand whether the
tolerance of ultraviolet radiation is an inducible trait, and 3) to use genetic
and analytical methods to elucidate the role of evolution by natural selection
in adapting populations of Daphnia to the ultraviolet radiation threats in their
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The indirect effects of global climate change
on underwater ultraviolet radiation regimes are understood to be stronger than
the effect of the ozone hole. This project will expand our understanding of how
a zooplankton population has evolved to persist in the presence of high
ultraviolet radiation exposure. This will serve as a predictive model for how
other populations may or may not be able to persist in the face of climatic
changes and management strategies. The intellectual contributions of this
project are therefore twofold, specifically informing our understanding and
predictions of zooplankton responses to environmental stress in alpine habitats,
and more broadly illuminating the evolutionary process of how populations adapt
to variable environmental pressures in an era of global climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;