* 0808533
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Plant species and functional trait effects on methane and nitrous oxide fluxes from a North Carolina restored wetland
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2008,12/31/2011
* Robert Jackson, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 12/31/2011
* USD 12,000.00

This work will examine relationships between wetland plant species, soil
chemical reactions, and greenhouse gas emissions. Greenhouse gases such as
methane and nitrous oxide are trapping increasing levels of radiation within the
atmosphere, warming the globe. Wetlands are large sources of both methane and
nitrous oxide, which are produced by chemical reactions in wet soil. Such
processes are altered by the physical presence and chemical signatures of
plants. Plant species possess different suites of traits that influence the
environment plants inhabit, leading to possible species-specific effects on
greenhouse gas emissions. The traits most likely to affect greenhouse gas
emissions are those traits that shape chemical transformations of carbon,
nitrogen, and oxygen in wetland soils. This work will compare methane and
nitrous oxide emissions with soil conditions and plant traits in single-species
plots of 10 herbaceous plant species at a wetland restoration site in Durham,
NC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wetland restoration projects are typically conducted to
improve hydrology and water quality, yet they can also increase greenhouse gas
production. This research will identify plant species and plant traits that help
achieve restoration goals while minimizing emissions of greenhouse gases. As the
climate and rates of wetland destruction and restoration change, understanding
the roles of different plant species in wetland greenhouse gas dynamics will
help to predict greenhouse gas fluxes and manage wetland ecosystem
functions.&lt;br/&gt;