* 0808225
* Dissertation Research: The Community And Ecosystem Consequences Of Plant Genotypic Diversity
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Nathan Sanders, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2009
* USD 9,310.00

Global declines in biodiversity have spurred research into whether biodiversity
is important for the functioning of ecosystems. To date, much of this research
has focused on how the loss of species affects associated communities and
ecosystems. Only recently have ecologists realized that loss of genetic
diversity within a species is as much a concern as loss of species diversity.
The research in this proposal aims at understanding the consequences of
reductions in genetic diversity within a dominant plant, Solidago altissima
(tall goldenrod), for associated insect and plant communities and for ecosystem
processes of primary production and nutrient cycling. Tall goldenrod is one of
the most common plants in the eastern United States and likely plays a critical
role in many ecosystems. The goal of this work is to match previous and ongoing
experiments that manipulate genetic diversity with observations in natural
populations of plants. Specifically, the investigators will ask if the diversity
of associated insect communities is positively correlated with genotypic
diversity in natural plant patches, as has been observed in manipulative
experiments. This work has broad appeal in that it will fill several gaps in our
current understanding of the importance of biodiversity within species for
terrestrial ecosystems. This is a doctoral dissertation improvement award that
supports the research of a graduate student and the dissemination of their
research results.