* 0808555
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Study of sickness behavior and its costs in relation to immunosenescence
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2008,05/31/2010
* Carol Vleck, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 05/31/2010
* USD 11,130.00

&lt;br/&gt;Carol M Vleck &amp; Maria G.
Palacios&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IOS-0808555, Study of sickness behavior and its
costs in relation to immunosenescence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The decline of
immune function with age, or immunosenescence, is a pervasive phenomenon in
animals. This project is designed to investigate what aspects of immune function
are most affected by age in a free-living bird population and what are the
consequences for individuals. Tree swallows are the model system because an
adequate number of known-aged individuals can be repeatedly sampled and their
reproductive success can be easily monitored. The researchers have already shown
that the pattern of immunosenescence in tree swallows resembles that of humans.
A field experiment will be carried out while swallows are caring for their young
to assess the consequences of this aging pattern. Researchers will simulate a
pathogenic insult by challenging birds of disparate ages with a non-infectious
bacterial component, which elicits sickness responses without causing actual
disease. Parental behavior, in the form of chick feeding, will be monitored
using video recording and blood samples taken before and after the challenge
will allow assessment of hormonal and immunological responses. Chick growth
rates and fledging success will be measured. Researchers will test the
hypothesis that older, immunosenescent individuals pay higher costs of defense
against pathogens than younger ones with the prediction that older individuals
will show more extreme sickness responses, both behavioral and physiological,
that will result in reduced reproductive success and/or survival compared to
young individuals. The project will include training of undergraduate students
in the field and in the lab. This research on sickness responses and their
effects on reproductive behavior and survival has implications for disease
ecology and conservation of threatened/endangered species. In addition, this
research will be of general interest to physiologists, gerontologists, and
evolutionary ecologists, and of increasing importance to the general public as
our population ages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;