* 0808408
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Influence of a facultative endosymbiont on an invasive psyllid's phenotype
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2010
* Timothy Paine, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 05/31/2010
* USD 12,000.00

Secondary (i.e. facultative) endosymbionts (SS) have recently been found to
influence the resistance of their host, Acyrthosiphon pisum Harris (Hemipter:
Aphidae), to parasitoids and fungal pathogens. If the presence of maternally-
transmitted secondary endosymbionts influences host survival or reproduction,
then disparate selection pressures among populations should influence infection
frequencies on a geographic level. Only some individuals of an invasive psyllid
(Glycaspis brimblecombei) that colonizes eucalyptus in California possess one
particular type of facultative SS. The frequency of SS-infection varies
dramatically among G. brimblecombei populations, and is positively related to
parasitism pressure by a wasp natural enemy. This project will investigate
whether parasitism is a key mechanism that maintains SS-infection frequencies
among populations.&lt;br/&gt;The diversity, occurrence, and effects of
endosymbionts harbored in insects are largely unknown. This project will address
the relationship between the frequency of infection by secondary endosymbionts
and parasitism. A primary goal is to determine if there is a fitness advantage
or cost for a host insect to possess secondary endosymbionts when parasitism by
its natural enemy (P. bliteus) is present or absent. Broader impacts of the
project include student training and potential application to management of
agricultural insect pests and invasive species.&lt;br/&gt;