* 0808790
* Physics Teacher Education Coalition II (PhysTEC-II)
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2009,01/31/2017
* Toufic Hakim, American Physical Society
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 01/31/2017
* USD 6,760,000.00

This proposal is a renewal proposal for the Physics Teacher Education Coalition
(PhysTEC), led by the American Physical Society (APS) and the American
Association of Physics Teachers (AAPT). The overall aim of the project is to
build the capacity of the nation to produce more highly-qualified physics and
physical science teachers, and thus address the critical shortage of qualified
physics and physical science secondary teachers in the U.S. The goals of the
project are to: demonstrate and provide sustainable models for a) increasing the
number of highly qualified high school physics teachers and b) improving the
quality of K-8 physical science teacher education; advocate for improving
teacher education within the physics community, and spread best practice ideas
through a coalition of institutions committed to this work; and work directly
with physics departments to engage them in educating teachers, targeting areas
of critical need. Project sites will adopt best practices in teacher education,
including researched curricula and methods shown to increase student learning,
and research-validated assessment tools to measure important aspects of teacher
quality. The sites will collect and report data on teacher production, teacher
quality and teacher retention, as well as implementation of program elements and
innovations. Collaborative working relationships with prominent physics
education researchers have been developed who will lead scholarly investigations
to answer research questions in teacher education and advise the project on
assessment activities. The project will use surveys as a formative evaluation of
conferences, workshops, and other activities. Teachers from PhysTEC institutions
and from outside the project will benefit from mentoring and professional
development provided by Teachers-In-Residence and local Teacher Advisory Groups.
With a combined membership of over 50,000 physics professionals, the APS and
AAPT, through this project, will disseminate knowledge on teacher education to
its members, and through conferences and workshops for PTEC Coalition
institutions.