* 0808650
* RET Site: The Joule Fellows -Teachers in Sustainable Energies Research Laboratories
* ENG,EEC
* 05/15/2009,04/30/2013
* Kazem Kazerounian, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 04/30/2013
* USD 450,000.00

This award provides funding for a 3 year continuing award to support a Research
Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering Site program at the University of
Connecticut (UConn) entitled, RET Site: The Joule Fellows-Teachers in
Sustainable Energies Research Laboratories", under the direction of Dr. Kazem
Kazerounian. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research Experiences for Teachers (RET)
in Engineering Site is a comprehensive program to host a total of 36 teachers
and instructors (12 each year for three years, 8 from high school, 2 from middle
school and 2 from community colleges) as Joule Fellows at the University of
Connecticut for six summer weeks with long term academic year follow-on
programs. At UConn they will participate in a rich spectrum of activities that
will provide them a broad view of research methods and hands-on education and
research experience in ongoing programs in sustainable energies. The planned
activities of the program are integrated into the following five categories: 1)
research preparation, 2) research participation, 3) professional development, 4)
bridging technology and K-12 curriculum, and 5) mentorship and outreach. To
attain sustainablility and institutionalization, the project team will develop a
combination of activities: an innovative Master of Engineering Education degree
program, collaboration with the State to develop engineering frameworks in K-12
curricula, and building community-based enabling partnerships.