* 0808415
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Systematics of Cloud-forest Moths: Revision of Cliniodes (Lepid.: Crambidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2010
* James Liebherr, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 06/30/2010
* USD 10,137.00

Cliniodes is a diverse genus of snout moths with caterpillars that specialize on
shrubs with toxic chemicals. Males have a unique sound-producing mechanism
consisting of giant scales or modified hairs, apparently for courtship. The two
goals of this project are a taxonomic revision of Cliniodes species and detailed
study of their morphological structures. The researcher will assess variation in
specimens across broad geographic areas, describe 10-20 species new to science,
and re-describe the 20 known species from the Western Hemisphere. Anatomy and
morphology will be used in testing hypotheses of the origin of and variation in
the courtship structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Museum collections in Brazil,
France, Germany, the Netherlands, Mexico and elsewhere will be visited to
maximize geographic coverage. An illustrated study that accurately defines
species and their relationships and enables identification will facilitate
ecological and population-level studies. Analysis of morphology will elicit
discoveries in other fields such as developmental and behavioral biology.
Products will include an on-line database of specimen data and images, which
will aid conservation planning for the rare native North American species. Two
undergraduate students will receive training in identification, dissection, and
imaging of moths. Papers coauthored with the students will introduce them to
scientific publication.