* 0808817
* C: The Future of High School Mathematics
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2008,12/31/2010
* James Fey, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* John S. Bradley
* 12/31/2010
* USD 174,325.00

The University of Maryland, College Park, in collaboration with several
professional organizations and the Math is More group, is organizing a national
conference focusing on the future of high school mathematics. The conference
showcases and analyzes progressive ideas about curriculum, teaching, assessment,
and technology in high school and early college mathematics. The plenary and
workshop sessions of the 2.5-day conference address four central questions:
&lt;br/&gt;What are the most important mathematical concepts, skills, and
reasoning methods that students of different interests and aptitudes should
master in the high school years so that they are well prepared for college, the
world of work, and effective citizenship in the 21st century? &lt;br/&gt;What
instructional practices hold greatest promise for effective teaching of
mathematics to the diverse student population in U. S. high schools?
&lt;br/&gt;What practices in assessment of student understanding and skills most
effectively advance teaching and learning and provide an evidence base for
important educational policy decisions? &lt;br/&gt;What practices in teacher
professional development and school change hold greatest promise for meeting the
challenge of implementing best practices in mathematics education curriculum,
teaching, and assessment?&lt;br/&gt;The conference brings together leaders of
state and local school system mathematics programs, mathematicians, curriculum
developers, educational researchers, and education policy-makers for in-depth
discussion of the challenges and opportunities for innovation in high school
mathematics. Participation in this conference provides school system leaders
with information and perspectives about future directions of high school
mathematics that they can carry back to their state and local work on
curriculum, teaching, and assessment. Participation by curriculum developers,
teacher educators, and education policy-makers provides them with insights into
their own work developing future mathematics programs, teachers, and policies.
Participation by mathematics education researchers helps in framing an agenda of
important evaluation and research projects required to inform and evaluate the
various ideas for innovation. Expected media coverage of conference sessions
provides visibility to the most prominent recent work aimed at improving the
yield of high school mathematics education.