* 0808987
* MRI: Acquisition of a Rapid Compression Machine for Chemical Kinetic Studies on Biofuels
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Anthony Marchese, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 09/30/2012
* USD 451,951.00

Proposal: 0722780 PI: Anthony Marchese Institution: Rowan University

Title: MRI: Acquisition of a Rapid Compression Machine for Chemical Kinetic
Studies on Biofuels

Biodiesel has been shown to be highly effective in reducing CO, HC, PM and
greenhouse gas emissions from diesel engines, decreasing dependence on petroleum
imports and developing new markets for domestic agricultural products such as
soybeans. Unfortunately, many research studies have also shown that biodiesel
results in an increase in NOx emissions. The perceived NOx penalty associated
with biodiesel threatens to limit its widespread acceptance since engine
manufacturers and regulatory agencies continue to struggle with NOx emissions
from mobile diesel sources. The vast majority of the literature has focused on
differences in physical properties (bulk modulus, boiling point, viscosity,
etc.) between biodiesel and petroleum diesel as the mechanism for increased
biodiesel NOx. However, there is increasing evidence that biodiesel NOx
increases are related to fundamental differences in the chemical oxidation
mechanism of biodiesel (i.e. methyl esters) in comparison to petroleum diesel.
Unfortunately, very little work has been done to develop detailed chemical
kinetic mechanisms for long chain methyl esters and to evaluate why these
molecules result in increased NOx and decreased PM. A better understanding of
biodiesel NOx and soot processes, will lead to the development of even cleaner
burning renewable fuels.

Intellectual Merit This Major Research Instrumentation Grant is for the purchase
of a rapid compression machine (RCM) that will be used for fundamental chemical
kinetic studies on biofuels. An RCM is an instrument designed to simulate the
compression stroke of a single engine cycle allowing auto-ignition phenomena to
be studied in a much more controllable environment than that which is possible
in an actual engine. The RCM will be integrated with a novel fast response
NO/NO2 analyzer that will allow time-resolved NOx measurements and a rapid
quenching system that will enable sophisticated gas analysis of combustion
products and intermediates. By performing experiments on biofuels (and surrogate
fuels) in an RCM it will be possible to isolate the chemical kinetic effects on
NOx and soot production from the variety of other processes that are present in
an actual diesel engine. Moreover, data acquired using this system will be
integral to developing a data base necessary for adopting a universally accepted
reference fuel for biodiesel, such as methyl oleate. Development of an RCM
capability dedicated to alternative fuels research will effectively bridge the
gap between the handful of fundamental combustion studies on smaller biodiesel
surrogates and the multitude of engine studies in which the underlying
mechanisms responsible for pollutant emissions are difficult to isolate.

Broader Impacts Environmental essayist Bill McKibben rightfully suggests that
global warming is the first civilization-scale challenge ever faced by the human
race. While there is no single technological panacea for this omnipresent
challenge, renewable fuels such as biodiesel have the potential to play a
significant role in mitigating greenhouse gas emissions since they are nearly
CO2 neutral. A solution to the perceived biodiesel NOx problem will result in
further widespread acceptance of biodiesel by engine manufacturers and
government agencies, thereby resulting in decreased greenhouse gas emissions.
Decreasing PM emissions from diesel engines is an equally important issue that
can be addressed through the use of biodiesel. Diesel PM has been classified as
a probable human carcinogen by the World Health Organization and the USEPA, and
recent studies have linked diesel PM to heart disease.

