* 0808381
* Dissertation Research: The Evolution of Freeze Tolerance in a Historically Tropical Snail.
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2010
* Michael Hellberg, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 05/31/2010
* USD 12,000.00

Freezing temperatures present a lethal barrier that limits the geographic
distribution of many organisms; this research will illuminate the evolution and
significance of freeze tolerance. The genes underlying freeze-tolerance will be
isolated from a marsh snail (Melampus bidentatus) found in freezing regions
atypical for its genus. Tests for natural selection for freeze tolerance in
northern species will be made through comparison of DNA sequences of these genes
from freeze-tolerant species and their tropical relatives. Expression of freeze-
tolerance genes also will be measured and compared among winter populations of
freeze-tolerant and non-tolerant species to determine if the pattern of gene
expression contributes importantly to survival of freezing temperatures.
Collectively, the results will test for the importance of evolution of freeze-
tolerance in allowing range expansion from tropical to temperate regions.
&lt;br/&gt; A tropical maximum in species diversity has been recognized for over
a century, and the rarity of evolution of the ability to avoid freezing may
underlie the pattern. This research will directly test for correlation between
the evolution of freeze tolerance and a poleward range expansion. The research
will identify the genetic and molecular basis of a key ecological trait, freeze
tolerance, and will lead to a better understanding of what determines the range
of a species. The work will test a key mechanism hypothesized to underlie a
major global diversity pattern and will provide a detailed case study of one
species? evolutionary responses to global climatic change. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;