* 0808957
* SBIR Phase I:A Novel 360-Degree Video Surveillance Camera
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2008,12/31/2008
* Zheng (Jason) Geng, Xigen LLC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2008
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a novel
360° video camera with direct optical unwrapping capability. It can obtain high
resolution undistorted (unwrapped) 360° video of surrounding scene without
requiring external computer for performing digital unwrapping. The proposed
video camera offers, for the first time, several unique advantages over any
existing 360° video cameras. It is able to: (1) Capture real-time video of
seamless 360° surrounding scene with no moving components; (2) Unwrap the 360°
surrounding image optically, without using any electronics or computing
overhead. The outputs video is directly viewable for human interpretation and
understanding. (3) Preserve image quality via optical unwrapping - no digital
re-sampling related artifacts that deteriorate image quality; (4) Acquire entire
360° surrounding scene with full pixel resolution of imaging sensor
(conventional fisheye lens or omni-directional 360° optics acquires circular
images, making 42% active pixels of sensor useless); (5) Eliminate time delay
caused by digital processing.

If successful the proposed video camera concept will offer a completely
different path to the 360° imaging technology field and will have profound
impact in video surveillance markets. In 2005, the global video surveillance
industry is about $7 billion, which is expected to grow to $13 billion within
five years, with 44% growth market on the verge of technological breakthrough.
The video surveillance market is considered as a limitless growth market.
'Cameras Everywhere' continues to be the best description of the trend in the
Video Surveillance market. By eliminating the need for digital unwrapping, the
proposed video camera eliminates the need for external computing resource, which
historically has been one of most significant barriers in building practical
360° video cameras and facilitating 360° video surveillance. This new advanced
360° imaging technology will lead to a number of innovative products and vast
applications to video surveillance fields, with unprecedented performance,
resolution, image quality, cost efficiency, and ease of use.