* 0808012
* Dissertation Research: Prediction and understanding the recovery of communties
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Peter Raimondi, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 06/30/2011
* USD 11,916.00

Predicting and understanding the way natural communities change over time and
recover from disturbance remains one of the great challenges to the field of
ecology. Much of the research seeking to predict ecological community dynamics
assumes that processes measured in intact communities can be used to predict the
response to a disturbance. Preliminary results suggest that for the rocky shore
seaweed community dominated by the red turf alga, this assumption does not hold
true. This project combines empirical studies of variables that may have
profound effects on the rate and trajectory of succession (species interactions,
dispersal, life history characteristics and biogeographic region) with the
predictive capabilities of modeling. Understanding the processes by which a
disturbed area recovers is also a key to understanding the long-term
consequences of human impacts to ecosystems. Such information can aid in the
placement of reserves and other resource-use decisions. Having the ability to
predict recovery rates based on empirical data will allow access to information
that would otherwise be impossible to obtain without experimental disturbances.
This research takes a multi-faceted approach to understanding intertidal
community dynamics that will be useful information to coastal resource managers
regarding recovery potential for intertidal organisms. This project also
supports the thesis research of a doctoral student.