* 0808339
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Systematics and evolution of sea anemones (Cnidaria: Actiniaria: Hormathiidae) symbiotic with hermit crabs
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2008,12/31/2010
* Marymegan Daly, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Charles Lydeard
* 12/31/2010
* USD 11,803.00

A grant has been awarded to the Ohio State University Research Foundation under
the direction of Dr. Marymegan Daly to study the systematics and evolution of a
symbiosis between sea anemones and hermit crabs. The grant will improve the
doctoral dissertation research of Luciana Gusmao. The association of sea
anemones and hermit crabs is one of the most interesting and eye catching
symbioses in the sea. The anemone-crab partnership is a mutualism in which
anemones gain access to food and transport away from unfavorable local
environmental conditions, in exchange for defending the crab from predators.
This symbiosis has been studied extensively in terms of behavior and physiology,
while the biodiversity and evolutionary components have received little or no
attention. This study uses genetics, observations of behavior, and museum
specimens in an integrated approach to understand the diversity and evolution of
this group of hermit crab symbiotic anemones.

In addition to illuminating the evolutionary history of the sea anemone-hermit
crab relationship, this research will generate detailed descriptions of
symbiotic relationships, improved tools for the identification of these abundant
marine invertebrates, and new collections of specimens and DNA samples. In the
course of this project, a graduate student and a high school student will be
trained in sea anemone biology and genetic techniques. Results from this work
will be featured in both general and scientific publications, increasing public
awareness about marine biodiversity and symbiosis.