* 0808000
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Friends in high places: Mycorrhizal associations in alpine communities
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2008,08/31/2010
* Candace Galen, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2010
* USD 12,000.00

Mutualisms, interactions between species in which both partners benefit, are
found in all ecosystems. However, mutualisms vary in strength and persistence
over space and time. This variation raises the question of why mutualisms
persist or vanish under different conditions. This investigator focuses on
plant-fungus interactions, or mycorrhizal associations, as a model of mutualism.
The overall goal of her research is to address the question of where and why
mutualisms occur, by investigating factors that influence the costs and benefits
of plant-fungus partnerships. Through field, greenhouse, and laboratory projects
this research aims to 1) describe patterns in the distribution and abundance of
mycorrhizal associations; 2) quantify the physiological costs and benefits of
supporting mycorrhizal fungi; 3) identify environmental factors that influence
the costs and benefits of these partnerships; and 4) evaluate population- or
community-level consequences of variation in mycorrhizal status. Plant-fungus
interactions may have important consequences for plant communities through their
effects on plant responses to environmental stress and processes such as
invasions by exotic species. Consequently, this research will inform restoration
and conservation efforts in native plant communities. Through her research, this
graduate student will also facilitate undergraduate involvement in science by
providing opportunities for minority students to participate in ecological
projects.