* 0808211
* Engaging Native Alaskan Students and their Community in Local Hot Springs Research
* GEO,GEO
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Sherry Cady, Portland State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 08/31/2011
* USD 182,561.00

Geoscientists, educators, and pre-service K-12 teaching students at Portland
State University will collaborate with Southeast Alaska Native high school
students, their teachers, tribal elders, and local government and business
leaders to develop a series of innovative high school geoscience curriculum
modules around the study of local hot spring ecosystems. The curricula will
engage the students through hands on field- and laboratory-based experiences
that build upon their cultural knowledge of, and experiences with, this type of
local natural resource. The inclusion of community members in this inquiry-based
research project and curricular development is key to motivating students to
learn about geoscience-related concepts and issues. Traditional Native Alaskan
knowledge encompasses an understanding of a geological setting as a habitat
occupied by ecological communities that provide a number of agricultural,
natural resource, and medicinal opportunities. In hot springs, microbial
communities may alter their surroundings, enhance fishery resources, and
concentrate mineral resources. The remains of these communities - when preserved
in hot spring sinter deposits - can record a history of bacteria, plant and
animal species associated with them. Hot spring mineral deposits have been used
in a variety of ceremonial ways by indigenous communities, and their medicinal
use has not been recorded. A major project goal is to present an opportunity for
interdisciplinary study of a relatively simple (extreme and mineralizing)
ecosystem that will pique the interest of these high-school students in teaching
and research careers in the geosciences and help preserve a scientific and
culturally important natural resource for Native Alaskan tribal communities.