* 0808907
* SGER:   Cryptographic Techniques for Trustworthy Computation in Faulty and Non-Confining Execution Environments
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2010
* Ronald Rivest, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* carl landwehr
* 08/31/2010
* USD 200,000.00

Proposal Number: 0808907 PI: Ronald L Rivest Institution: Massachusetts
Institute of Technology Title: SGER: Cryptographic Techniques for Trustworthy
Computation in Faulty and Non-Confining Execution Environments

The objective of this exploratory research is to find methods for conducting
secure computation within insecure, imperfect, and possibly malicious
environments. To realize this goal, two complementary approaches are being
pursued. The first one, inspired by the technique of ?proof carrying code,? is a
?Proof-Carrying Data? framework that can address many of the difficulties with
current approaches. In this framework, the system designer prescribe the desired
properties of the computation?s output, usually expressing a security or privacy
property. Proofs of these properties are attached to the data flowing through
the system, and are mutually verified by the system?s components. The second
research focus is the investigation of means by which concrete realizations of
computation can guarantee security properties despite inevitable risks. The
novelty in the method is that the assumptions on which the risks are based are
enumeratable, so they can be checked to be sure they that are, ideally, minimal,
realistic, and verifiable.

