* 0808498
* Dissertation Research: The Effects of Exotic-dominated Forest Communities on Ecosystem Productivity and Carbon Storage in Lowland Hawai'i
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2008,04/30/2010
* Richard Hughes, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 04/30/2010
* USD 12,000.00

In areas where exotic species invasions are pervasive and these invaders become
dominant, such as in oceanic islands like Hawaii, the original native ecosystems
are being systematically and irrevocably transformed to new states. A key
question is whether the ecosystem services will be impaired or otherwise altered
by such transformations in the balance of species. The proposed research will
measure the production and storage of carbon, services critical to the
maintenance of the global carbon cycle, by heavily invaded forest ecosystems on
Hawaii. The goal of the research is to determine the extent to which production
and carbon storage may be altered and to better understand the mechanisms
responsible for any changes in these ecosystem services. Hawaii provides a model
system to examine ecosystems with a long history of human influence, including
extensive invasion of exotic species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
significantly improve our ability to adapt management needs to the rapidly
changing environmental conditions imposed by invasive exotic species. This is a
situation that will likely be very prevalent in the 21st century. The research
will also provide training and research opportunities for undergraduate students
at universities in Wisconsin and Hawaii. Furthermore, investigators on this
project will work directly with the US Forest Service, informing forest managers
of the status of invasive species on Hawaii and implications of changes in these
forest ecosystems.