* 0808151
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Social Lives of Pottery on the Plain of Flowers: Late Bronze Age Ceramic Production and Exchange in Tsaghkahovit, Armenia
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2008,05/31/2010
* Adam Smith, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2010
* USD 15,000.00

Under the direction of Dr Adam Smith, Mr. Alan Greene will collect data for his
doctoral dissertation. With National Science Foundation support Mr. Greene will
travel to Yerevan Armenia and analyze a large sample of archaeological ceramics
excavated from Late Bronze Age sites. Upon his return to the United States a
selected sample will be analyzed by a variety of chemical and physical
techniques, including neutron activation analysis, digital radiography and X-ray
computed tomography. These latter two techniques have not been applied to
archaeological ceramics and this research has the potential to develop robust
techniques with wide applicability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For decades researchers
studying the rise of social complexity in the Old World focused on the rich and
abundant archaeological records in Iraq and Iran because in both these areas it
was possible to trace the development of complex societies from initial small
scale hunting and gathering groups through the emergence of empires. With access
to these two countries limited in recent years archaeologists have productively
pursued these same fundamental questions in neighboring areas and Armenia -
particularly the Bronze Age period - has proven fruitful ground. During the
Early Bronze Age large settlements appear in the archaeological record. It is
particularly interesting that in the following Middle Bronze Age period, the
pattern changes and settlements are abandoned in favor of a nomadic militaristic
lifestyle. During the Late Bronze Age (1,500 to 1,200 BC) which is the focus of
Mr. Greene's study, the pattern shifts once again and a unique arrangement
appears with people aggregated in large heavily fortified settlements with
smaller outliers. Mr. Greene wishes to understand how these settlements relate
to one another - to what degree and over what area do they interact - and what
were the economic and social systems which underpinned these relations. To do
this he is focusing on ceramics from a number of sites which have been excavated
in recent years. By tracing the distribution of pottery types over space he can
determine where different kinds were produced and how they moved and were
traded. Through the examination of the techniques by which they were fabricated
and the extent to which they were standardized, it will be possible to
determined the degree to which production was centralized. Thus the ceramics
serve to provide insight and understanding of a broader social universe.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves close collaboration between US and
Armenian researchers and will strengthen ties between the two countries. It will
also further the scientific career of a promising young researcher.&lt;br/&gt;