* 0808072
* Angular Momentum Evolution and X-ray Production in Low-Mass Pre-Main-Sequence Stars
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Keivan Stassun, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Womack
* 08/31/2012
* USD 309,790.00

In this project, Dr. Stassun, along with collaborators and students, will
execute a multi-faceted, observational research program, with the goal of
addressing three fundamental questions relating to the physics of low-mass stars
during the planet-building era (1-10 Myr): (1) What governs the angular momentum
evolution of low-mass pre-main sequence stars? (2) By which physical mechanisms
are X-rays in low-mass pre-main sequence stars generated? (3) How do X-rays
influence the properties and evolution of protoplanetary
disks?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By harnessing several large optical, infrared, and
X-ray databases of hundreds of low-mass pre-main sequence stars in the Orion
Nebula Cluster (1 Myr old) and the Orion OB1 association (10 Myr old), they
will:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Explore mechanisms for angular momentum loss in
young, low-mass stars: It is empirically known that angular momentum is not
conserved during the pre-main sequence phase of stellar evolution. Rotation data
show that low-mass stars deplete their angular momentum content by an order of
magnitude or more between ~1 Myr and the main sequence (~100 Myr). What is not
known is how this happens. Dr. Stassun will examine two possible mechanisms for
angular momentum evolution of pre-main sequence stars. First, the key
predictions of so-called "disk locking" theory, in which it is thought that
magnetic coupling of stars to their circumstellar disks regulates the star's
angular momentum, will be directly tested. Second, motivated by the discovery of
extremely powerful X-ray "super-flares" in the Orion Nebula Cluster stars, a new
model of angular momentum loss via scaled-up solar-type coronal mass ejections
will be developed and refined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) Elucidate the origins of
X-ray production in young, low-mass stars: It is now well established that low-
mass pre-main sequence stars produce X-rays at up to ~104 times that of the
present-day Sun. Yet, it is still unclear how they do this. While X-ray
production on the main sequence is well understood in terms of a rotation-driven
dynamo, X-ray observations of pre-main sequence stars have so far failed to find
a clear "rotation-activity relationship" such as that found on the main
sequence. An underlying rotation-activity relation for pre-main sequence stars
may indeed exist, but it has been missed due to an astrophysical bias that makes
stars with known rotation periods systematically more X-ray luminous. To test
this hypothesis, and to explore the evolution of the rotation-activity
connection, Dr. Stassun will make sensitive v sin i and rotation-period
measurements of Orion Nebula Cluster and Orion OB1 stars, and correlate these
measures with the stars' X-ray luminosities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3)
Investigate the influence of stellar X-rays on the circumstellar environment:
X-rays are thought to play a central role in much of the microphysics that
governs magnetic star-disk interaction, accretion processes, outflows of
material, and angular momentum evolution of young stars. However, to date there
has been no direct observational proof of stellar X-rays interacting with and
heating circumstellar gas. Here, Dr. Stassun will conduct an experiment to
establish for the first time a direct link between stellar X-rays and the
heating of circumstellar gas in a large sample of pre-main sequence stars. In
particular, he will search for time-correlated variability in H-alpha and X-rays
among 800 pre-main sequence stars for which we have a unique database of
simultaneous H-alpha and X-ray light curves. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will continue and expand upon the successful undergraduate and graduate programs
developed in collaboration with Fisk University: The Fisk Astronomy and Space
Science Training (FASST) program, and the Fisk-Vanderbilt Masters-to-PhD Bridge
program. This research program will form the basis of a PhD thesis for a
Vanderbilt PhD student, with active participation of a Bridge graduate student
and one or more FASST undergraduates. The project will also result in an
excellent professional development opportunity for a postdoctoral researcher
seeking experience in integrating research, teaching, and student mentoring.