* 0808479
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Transition to Independence: Exploring an Extreme Life History
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Creagh Breuner, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* daniel wiegmann
* 06/30/2009
* USD 12,000.00

PI Breuner&lt;br/&gt;Proposal # IOS 0808479&lt;br/&gt;Doctoral Dissertation
Research: Transition to Independence- Exploring the&lt;br/&gt;Extreme Life
History of Albatrosses&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In species with parental care,
transition to independence is the first true test of individual fitness. In many
birds, leaving the nest (1) ends parental care, (2) requires an abrupt
transition from immobility to sustained flight, and (3) requires learning to
forage. In light of these requirements, it is not surprising that age and
condition at departure can influence future survival and reproductive success.
What proximate triggers do fledglings use to time this important life-history
transition? Past studies have focused either on morphological, energetic, or
endocrine correlates of fledging. This proposal addresses proximate triggers of
fledging, integrating measures of morphology, energetic reserves, and endocrine
physiology in a long-lived seabird, the Laysan Albatross. Further, hormone
levels and food availability will be manipulated to experimentally address
interactions between energetics, body mass, food delivery, and glucocorticoid
hormones. The combination of strategies will allow for experimental evaluation
of fledging behavior within a physiological framework. Broader impacts include
strong conservation biology implications. Laysan Albatross have been identified
as one of a number of indicator species for the seabird colonies of the NWHI and
are a major consumer of marine resources, so their reproductive success is
reflective of the health and status of the oceans. Knowledge of the mechanisms
and effects of physiological changes during fledging will aid in both
understanding the mechanisms of behavior and the informed management of long-
lived oceanic seabirds.&lt;br/&gt;