* 0808975
* Diagnosing the Climatic Causes and Consequences of Snow Depth Variability
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Upmanu Lall, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 09/30/2011
* USD 309,070.00

The goal of the proposed work is to provide an improved understanding of snow
depth ? climate relationships and the physical mechanisms involved. An extensive
body of scientific literature describes the linkages between snow extent
anomalies and climate, but snow extent alone does not tell the whole story.
Variations in snow depth, which do not necessarily coincide with variations in
snow extent, may have a distinct and considerable impact on climate over a range
of spatial and temporal scales. Recently completed research by the PI clearly
distinguishes the climatic significance of snow depth, and complements the
somewhat limited existing literature on snow depth ? climate linkages. This
serves as motivation for this proposal to identify the responsible mechanisms.
The snow depth - climate relationship is likely to be very complicated, and
involve different dynamic and thermodynamic processes across varying spatial
domains and scales. Some facets of this overall relationship are better
understood than others, while still other facets may benefit from updated
analyses using more recent data and/or modeling resources. Therefore the
proposed work will specifically target two aspects of the overall snow depth ?
climate relationship where our current state of understanding is incomplete. Two
hypotheses are investigated, the first involving a remote climatic cause for
snow depth variability over North America, and the second involving a local
climatic consequence of snow depth variability. A key resource for this proposal
is a newly released, long-term, gridded, daily snow depth dataset covering all
of North America (Dyer and Mote 2006). Its availability offers exciting new
opportunities to study snow depth and its interactions with climate, especially
in northern regions of North America where snow depth information has
historically been lacking but is expected to vary considerably. Hence this
frequently neglected parameter can be empirically evaluated over a broader
domain than previously was possible. Furthermore, snow depth perturbation
experiments will be performed using both a one-dimensional snowpack model and a
regional climate model, to comprehensively evaluate the thermodynamic and near-
surface dynamic processes associated with anomalous snow depth. Diagnosing
specific climatic causes and consequences of snow depth variability, rather than
an exploratory and unfocused study of the overall relationships, hold the
strongest prospects for success and impact within the hydrologic and climate
science communities. Recognition of snow depth as an important contributor to
climate variations will promote continued improvements in the still relatively
crude snow parameterizations in climate models, and also in snow depth remote
sensing techniques. The concept of distinct snow depth and snow extent linkages
will lead to a more comprehensive understanding of snow ? climate relationships,
and provide new information to help identify additional regions/seasons which
may hold some predictive capability for climate. This in turn would have far-
reaching societal benefits for water resource management, hazard mitigation and
anthropogenic climate change. The proposed research will be managed to maximize
its broader impacts on education. Despite its focused scope and relatively
modest budget, the project will support three students at dramatically different
stages of their educational career. An existing doctoral candidate at the PI?s
institution will complete her dissertation, and ensure a smooth and efficient
transition to a new doctoral student for the duration of this project.
Furthermore, one high school student at New York City?s prestigious Bronx High
School of Science will be sponsored, whose research on this project will be
entered in the Intel Science Talent Search competition
(http://www.sciserv.org/Sts/). Such early exposure to research can inspire
students to pursue careers in science and engineering, and foster the
development of the next generation of researchers.