* 0808043
* Collaborative Research: Probing Galaxy and Cluster Halos Using Dwarf Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2014
* Mario Mateo, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Barvainis
* 06/30/2014
* USD 469,173.00

Drs Mateo and Olszewski will measure the motions of stars within dwarf galaxies,
using a spectrograph at the Magellan telescope built by Dr. Mateo. These least-
luminous of the galaxies appear to contain far more mass than is present as
stars: we observe those stars to be moving so rapidly that they would escape
from the galaxy if not for the additional gravitational pull of unseen dark
matter. By careful studies of stellar motion, the group will improve
measurements of the total mass present in nearby dwarf galaxies, and test
whether they are being pulled apart by gravitational forces from neighbor
galaxies. In more distant galaxies, they will measure motions of the surrounding
globular star clusters to estimate the mass of the galaxy and hence of its dark
matter. The group will collaborate with statisticians to analyze and interpret
their results. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this work will test theories
of galaxy formation, many of which predict that a galaxy must exceed a minimum
mass in order to continue making stars. Students will be trained as they
participate in the research. Both Dr Mateo and Dr. Olszewski will present public
lectures on their work in their local communities. Through a program at U.
Arizona, Dr. Olszewski will continue his work with elementary-school teachers,
with star parties and visits to the Steward Observatory telescopes. &lt;br/&gt;