* 0808416
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Role of Envrionmental Stress in the Expression of Inbreeding Depression
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2010
* Leonard Nunney, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 06/30/2010
* USD 11,818.00

Organisms are adapted to specific biotic and abiotic conditions, and are subject
to environmental stress whenever environmental variables shift towards the
limits of their tolerance. Understanding how environmental stress influences
population persistence is a major concern in conservation biology. In
particular, inbreeding in small populations can lower individual fitness
(inbreeding depression) even under ideal conditions and this effect can be
amplified by environmental stress. However, not all stresses interact with
inbreeding in the same manner. The proposed research aims to determine whether
fundamental differences exist between different types of stress in amplifying
the deleterious effects of inbreeding using the model organism Drosophila
melanogaster. Inbreeding depression will be measured for survival and
reproductive traits in individuals exposed to several types of abiotic and
biotic stresses. Furthermore, the underlying genetic basis of these effects will
be investigated using micorarrays. This will permit the identification of
specific genes and biological pathways involved in the expression of inbreeding
depression under these stresses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has
important implications for reintroduction of organisms into stressful natural
environments following captive breeding. It is also important for the management
of small or bottlenecked populations, given that the magnitude of environmental
stress experienced by organisms in the future is likely to increase due to
global climate change. Information on the specific genetic mechanisms
responsible for inbreeding depression under stress could also help predict and
ameliorate potential problems in conserved populations. &lt;br/&gt;