* 0808454
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Symbiont evolution and host social structure: bees and nematodes
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2010
* Quinn McFrederick, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 05/31/2010
* USD 11,913.00

An insect society can serve as a hub of transmission for pathogens, commensals,
and mutualists (symbionts), but transmission within a colony occurs between
close relatives. If this consanguineous transmission is much more prevalent than
between-colony transmission, selection may favor more benevolent symbiont
strains in social hosts in comparison to solitary hosts, because high
consanguineous transmission may couple the fitness of the symbiont to that of
the host colony. To test this hypothesis, genetic covariances between social and
solitary sweat bee hosts and their nematode symbionts are being measured to
represent effective transmission. Effective transmission is a measure of within-
versus between-colony transmission, and therefore provides a means to measure
the coupling of host and symbiont fitnesses. Laboratory colonies of social and
solitary hosts either with or without symbionts will be used to measure the
impacts of infection on host fitness. This research will also determine if
genetic covariances can predict the impact of a symbiont on its host.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will involve the training undergraduates,
including students from underrepresented groups. Additionally, this research has
direct relevance to the understanding of disease dynamics in social systems of
all kinds, from humans to slime molds.