* 0808130
* Research on Controllability of Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Oleg Emanouilov, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 06/30/2011
* USD 108,643.00

The focus of the proposed research is to analyze global controllability and
stabilizability properties of several different types of physical processes
described by nonlinear partial differential equations (PDEs). The control acts
through actuators located on the boundary or concentrated in some subdomain. The
primary goals are to establish the theoretical possibility of global
controllability, and to obtain an explicit construction of the control strategy.
The latter will be in the form of asymptotic formulae or by reduction of
original nonlinear problem to a much simpler controllability problem for linear
PDEs or integral equations capable of numerical solution. For example, if a
physical process is described by an integrable nonlinear PDE , we reduce the
question of controllability to the analysis of a controllability problem for the
Gelfand-Levitan-Marchenko integral equation and then try to solve this problem
asymptotically. For a physical process described by a nonintegrable PDE we plan
to adapt Coron's return method, which allows construction of asymptotic
solutions to a large class of controllability problems with control distributed
over the whole boundary or just a part of the boundary. The main analytical
tools will be the inverse scattering technique, microlocal analysis, the
Carleman type estimates and soliton theory.

Understanding the control and stabilization of physical processes described by
nonlinear partial differential equations is becoming increasingly important due
to the rapid advances in material science, physics, aircraft design, fiber-optic
communication systems. The nonlinear partial differential equations used as
models are mathematically challenging and widely used in physics and
engineering. The global controllability problems for these equations are
motivated by practical real-world applications which include suppression of
turbulence, control of waves in channels, control of plasma flow, design of a
new generation of amplifiers which will allow the preservation of the shape of
optical pulse in fiber-optical communication systems.

