* 0808314
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Experimental investigation of the genomic basis of local adaptation
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2009
* Alison Anastasio, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 05/31/2009
* USD 11,995.00

Local adaptation is characterized by natural selection for traits that improve
fitness under local conditions, irrespective of consequences of these traits in
other habitats. Scientists have studied local adaptation via reciprocal
transplant experiments: planting individuals of the same species from two
different locations together, then assessing if individuals grown at their home
site show higher survival and reproduction. However, the extent to which
underlying genetic changes contribute to local adaptation remains poorly
understood. This research aims to illuminate the genomic basis of local
adaptation by pairing reciprocal transplant experiments with genome-wide genetic
analysis, using Arabidopsis thaliana plants from different habitats in Sweden.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The novelty of this study lies in two areas: the
application of cutting-edge genomic resources to plant populations growing in
native habitats, and the ability to pinpoint specific regions of the genome
associated with survival and reproduction in the field. The researchers will
disseminate results, information on rare and isolated populations of A.
thaliana, and seed stocks widely to the scientific community. Finally, the value
of this research becomes clear when considering the challenges of global climate
change, conservation, and habitat restoration in the modern world, all of which
touch on the issue of adaptation to specific environmental
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;