* 0808845
* SGER: Response of Alum Rock springs to the magnitude 5.6 Alum Rock earthquake on October 30, 2007
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2008,03/31/2009
* Michael Manga, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 03/31/2009
* USD 10,000.00

Hydrologic responses to earthquakes, such as increases in steam flow or changes
in the water level in wells, are not uncommon. Hydrologic responses are
important because they provide unique insight into the coupling of hydrologic
and tectonic processes at spatial and temporal scales that are otherwise
difficult to study.

The origin of hydrologic responses to earthquakes has been the subject of
controversy, in large part because there are many models to explain observations
and almost no measurements suitable for distinguishing between hypotheses. On
October 30, 2007 a magnitude 5.6 earthquake occurred near the Alum Rock springs,
California. The PI monitoring these springs for the past 5 years in order to
provide a benchmark for post-seismic changes in discharge and water composition.
Over the first 5 days following the earthquake he documented a three-fold
increase in discharge. The Alum Rock springs discharge along one strand of the
Hayward fault. They discharge water that is a mixture of local meteoric water
and connate waters expelled from depth.

The PI will use stable isotope analyses of water samples collected over a 3
month time period following the earthquake in order to test proposed models for
the origin of the increased discharge. Because the spring water at each spring
is geochemically distinct it should be possible to document changes in fault
zone plumbing. It will also be possible to determine whether the source of the
excess water flowing from the springs originates at depth, or in the shallow
subsurface.

This project offers an interdisciplinary opportunity to understand fault zone
structure and evolution. In particular it will provide new (and probably unique)
constraints on the role of fluids in fault zone processes. The PI will integrate
the monitoring of the springs with courses taught at UC Berkeley, including
freshman seminars, undergraduate-level geodynamics, and graduate level classes.
The results will also be communicated with the managers of Alum Rock Park where
the springs are located. The park is a popular destination for local residents
and K-12 student field trips. The springs are the main draw of the park and this
work can be used to update interpretative signs and displays.