* 0808138
* Stochastic Analysis and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Tyrone Duncan, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

The research focuses on stochastic analysis for systems with fractional Brownian
motions with particular application to control problems. Since the available
results for the solutions of stochastic differential equations driven by
fractional Brownian motions are very limited, the investigation of explicit
solutions of multidimensional bilinear equations and the existence and
uniqueness of solutions of nonlinear equations is proposed. The explicit
solutions for bilinear equations requires a combination of Lie theory and
stochastic analysis and the explicit solutions provide an important method for
solving various stochastic problems for bilinear equations. These stochastic
differential equations should provide useful models for many physical phenomena.
The stochastic optimal control of multidimensional linear systems driven by
fractional Brownian motions and a quadratic cost functional for a finite time
interval is proposed. Furthermore this controlled system with an ergodic cost is
also proposed for study. In both cases the optimal control uses a prediction of
the increments of a fractional Brownian motion. The ergodic control problem is
the natural setting for an adaptive control problem for these linear systems.
The adaptive control problem requires the identification of the unknown
parameters of the linear system and the construction of a self-optimizing
adaptive control. Some parameter identification schemes are proposed such as a
weighted pseudo least squares algorithm to obtain strongly consistent estimators
of the parameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal describes the investigation
of some stochastic models that use a family of stochastic processes called
fractional Brownian motions which arose empirically in a model for the rainfall
along the Nile River. The potential usage of these processes has been
demonstrated for economic data, telecommunications, device noise, and medicine.
To have useful stochastic models with fractional Brownian motions it is
necessary to have information about the solutions of the equations. This is one
goal of the proposal. Many stochastic models are also controlled and with a cost
criterion an optimal control is sought. In the research some control problems
for linear systems with a quadratic cost functional will be studied. Often some
parameters of the system are unknown and it is also required to control the
system. These problems require that the parameters are identified and a control
is determined based on the estimates of the parameters. Such problems with
controlled linear systems and fractional Brownian motion will be
investigated.&lt;br/&gt;