* 0808337
* Dissertation Research: The effects of multispecies interactions on population dynamics of invading Centaurea solstitialis across a geographic range
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2008,04/30/2009
* Sarah Swope, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Richard S. Inouye
* 04/30/2009
* USD 7,961.00

Plants interact with numerous species, including pollinators, competitors, and
pathogens. Nonadditive effects arise when an interaction with one species alters
the intensity or frequency of the plant's interactions with subsequent species.
While complex interactions such as these are probably common in natural systems,
their net effects are inherently difficult to predict and the underlying
mechanisms are poorly understood. Even when interactions impact individual
plants, they may not affect the size of the plant population. Individual
performance and population size can be decoupled when population growth is less
sensitive to changes in a particular life stage; interactions that alter a plant
at that stage will have little effect on the population as a whole. Because
population dynamics often vary across the geographic range of a species, a given
biotic interaction may have different population level consequences depending on
where it takes place. &lt;br/&gt;This study will use an invasive plant, yellow
starthistle, its pollinators, and two biological control agents (a pathogen and
an insect herbivore) to examine (1) the net outcome of multispecies interactions
for individual plants, (2) whether changes in individual performance have
population level effects, and (3) whether populations at the periphery of the
range of this invasive species are affected differently than populations at the
center of its range. The intellectual merit of the study is that it addresses
population-level consequences of multispecies interactions, a central, albeit
under-studied, theme in ecology. Furthermore, it considers those consequences in
a geographic context, with the understanding that population-level consequences
may vary with their broader ecological context. Broader impacts of this study
include student training and potential application to biological control
programs that are used in agricultural systems and to limit the spread of
invasive species.