* 0808718
* III-CXT-Core Large: Computer Vision Research: Promoting Paradigm Shifts in Archaeology
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* David Cooper, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2014
* USD 2,845,654.00

IIS - 0808718 &lt;br/&gt;III-CXT-Core Large: Computer Vision Research: Promoting
Paradigm Shifts in Archaeology&lt;br/&gt;Cooper, David B.&lt;br/&gt;Brown
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project continues a longer term
intellectual program begun under the ITR solicitation and has proven to be
innovative in multiple ways. The work is an artful interdisciplinary blend of
computer vision, physics, mathematics, algorithm development, efficient
computation, graphics and visualization in a rapidly emerging area which might
best be termed computational archeology, although the methods are generalized to
other domains. The project involves an interdisciplinary team of archeologists
and computer vision/graphics/visualization researchers developing methods and
software for capturing and analyzing archeological data. In this project The
Brown University Division of Engineering, Laboratory for Man/Machine Systems
(LEMS), will collaborate with the Brown University Joukowsky Institute for
Archaeology and the Ancient World, the nonprofit educational outreach Institute
for the Visualization of History, Williamstown, MA, archaeologists at Tel Aviv
University, Israel and several computer vision experts from European
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary testbed project will
be a crusader castle in Israel. There are four sub-projects proposed: a
collection system and database for video and 3D data captured on-site during
excavation, three-dimensional reconstruction, of both small artifacts and
architectural sites, assembly of pottery and glass fragments, and visualization
of sites and artifacts. The project builds on and extends earlier work which
focused on the Petra archaeological site and assembly of artifact fragments. The
advances in computing technologies over the past 5 years in processing power and
storage capacity combined with decreases in cost allow the researchers to expand
their ambitions and develop more powerful tools and analytic
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;