* 0808115
* Div-curl systems and Variational principles
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Giles Auchmuty, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2012
* USD 89,999.00

This project will support the investigator's analysis of certain basic systems
of equations of interest in science and engineering. Our primary topic will be
boundary value problems for div-curl system on bounded regions in space. Both
Maxwell's equations for an electromagnetic field and some problems in fluid
mechanics are governed by this system with certain associated boundary
conditions. There still are many open questions about these systems and their
solutions. The proposed research centers on how to describe the mathematical
properties, and approximation, of solutions of these boundary value problems.
This information is needed for the development of good algorithms for the
computation of these fields or flows -- and should have wide applicability for
the numerical modeling of devices and
equipment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematically, these div-curl systems are over-
determined systems of equations that only have solutions when certain
compatibility conditions hold -- and often require extra data in addition to
standard boundary conditions. These extra conditions include both natural
analytical conditions and some subtle conditions that arise from geometrical
considerations. They sometimes are known to experts on these subjects, but their
statements have previously only been vaguely stated, since the precise versions
require considerable geometrical and analytical detail. They have been carefully
described in recent papers of the PI and his collaborators. This proposal is to
support the implementation, and further development, of these results in some
models that arise in applications. The proposed research will use the
variational characterization of the solutions to obtain sharp results about the
finite energy solutions of these systems in a number of important geometrical
situations. We also intend to investigate the development of good methods for
the numerical approximation of the solutions in various different geometrical
configurations. A particular interest will be the analysis of the solution of
certain models of ferromagnetic bodies and electrostatic discharges.&lt;br/&gt;