* 0808665
* First Principles Investigations of Boron Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Sohrab Ismail-Beigi, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2012
* USD 240,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational and
theoretical research, and education on Boron nanomaterials. Theoretical work in
materials physics provides models that link microscopic mechanisms to observed
phenomena such as magnetism, optical response, elastic and plastic behavior, or
unusual charge transport. The PI will apply accurate first principles
theoretical techniques to study the structure, stability, and electronic states
of boron nanostructures.&lt;br/&gt;Boron nanomaterials have been the subject of
increasing scientific interest and investigation in recent years. One driving
force is that such boron systems should have novel and unusual structural,
mechanical, and electronic properties. These properties differ from those of
well-known nanomaterials such as carbon nanotubes and may prove robust and
useful in device applications. So they may enlarge the library of nanoscale
materials properties that are accessible and modifiable.&lt;br/&gt;The PI has
recently discovered a novel class of boron nanostructures with higher stability
than those known to date. He has provided a physical picture of the nature of
bonding in these and other boron nanosystems that explains the reasons for the
stability of the new structures. These initial findings lay a firm foundation
and also open new, unexplored, and exciting areas of investigation. More
generally, research in this area furthers our understanding of the atomic
geometries, stability, unusual bonding schemes, and electronic behaviors of
nanostructures and reduced dimensional systems.&lt;br/&gt;A goal of this
research is to advance our understanding of nanostructures in multiple
directions. These include the properties of two-dimensional sheet-like forms of
boron?the boron analogues of graphene for carbon nanotubes, boron nanotubes
constructed from these sheets, and the response and properties of boron sheets
and nanotubes when doped with a variety of atoms.&lt;br/&gt;This research will
be enhanced through collaboration with the Pfefferle group at Yale, a group that
can fabricate and carry out experimental studies boron nanotubular structures.
This intersection of theory and experiment holds potential for theory to have a
direct impact on the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports educational
activities that aim to disseminate knowledge and interest in computational
condensed matter theory through mentorship of graduate and undergraduate
students. The PI plans to develop a curriculum for an advanced graduate-level
solid-state theory course. Undergraduate students will continue to be trained
and will perform research on boron nanostructures while learning solid-state and
computational physics. The PI will continue and expand his participation in
science education at minority-dominated local public schools by: (a) helping
plan and judge at science fairs and competitions, (b) mentoring and tutoring
students in a robotics class at a local public school, and (c) developing a set
of presentations for young students to introduce them to the key materials
physics and technological ideas behind common objects such as computer chips,
LEDs, CD players, lasers, displays, flash memory, etc. The presentations are
aimed both at educating young students and captivating the interest of those who
may consider a degree or career in science or
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational and theoretical
research, and education on materials and structures of atoms that involve the
element boron and have at least one dimension that is very small, at most a few
billionths of a meter in length or, put another way, on the length scale of a
few atoms. The PI will use computer simulations based on powerful algorithms and
software to predict the properties of boron nanostructures. Of particular
interest is whether there are specific arrangements of boron atoms, like sheets
or tubes, that are particularly stable or able to withstand various physical and
chemical stresses. Do these structures have interesting electronic and chemical
properties? Similar structures based on carbon, like nanometer diameter tubes
and nanometer scale ?soccer balls,? are much better known. They hold potential
to form the basis of future technologies for electronic devices and sensors.
Boron based nanoscale structures are less well studied, but recent advances
suggest that they may possess advantages over their carbon analogs or may
provide useful flexibility in the quest to develop electronics on the nanoscale.
Boron has a rich chemistry and is of considerable fundamental
interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports educational activities that
aim to disseminate knowledge and interest in computational condensed matter
theory through mentorship of graduate and undergraduate students. The PI plans
to develop a curriculum for an advanced graduate-level solid-state theory
course. Undergraduate students will continue to be trained and will perform
research on boron nanostructures while learning solid-state and computational
physics. The PI will continue and expand his participation in science education
at minority-dominated local public schools by: (a) helping plan and judge at
science fairs and competitions, (b) mentoring and tutoring students in a
robotics class at a local public school, and (c) developing a set of
presentations for young students to introduce them to the key materials physics
and technological ideas behind common objects such as computer chips, LEDs, CD
players, lasers, displays, flash memory, etc. The presentations are aimed both
at educating young students and captivating the interest of those who may
consider a degree or career in science or
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;