* 0808990
* SBIR Phase I:  Natural Fiber-Reinforced Bio-Based Thermoset Resin Composites
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2008,09/30/2009
* Mark Janney, Materials Innovation Technologies, LLC.
* Standard Grant
* Maria Josephine Yuen
* 09/30/2009
* USD 149,300.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop natural
fiber-reinforced bio-based resin composites that are appropriate for use in
exterior applications on vehicles (automobiles, over-the-road trucks, and
recreational vehicles). These bio-based engineering materials are interesting to
automotive and truck manufactures because of their light weight, potential low
cost, and low environmental impact. However, these composites tend to be highly
sensitive to moisture. That sensitivity is one of the main barriers to
commercialization for bio-based composites. Currently, no natural fiber-
reinforced composites are used as structural components in transportation
applications because of the moisture sensitivity issue. The approach is to
investigate combinations of fiber type, fiber processing, and resin chemistry to
produce composites with strong interfacial bonding and properties that are the
least sensitive to moisture. It will be determined how the type of fiber (kenaf
vs. flax), the processing of the fiber (degree of fibrillation, and surface
modification), and the type of resin (soybean oil-derived resins vs. modified
phenolics) affect the mechanical properties of the composites and their moisture
sensitivity. It is anticipated that within this experimental space will be
combinations that produce good interfacial bonding between resin and fiber which
will lead to reduced moisture sensitivity.

Natural fibers and bio-based resins have the potential to replace fiberglass and
synthetic resins derived from petroleum in a variety of composite applications.
The most likely opportunities will be in the transportation sector (automotive,
truck, RV); additional opportunities may develop in building materials
(subfloor, roof, decking, posts and beams). Replacing fiberglass-reinforced
synthetic resin composites with natural fiber-reinforced biobased thermoset
resin composites will have the many advantages over traditional composites. The
bio-based composites will have lower density, acceptable specific strength,
equal or higher specific modulus, and fibers that are non-abrasive and have low
wear rates for tooling. Their environmental impact will be less as the are
renewable resources and use less non-renewable energy in making the fibers.
There will be a weight reduction which can increase fuel economy and reduce
emissions as well as reduce the life-cycle environmental impact by sequestering
carbon during the growth of the plant material. This product will have a lower
cost due to the fact that these are renewable resources and have a lower cost of
raw materials at industrial production levels. Natural fibers and bio-based
resins can be combined with synthetic fibers and resins to provide design
flexibility, e.g., if the stiffness of a natural fiber-reinforced composite is
insufficient for an application, fiberglass (10-30 wt%) can be added to raise
the modulus to an acceptable level. One still realizes much of the value of the
natural reinforcement. Likewise, bio-based resins can be used to extend
petrochemical resins much as ethanol is blended with gasoline.