* 0808033
* Exploring the past, present and future landscape with elementary school students
* GEO,GEO
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2010
* Tina Delahunty, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 08/31/2010
* USD 49,976.00

This Planning Grant is exploring the educational potential of using an unusual
landscape setting to provide elementary students and their teachers with place-
and field-based research experiences, as a tool for engaging them in STEM career
paths and enhancing their science content knowledge, creativity, and critical
thinking skills. The Nature Conservancy manages a wetlands site in Shady Valley,
Tennessee that is a rare, ecologically-important mountain bog. The site offers
excellent conditions for sediment coring, which provides students with the
opportunity to learn about landscape development and reconstruct the Holocene
environment via palynological investigation. Integration of historical
perspectives on land-use changes, student forecasting of future landscapes, and
development of a video demonstrating age-appropriate sampling strategies are
potential strategies for augmenting student data collection and analysis
activities. Planning activities will focus on a series of meetings between
geoscientists, learning theory professionals, curriculum developers, mass
communication professionals, videographers, members of the Tennessee and North
Carolina Geographic Alliances, elementary school teachers and administrators,
and the Nature Conservancy, in order to clarify needs, goals, and potential
partnerships.