* 0808168
* Integrating precision observations and simulations of the Intergalactic Medium
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* David Tytler, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 07/31/2011
* USD 799,158.00

AST-0808168&lt;br/&gt;Tytler&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intergalactic medium is
most of the volume of the Universe and until recently it contained most of the
dark matter and gas. This project is a tight combination of precision
measurements of the intergalactic medium through absorption in quasar spectra
with a suite of simulations designed to extract the physical parameters from
those measurements. It will provide new estimates of cosmologically interesting
parameters, including the baryonic, dark matter and dark energy contents, and
the amount of clustering of matter on small scales, which are more accurate than
those obtained before from the intergalactic gas, and completely independent of
those from supernovae, galaxies and the cosmic microwave background. For all
parameters the errors will be comparable to the best of any method. The work
will also give much more accurate measurements of the temperature of the
intergalactic gas, and the intensity of the ultraviolet background radiation.
Sophisticated calibrations of spectra will make them suitable for determining
which set of parameters makes the simulated spectra most like the real spectra.
Some simulations will include radiative transfer so as to interpret absorption
near to individual quasars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This team has a long record of
integrating education and diversity with their research. Students receive
intensive instruction in astrophysics, cosmology and the methods of precision
measurement, observing with the Keck and Lick telescopes, and learn to run a
large code on state-of-the-art supercomputers. Most undergraduates will also
become co-authors on one or two papers.