* 0808551
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Behavioral adaptation to captivity in the zebrafish, Danio rerio
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2008,05/31/2009
* Barrie Robison, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* daniel wiegmann
* 05/31/2009
* USD 6,831.00

PI Barrie D. Robison &lt;br/&gt;Proposal # IOS-0808551&lt;br/&gt;Behavioral
adaptation to captivity in the zebrafish, Danio
rerio.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Captive breeding programs are often used as a
conservation tool. Unfortunately, adaptation to the captive environment
(domestication) can produce dramatic behavioral changes that make captive
animals unsuitable for release into the wild. Understanding the processes that
produce the tame behavior typical of domesticated populations helps the
development of informed conservation decisions. Wild and domestic zebrafish will
be used to examine the relationship between stress and the tame behavioral type
produced by domestication. Studies will integrate behavioral and hormonal assays
with studies of genetics. Wild populations of zebrafish are expected to show
higher levels of stress hormones in the laboratory relative to domestic
populations, as well as higher responses to stressful activities such as
handling by humans. This research will build understanding of how and why
behavior changes during domestication, and set the stage for future studies on
the genetic basis of these changes. Broader impacts will include research
training opportunities that will enhance educational experiences by integrating
studies of behavior, endocrinology, and genetics. The work will include
mentoring of undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;