* 0808911
* Dissertation Improvement Grant: Micromorphological Analysis of Activity Areas at the Early Bronze Age Village, T.A.V. Afragola, Southern Italy
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2008,10/31/2009
* Natalie Munro, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2009
* USD 14,983.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Natalie Munro, Tiziana Matarazzo will use
micromorphological analysis to identify human activity areas at T.A.V. Afragola,
an exceptionally well-preserved Bronze Age village in southern Italy. The
Afragola village is remarkable for its preservation, which is matched by few
archaeological sites in Europe. The site has been called the ?New Pompeii? as it
was covered by almost 1 m of ash during the Vesuvius eruption in 3,780 BP. The
site boasts a large number of well-preserved structures, built features and
organic materials and it provides a unique laboratory to investigate variability
in artifact distribution and activity areas across the village. The
identification of activity areas will proceed through the analysis of
micromorphological thin sections of collected samples of undisturbed surface
sediments.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The identification of activity areas is a first
step toward understanding how past people interacted, organized their daily
routines, and moved around their settlements. In addition, identification of the
types of artifacts and tasks associated with activity areas informs us about
social differentiation and organization. By identifying the location and
function of domestic and manufacturing areas, this study will address issues
related to social stratification, labor specialization, economic specialization,
and organization of households in Bronze Age Italy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the study of undisturbed archaeological deposits,
soil micromorphology can be used to reconstruct the formation histories of
complex occupation surfaces and associated activities. This study will examine
the relationship between household structures, microstratigraphy, and micro-
refuse to identify domestic and manufacturing activities and their precise
location at the site. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
study is realized on four fronts. First, the Vesuvius eruption resulted in near
total preservation of the village. This quality of preservation is extremely
rare in the archaeological record and provides a unique snapshot of past human
activities. Second, Afragola was occupied in the Bronze Age, a period of
monumental social and economic change. This study will contribute to an active
debate on the development of social complexity that crosscuts diverse time
periods and geographic regions. Third, although scholars have studied the
architecture, construction materials and associated artifacts of this period,
little is known about its household spatial organization. The application of
micromorphology to the study of human domestic activities has the potential to
revolutionize our current understanding of everyday life during this period.
Finally, the function of most features and structures at T.A.V. Afragola cannot
be discerned using traditional archaeological techniques.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will also increase public knowledge about
micromorphological analysis and the study of human behavior at the household
level. This research will demonstrate the value of micromorphology for
addressing cultural questions that cannot be reconstructed using macro-
archaeological methods alone. This is important not only in Italy but also in
the United States where micromorphology is not commonly used in archaeological
analysis despite its potential to answer questions that cannot be addressed
using other means. The study will not only provide training for the author, but
will encourage undergraduates at the same institution to explore micromorphology
technique to answer socio-cultural questions. &lt;br/&gt;