* 0808604
* Reduction of iron and humic substances as a dominant respiratory process in arctic peat soils
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2008,12/31/2012
* David Lipson, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 12/31/2012
* USD 590,498.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reduction of iron
and humic substances as a dominant respiratory process in arctic peat
soils&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;P.I.:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;David Lipson
&lt;br/&gt;San Diego State University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lars T. Angenent
&lt;br/&gt;Washington University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Theodore K.
Raab&lt;br/&gt;Stanford University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal # 0808604
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigators from San Diego State University, Washington
University, and Stanford University will collaborate to study the role of iron
and humic substances as electron acceptors in anaerobic respiration in peat
soils of drained thaw lake basins in the Arctic. The role of microbial
physiology in carbon flux from Arctic soils has substantial implications of
climate change, and the PIs will apply novel methods that promise new insights.
The study will further our understanding of controls over and seasonal and
spatial variability in of carbon fluxes from Arctic soils. The goals are to: (1)
determine the specific mechanisms of exocellular electron transfer in Alaskan
peat soils, and the microorganisms that mediate these processes, (2) quantify
the importance of exocellular electron transfer to soil respiration in Arctic
drained thaw lake basins, (3) determine the effects of polygon-induced
microtopography on exocellular electron transfer, and (4) determine how age and
complexity of soil humic materials along a soil age gradient affect rates of
exo-electron transfer, and the conditions under which it occurs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;