* 0808598
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Pollinator behavior and the maintenance of females in gynodioecious populations
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2011
* James Stone, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 05/31/2011
* USD 10,270.00

Pollination is one of the best studied and ecologically most important
mutualisms in biology. Pollinators are diverse and vary widely in their behavior
and efficiency in pollinating flowers. Many plants have separate sexes, yet it
is poorly understood how changes in the pollinator community could
differentially affect male, hermaphrodite, and female flowers. Pollinators that
eat pollen, for example, may neglect female flowers. Furthermore, the
distribution and abundance of pollinators vary over time naturally and as a
result of human activity. Using computer simulations and field experiments, this
study will directly measure the consequences of pollinator communities on seed
production of female and hermaphrodite Silene vulgaris plants exposed to
different groups of pollinators, including pollen collecting bees, nectar
collecting moths, and seed eating insects, in North America and in Europe. The
intellectual merit of this research is that it will develop our understanding of
the consequences of changes in pollinator communities on plant fitness, and our
understanding of the conditions that favor plants that are hermaphroditic or
which have separate sexes. &lt;br/&gt;This study will have broader impacts in
several areas. There are potential economic implications because many
agricultural crops require insect pollination to produce adequate yields.
Computer programs created for this project will also be used to develop freely
available educational software modeling pollination processes for use in
university biology classes. Finally, this project will develop a graduate
student as a scientist and further expand an international collaboration between
US and Czech Republic researchers.