* 0808045
* Atomization of Liquids in Non-isothermal Environments: Multi-scale Modeling and Simulations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Juan Lopez, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2012
* USD 337,118.00

Atomization of liquids is a key component in many natural phenomena and
technical processes. Yet, detailed understanding of the fundamental physical
processes is incomplete, due to the inherent complexity of atomization and the
inability to experimentally observe the processes in detail. This project
focuses on improved understanding of the phenomenon by computational studies, on
massively parallel computational facilities, of mathematical models that
incorporate the interaction and competition among several forces acting on
multiple length and time scales. High-fidelity gas/liquid interface tracking
algorithms based on the level-set approach will be combined with efficient
Lagrangian descriptions of small-scale liquid droplets. Thermal Marangoni
effects due to the temperature dependence of surface tension will be included,
along with evaporation and related effects of latent heat, with the intent to
examine the extent to which these processes affect the fragmentation cascades of
droplets in high-inertia flow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
enable breakthroughs in the understanding of physical mechanisms that govern the
process of atomization, with potential impact on a broad range of applications.
Foremost among these are energy systems, where the design of fuel-efficient and
low-polluting engines hinges on the air/fuel mix for optimal combustion, and
that in turn depends critically on the droplet size distribution from the
atomization of the injected jet of fuel. This will aid in achieving national
goals of energy independence and environment sustainability. Other applications
include aerosol drug delivery, agricultural sprays, and fire-fighting (here
atomization of the water jet is to be avoided for increased flame quenching).
Accurate atomization models of waves producing sea spray and small air bubbles
driven deep into the ocean by breaking waves, especially those associated with
large-scale storms and hurricanes, can lead to improved weather and climate
modeling and predictions of the impact of greenhouse gases on global warming.
The project also includes the interdisciplinary training of graduate and
undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;