* 0808617
* Collaborative Research: CT-T:  Cryptographic Techniques for Searching and Processing Encrypted Data
* CSE,CNS
* 09/24/2007,08/31/2013
* Dawn Song, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 08/31/2013
* USD 160,000.00

Proposal Number: 0716389&lt;br/&gt;PI: Rafail Ostrovsky&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of California, Los Angeles
&lt;br/&gt;Lead&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 0716199&lt;br/&gt;PI:
Brent Waters&lt;br/&gt;Institution: SRI
International&lt;br/&gt;Sub&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
0715739&lt;br/&gt;PI: Dan Boneh&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Stanford
University&lt;br/&gt;Sub&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number
0716230&lt;br/&gt;PI: Dawn Song&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Carnegie Mellon
University&lt;br/&gt;Sub&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title:
Collaborative Research CT-T: Cryptographic Techniques for Searching and
Processing Encrypted
Data&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
proposal we consider the question of what constitutes identities in
cryptography. Typical examples of identities include your name and your social-
security number, or your fingerprint/iris-scan, or your address, or your (non-
revoked) Public-Key coming from some trusted public-key infrastructure. In many
situations, however, where you are defines your identity. For example, we know
the role of a bank-teller behind a bullet-proof bank window not because he or
she shows us her&lt;br/&gt;credentials but by merely knowing her location. In
this proposal, we ask the following question: is it possible to have the
"geographical position" of a party take part in defining the set of
credentials&lt;br/&gt;she has? What are the new possibilities in terms of what
we can achieve in this setting?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;First, we propose to
consider the central task in this setting, i.e.,&lt;br/&gt;securely verifying
the position of a device. Despite much work in this area, we have preliminary
results that show that in the "vanilla" (i.e., standard) model, the above task
(i.e., of secure&lt;br/&gt;positioning) is impossible to
achieve.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose to study the proof of position in the
bounded storage model (i.e. where we assume some bound on the total memory of
the adversary).&lt;br/&gt;In this setting, we wish to achieve two tasks: secure
positioning, and position-based key exchange. While the question of secure
positioning has been asked in the past, no satisfactory answers exist.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second question (of position-based key exchange) has
not been asked in the past. We also ask a broader question: whether position-
based Secure Multi-Party Computation can be achieved in this
setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;