* 0808344
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Biogeography of Sumatra and The Mentawai Islands: Phylogeographic Studies of Southeast Asian Flying Lizards (Agamidae: Draco)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2011
* Jimmy McGuire, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 06/30/2011
* USD 11,829.00

The Mentawai Archipelago and adjacent islands lie in the Indian Ocean west of
the Indonesian mega-island of Sumatra. These islands have been separated from
Sumatra and the remainder of insular and mainland Asia for at least 250,000
years and are consequently inhabited by an assemblage of endemic species found
nowhere else. Although the few taxa that have been studied intensively exhibit a
high degree of endemism, most of the Mentawei biota remains largely or
completely unstudied. This study will investigate species diversification and
the history of inter-island connectivity of Sumatra and the Mentawai Islands
fauna by applying phylogenetic and biogeographic methodologies, along with
recently developed coalescent-based population genetic approaches. The taxonomic
focus of this study is a spectacular group of gliding lizards (genus Draco) that
is diverse in this region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study is scientifically
significant because it will be the first to utilize rigorous molecular analyses
to answer questions regarding non-primate faunal distributions in this highly
diverse, yet understudied biological system. Furthermore, the results from this
study will provide baseline data for conservation efforts directed towards these
biodiverse islands. The fieldwork associated with this study will be conducted
in collaboration with the University of Indonesia, and will provide
opportunities for Indonesian undergraduates to receive training in field
methodologies. The molecular component of the study will be carried out with the
help of undergraduate students at the University of California, Berkeley,
providing them with laboratory skills and engaging them in the process of
scientific research.