* 0808300
* Dissertation Research: Do egg size effects cascade through salamander ontogeny?  Allometric engineering of maternal provisioning
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2010
* Carl Schlichting, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 05/31/2010
* USD 12,000.00

Maternal investment in amphibian offspring varies a great deal among species,
individuals and environments. However, larger egg size comes at the cost of
producing fewer offspring. Furthermore, egg size variation in nature is often
accompanied by differences in larval morphology and behavior (phenotype). The
mechanistic relationship between egg size and larval phenotype remains
controversial because species also differ in genetic and environmentally-induced
traits. This project will examine experimentally the effects of egg size on
larval phenotype in salamanders in which egg size evolutionarily doubled after a
pond breeding species invaded streams. By surgically removing yolk from embryos,
the effect of maternal investment on the phenotype will be assessed in light of
stream adaptations. Specifically, we will examine egg size effects on hatching
time and stage, body size and shape, escape performance and survival rates, and
time to metamorphosis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
research includes developing a powerful experimental research technique for
studying a major component of amphibian life history evolution that can help
identify correlated traits that respond to egg size. Broader impacts include
training of a graduate student, six undergraduates with diverse backgrounds, and
broad dissemination of the results - from YouTube to local, national and
international meetings, and publication in peer-reviewed journals.