* 0808059
* Variational Theories for Defects and Patterns
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Nicholas Ercolani, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2012
* USD 215,000.00

The principal physical impetus for the projects studied in this proposal is to
gain an analytical understanding of pattern formation. In particular the PI
seeks to characterize the classes of defects that appear when one is far above
the parameter threshold at which patterns emerge. These issues are studied
through a non-convex variational problem known as the regularized Cross-Newell
(RCN) model. Unlike similar models that have been studied recently, RCN
incorporates features of non-trivial twist which enable the existence of a
richer ?taxonomy? of defects (in particular, concave and convex disclinations).
Such features are indeed seen in experiments and numerical simulations of the
underlying microscopic physical equations. The issue has been to determine
whether or not the variational model can capture these defects. In a recent work
the PI has demonstrated that the minimizers of a variational model with twist
must necessarily differ from those without twist. The main projects of this
proposal are centered on establishing a precise analytical characterization of
the competition between microstructure formation and overall topologically
induced energetic stress in versions of the RCN model having some geometric
symmetry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of pattern forming systems is a
fundamental area of scientific investigation in which the tools of modern
mathematical analysis can be brought to bear on the modeling of physical systems
especially near a critical transition in the behavior of the system. For the
projects studied in this proposal one is principally interested in patterns that
arise when a continuous translational symmetry is reduced, at a critical
threshold, to a discrete periodic symmetry resulting in what is often referred
to as a "striped" pattern. Such patterns are for instance generic in Rayleigh-
Benard convection (RBC) which is a principal theoretical model for the formation
of weather patterns. In RBC the striped pattern corresponds to the formation, at
a critical temperature, of periodic "convection rolls" of a uniform
characteristic width. A major goal of this research is to study not just the
patterns that form at a critical threshold but to characterize the types of
defects that arise in these patterns when one is far from threshold. This work
will make definite predictions on defect formation that can be tested in the
laboratory. This will have relevance for modeling defect structure in liquid
crystals, in animal coat patterns (including fingerprints) and in the evolution
of plant patterns. &lt;br/&gt;