* 0808165
* Using Lyman Alpha Galaxies to Understand Galaxy Formation and Cosmological Reionization
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Sangeeta Malhotra, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 07/31/2012
* USD 397,395.00

AST-0808165&lt;br/&gt;Rhoads&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lyman-alpha emission has long
been predicted as a signpost of primitive galaxies in formation. This project
will characterize the nature and evolution of Lyman-alpha galaxies by: (1)
determining the mass and ages of the stellar populations in these galaxies by
narrow-band imaging; (2) using the results of the largest area Lyman-alpha
search to date to determine the halo occupation distribution of galaxies and the
duty cycle of Lyman-alpha emission; (3) determining the evolution in properties
of Lyman-alpha galaxies as a function of redshift; (4) determining the epoch,
pace and inhomogeneity of reionization; and (5) using near-infrared surveys to
obtain Lyman-alpha galaxy constraints on the IGM neutral fraction at redshifts
7.7 and 8.8. These surveys complement results from the Gunn-Peterson test and
the microwave background polarization measurements, and are expected to discover
some eighty galaxies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The anticipated discovery of the
'most distant galaxy', or even a whole population of them, could generate
significant publicity. Results will be included in courses at ASU, which is
committed to encouraging under-represented groups in science, especially Native
American and Hispanic students. Filters provided for this study will be
available to the whole community, as will the reduced data and any improvements
added to the data processing pipeline. This will benefit a whole community of
users.