* 0808333
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  The effects of assortative mating on resistance evolution in natural plant populations
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2009
* Diana Pilson, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 05/31/2009
* USD 11,772.00

Mating patterns can have large effects on the outcome of natural selection. For
instance, assortative mating, which occurs when similar individuals are more
likely to mate with one another than they would under random mating, increases
trait variance. Increased trait variance, in turn, increases the response to
selection. This research will examine the effects assortative mating has on the
evolution of resistance to virus infection in wild squash. Many factors affect
the degree of assortative mating in natural plant populations, including
flowering period, virus infection, pollinator preferences and variation in the
daily sex ratio. Wild squash will be planted in an experimental garden and
censused through the flowering period to determine if virus infection or virus-
resistance (conferred by a transgene) affects flower production and sex ratio.
Fluorescent dye will be used to track pollen movement by pollinators. These data
will allow quantification of patterns of assortative mating in virus-infected
and healthy plants. These empirical data will then be used in mathematical
models to investigate how variation in mating patterns affects the evolution of
resistance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will further our understanding
of the effects of assortative mating on trait evolution in natural plant
populations, and will enhance our understanding of resistance evolution when
disease epidemics are patchy in space and time. In addition, using
transgenic/wild hybrid squash will allow us to better understand the ecological
consequences of the escape of transgenes into wild populations, which is one of
the risks associated with the use of transgenic crops. The research will provide
research training for a PhD student and several undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;