* 0808537
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Tracing water sources used by terrestrial streamside animal communities using stable water isotopes
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2008,04/30/2010
* John Sabo, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 04/30/2010
* USD 10,674.00

Alterations and reductions of river flow have resulted in drastic changes to
streamside areas of the Western US and throughout much of the world. Effects of
these changes on plants have been documented, but effects on communities of land
animals are less known. The degree to which animals rely on river water versus
water from moist food may help predict how river alteration will affect
streamside communities. Isotopes of water that are non-radioactive and occur
naturally throughout the globe may be used to document the relative importance
of these two possible water sources to animals. However, this technique is
complicated by a change in water isotopes in the animal, over time, due to
differences in evaporation between heavier and lighter isotopes. The proposed
research will investigate a technique to avoid problems created by this
phenomenon, using laboratory experiments on representative animal
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to use isotopes to document patterns
of animal water use would be a great asset to biologists globally, especially
those studying drylands, river and streamside areas, irrigated landscapes, and
the effects of climate change. This project will incorporate undergraduate and
K-12 students from diverse backgrounds, providing them with first-hand
experience with scientific research.&lt;br/&gt;