* 0808404
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Ecological and Genomic Patterns in the Evolution of Symbiosis in the Fungal Genus Amanita
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2010
* Benjamin Wolfe, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Susan L. Perkins
* 09/30/2010
* USD 12,000.00

An award has been made to Harvard University under the direction of Dr. Anne
Pringle to study the symbiosis of fungi and woody plants. The grant will improve
the doctoral dissertation research of Benjamin Wolfe. Ectomycorrhizal fungi form
symbiotic associations on the surface of woody plant roots. This symbiosis
benefits the plant by enhancing water and mineral absorption, and it provides
the fungi with a source of nutrients from the plant. These symbioses have
evolved multiple times throughout the mushroom forming fungi. However,
ecological and genomic changes in the fungi in these symbioses remain poorly
understood. This work will use the genus Amanita, a genus that includes many
toxic species and includes both symbiotic and nonsymbiotic species of fungi. A
molecular phylogeny of 200 Amanita species will be constructed to determine the
number of times symbiosis has evolved in Amanita. To examine how the evolution
of symbiosis affects resource acquisition, stable isotopes of carbon and
nitrogen will be measured for Amanita species. The structure of functional genes
and estimates of genome size will be used to assess genomic changes associated
with the evolution of symbiosis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide
insight on the evolution of the ectomycorrhizal symbiosis, an economically and
ecologically important symbiosis in forest ecosystems. This work will also
directly contribute to the training of a Ph.D. student, provide research
opportunities for undergraduate students, and foster collaborations between
university research labs, citizen scientists, and science educators. &lt;br/&gt;