* 0808210
* UCLA-California Science Center Earth and Space Science Elementary Education Partnership
* GEO,GEO
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Mark Moldwin, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 08/31/2012
* USD 118,670.00

This project, being conducted through a partnership between UCLA and the
California Science Center, is focused on developing a series of professional
development opportunities specifically targeting elementary teachers in grades
3-5. The California Science Content Standards for those grades are rich in Earth
and Space Science topics, creating an important need for effective professional
development resources that emphasize cross-curricular integration and the use of
real-world observational techniques in the classroom. This project is testing
the hypothesis that site-based, master teacher-led professional development
activities are more effective for this audience than the more traditional summer
workshop format. In the course of investigating that premise, three grade-
specific professional development summer workshops will be designed and offered
to Los Angeles Unified elementary school teachers at the California Science
Center. Sustained partnerships between scientists and teachers will lead to
creation of the more customized site-specific programs, which will be offered at
the Culver City Unified School District. Internships provided to twenty UCLA
upper classman science majors participating in the California Teach program will
enable them to playing an integral role in the design and implementation of this
program, thereby enhancing their own communication skills and understanding of
educational practice. Both LA and Culver City school districts are urban, high-
needs settings; improved teacher preparation will thus enhance the quality of
Earth science instruction received by students underrepresented in the
geosciences and help to advance efforts to broaden participation. Additional
broader impacts of this project include the development of a Handbook for
Scientists on how to effectively develop partnerships and programs for
elementary science education, as well as strengthened collaborations between in-
service elementary teachers, professional science education specialists, Earth
science faculty and undergraduate students in the LA region.