* 0808427
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Edaphic factors in the diversification of Ceanothus L., subgenus Cerastes (Rhamnaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2010
* Dylan Burge, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 06/30/2010
* USD 11,989.00

This study will improve understanding of the role that soil conditions play in
plant diversification. Although soil conditions have long been seen as a key
component of plant ecology, little is understood about the effect of soil
conditions on plant evolution and diversification. The proposed research will
use the plant genus Ceanothus as a model system for the study of how soil
conditions affect diversification. Ceanothus contains a large number of species
that are associated with unusual soils, and is thus an ideal setting in which to
study the influence of soil conditions in diversification. The proposed research
will use genetic data to determine evolutionary relationships among Ceanothus
species. These data will then be combined with information on soil chemistry to
infer the role that soil conditions have played in the diversification of
Ceanothus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will take an
interdisciplinary approach to understanding how soil conditions affect plant
diversification, combining data and analytical methods from the disciplines of
evolutionary biology, ecology, and soil science. Insights derived from this
research, as well as the interdisciplinary approach that it develops, will apply
to other groups of plants, particularly the large portion of plant diversity in
which strong adaptations to soil conditions are observed. The proposed research
will also advance understanding of North American plant diversity, foster
international collaboration, result in the broad dissemination of research
results within the scientific community, and benefit society through direct
outreach in the form of guided hikes in Ceanothus habitats in the state of
California, and writings directed at the general public.&lt;br/&gt;