* 0808035
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Secondary Production in Urban Stream Food Webs: From Pattern to Process
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Margaret Carreiro, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 06/30/2011
* USD 12,000.00

Urban land use and future urban expansion pose a serious threat to natural
ecosystems. Urban areas rely on outside support from natural ecosystems for
resource acquisition and waste disposal. As a consequence, streams in urban
systems are affected by multiple disturbances within the watershed, and, in many
cases, serve as waste conduits for municipal wastewater discharge. In addition,
changes in watershed hydrology due to increased impervious surfaces (i.e. roads,
buildings, parking lots) drastically affect stream channel geomorphology by
deepening and widening the stream to accommodate new flow patterns. These
physical and chemical changes in stream conditions generally result in decreased
biological diversity of stream dwelling organisms. An unaddressed question,
however, is how reductions in community richness and diversity affect the
ecosystem functions and services provided by urban stream communities.

In this study, this question will be addressed by conducting experiments in six
streams draining watersheds in which land use varies from 0 to 80% urban cover
to determine not only how biological diversity within the stream is impacted by
urbanization, but what consequences these losses in biological diversity have in
terms of energy flow and nutrient cycling within stream food webs, two processes
with profound consequences for in-stream water quality. Dissemination of these
results will facilitate the future planning, management, and restoration of
urbanized streams by linking commonly observed decreases in stream biological
diversity with measureable ecosystem scale functions and services provided by
the stream organisms.