* 0808451
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Detecting ecomorphological convergence in the salamander genus Desmognathus:  A phylogenetic approach using molecular and geometric morphometric analyses
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2010
* Alfred Lamb, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 06/30/2010
* USD 11,912.00

The dusky salamander genus Desmognathus is a species-rich group of amphibians
distributed across eastern North America. Although many species occupy deciduous
forest streams, the group demonstrates remarkable ecological breadth, ranging in
habitats from spruce forests to coastal swamps. Despite their ecological
diversity, the species of dusky salamanders are quite similar in appearance and
all share a pattern of brown, mottled markings that makes species identification
notoriously difficult. As a result, interpretations regarding the exact number
of species (and relationships among them) remain controversial and problematic.
This study will work to resolve evolutionary relationships of dusky salamanders
by: 1) sampling salamanders on a very fine geographic scale, and 2) assessing
variation among these sampled populations using molecular characters (DNA
sequences for several genes) as opposed to morphological characters. Preliminary
results confirm the validity of certain species but also have revealed
additional, undescribed species. Moreover, preliminary work using a new
geometric approach to morphological analysis suggests that subtle variation in
head shape may play an important role in the group's observed ecological
diversity by allowing various species of dusky salamanders to forage in slightly
different ways. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This study will generate a large database
including several thousand specimens (to be deposited in the Field Museum of
Natural History, Chicago) and DNA sequences (to be deposited in Genbank), which
will be available to biologists worldwide. The fine-scale sampling will help to
identify all species in the group and delimit their geographic distributions,
findings important to conservation and land management.