* 0808597
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Character displacement in the morphology and song of two closely-related African barbets
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2009
* Alex Kirschel, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 05/31/2009
* USD 9,205.00

Tinkerbirds are tiny tropical African birds that sing very simple songs. Genetic
variation is thought to parallel song variation among populations of birds that
do not learn their songs culturally, such as tinkerbirds. The aim of this
project is to examine the genetic basis of a pattern of divergence in song
between populations of two related species, as well as divergence in body size
and beak shape. Such divergence is predicted to occur in order to facilitate
coexistence of two species that are so similar in ecology and behavior that
individuals of each species could compete with each other as they would with
individuals of their own species. If two species fail to recognize each other as
different species, they could even mate with each other and produce infertile
hybrids. The process of divergence in ecological or behavioral traits that
facilitates recognition and coexistence of related species is known as character
displacement. Analyses will also account for the possibility that song, body
size, and beak shape are adapted to differences in the environment, or vary
randomly over geographic distances.

While character displacement is a well-established theory in ecology and
evolution, few examples have been found in nature. This study will provide the
first unambiguous demonstration of character displacement in bird song, and
provide support for it with parallel shifts in body size and beak shape. The
project involves working with conservation organizations in Uganda and Cameroon,
employing their staff as well as Ugandan university undergraduates as field
assistants, thus helping the development of scientists in developing countries.