* 0808523
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Fish assemblage structure and functional trait diversity along a longitudinal fluvial gradient
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2010
* Kirk Winemiller, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 06/30/2010
* USD 10,780.00

An understanding of how environmental factors relate to the characteristics of
organisms in ecological communities can help reveal important processes driving
patterns of diversity. Functional traits associated with feeding, habitat use,
or reproduction can be examined along environmental gradients to investigate how
habitat variables influence community composition at multiple spatial scales. In
this study, such an approach will be used to compare fish communities along a
longitudinal gradient in the RÃ­o Grijalva, a large tropical river basin in
southern Mexico. Functional traits of fishes will be examined along with a suite
of environmental variables in study sites across a range of habitats, from
upland tributary streams to broad, lowland lagoons. The diversity of traits is
expected to increase from upstream to downstream as habitats become less
environmentally harsh and food resources are more
plentiful.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has important implications for
conservation in this study region and in other tropical rivers. Few studies have
examined changes in tropical fish communities at the scale of an entire
watershed, and little is known about how environmental differences affect
functional traits. A focus on how environmental factors influence fish
communities will provide valuable information for evaluating the effects of
species introductions, impoundments, and other forms of habitat
degradation.&lt;br/&gt;