* 0808909
* New Organometallic Radical-Cation Based Homogeneous and Heterogeneous Reactions and Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* William Geiger, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 07/31/2012
* USD 524,500.00

Abstract of NSF 0808909: University of Vermont, William Geiger (PI), supported
by the Analytical and Surface Science Program of the National Science
Foundation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Summary: Electrochemistry is one of
the most versatile tools available to the practicing chemist. Two of the most
important areas of applications are in analysis and catalysis. The first of
these deals with the identification and quantification of molecules and is
critically important to a wide range of needs addressing environmental,
biological, and medical problems. The proposed work seeks to develop a new
family of analytical 'sensors' based on the idea of labeling the analytical
target with a 'marker' that can be turned on and off by the equivalent of an
electrical switch. The new marker is derived from an easily prepared manganese
complex which can be reversibly switched in an electrolyte medium previously
developed at the University of Vermont (UVM). The other major area of inquiry is
intended to develop lower-energy and greener ways to utilize simple olefins,
which are oil-based organic building blocks, in the preparation of desirable
organic compounds that will be of general use to synthetic chemists. A highly
efficient electrochemical method will be developed and evaluated with the goal
of replacing energy-wasting thermal and photochemical methods by an
organometallic rhenium complex which is capable of electro-catalyzing the
desired reactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: In terms of the
research results, a successful outcome to the proposed work is expected to
broaden the impact of organometallic electrochemistry as a problem-solving
method among chemists and biochemists. It is also important for chemists to ask
how their efforts might contribute to the daunting task of increasing the
efficiency of energy usage in this country and in our world. There are only four
important general energy sources at our disposal: nuclear, heat, light, and
electricity. Our goal has been, and continues to be, the training of
electrochemists to develop advances in the last of these four areas. Graduate
students trained in electrochemistry at UVM are employed in a variety of
academic, industrial, and government research positions. Because it is important
to expand these opportunities to underrepresented groups, this project will
offer summer training projects to financially disadvantaged high school students
through Project Seed (overseen by the American Chemical Society) and initiate a
pilot project which offers a summer research opportunity at UVM to
underrepresented undergraduate students from a city-based college having a large
minority enrollment. Thanks to their experience in a research group composed of
highly-motivated graduate students and postdocs, the high school and visiting
undergraduate students will be more aware of their opportunities in pre- and
post-graduate higher education, thereby increasing the probability that they
will become scientific professionals.