* 0808452
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Effect of Mutation Rate on Mitochondrial Genome Evolution in the Angiosperm Genus Silene
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2010
* Daniel Sloan, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 06/30/2010
* USD 11,228.00

A central challenge in the field of molecular evolution is to elucidate the
mechanisms that have produced the enormous diversity in genome organization,
structure and function that exists across the tree of life. The proposed
research will examine the role of mutation rates in differentially shaping
genome evolution by comparing the mitochondrial DNA sequence, structure and
function for two closely related species of flowering plants (Silene latifolia
and Silene noctiflora) that differ more than 100-fold in mitochondrial mutation
rates. For each species, the entire mitochondrial genome will be sequenced along
with a sample of genes from the chloroplast genome (which does not exhibit any
differences in mutation rate between the species), and patterns of RNA editing
and intron splicing will be identified by sequencing cDNA. Given the many
commonalities between the mitochondrial genomes of flowering plants and the
nuclear genomes of multicellular organisms (such as the proliferation of non-
coding DNA), the implications of this work will extend to the evolution and
function of the nuclear genome. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Elucidating the dynamics
of mitochondrial mutations is potentially important for understanding a wide
variety of mitochondrial pathologies in humans and the mechanistic basis of
cytoplasmic male sterility in plants, a phenomenon that is of great importance
in agricultural systems. Annotated mitochondrial genome sequences will be of
broader value to the Silene research community in diverse fields of study
including breeding system evolution, metapopulation genetics, organelle
transmission, systematics and molecular evolution. Also, the research will
provide a valuable opportunity to train University of Virginia undergraduates in
the modern techniques of molecular genetics and bioinformatics. &lt;br/&gt;