* 0808354
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Exploring the existence of two discrete male phenotypes in a mixed population of Schizocosa wolf spiders
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2010
* Eileen Hebets, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 06/30/2010
* USD 11,998.00

PI - Eileen A. Hebets, Co-PI Kasey Fowler-Finn &lt;br/&gt;Proposal # IOS
0808354&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Exploring the existence of
two discrete male phenotypes in a mixed population of Schizocosa wolf
spiders&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to develop a better
understanding of the processes governing the formation, maintenance and
evolution of variation within natural populations. Specifically, this research
focuses on understanding the existence and putative maintenance of two male
forms found within a single wolf spider species. The two male forms (brush-
legged and non-ornamented males) are found in an apparently freely interbreeding
population in Mississippi, and are identical to two previously described species
that have are reproductively isolated. The first objective of the proposed
research is to use molecular approaches to confirm that the two male forms do
not represent two distinct genetic groups in this mixed population. The second
objective will use different sibling rearing regimes to understand factors that
influence the development of the male forms - specifically addressing the
importance of diet and/or genetics. Finally, lifetime reproductive success of
the two male forms will be determined in artificial field populations using
molecular techniques for paternity analysis. Taken together, the proposed
integrative research allows for the exceptional opportunity to understand the
existence of two alternative male forms from molecular, developmental,
behavioral, and natural field-based perspectives. Results of this research will
likely contribute greatly to our understanding of both speciation and the
maintenance of phenotypic variation. Broader impacts of the work: This research
will provide numerous opportunities for research training of undergraduate
students as well as opportunities for local youth in rural Mississippi to be
involved in specimen collection for research. Furthermore, knowledge of spider
biology generated by this research will be disseminated to elementary school
students through the Lincoln Community Learning Center program in Lincoln,
Nebraska.