* 0808232
* Completion of the NEON Cyber Infrastructure Construction-Ready Design
* BIO,EF
* 05/01/2008,10/31/2010
* David Schimel, National Ecological Observatory Network, Inc
* Cooperative Agreement
* Elizabeth Blood
* 10/31/2010
* USD 4,553,150.00

NEON, Inc. is awarded a grant to finalize the cyberinfrastructure component of
the final design for the National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON). NEON is
a continental research platform that will extend our understanding of the
biosphere to regional and continental scales. NEON will be a ?shared-use?
research platform of field deployed instrumented towers and sensor arrays,
sentinel measurements, remote sensing capabilities, natural history archives,
and facilities for data analysis, modeling, visualization, and forecasting, all
networked onto a cyberinfrastructure backbone. Activities supported under this
request are to (1) produce a detailed design as part of the requirements to
establish readiness for construction of the NEON facility and (2) test and
validate the design components with field implementations of sensors and
cyberinfrastructure prototypes. The proposed work will define the parameters
required to assure accurate and precise measurements with the goal of gaining a
complete, clear, thorough and well-documented understanding of the science
requirements as the foundation for developing a comprehensive description of the
needs for the CI and operational support architectures. The project will seek to
identify and address potential critical issues well before construction to
minimize the costs in time and materials associated with any necessity of
changing the design during or after the commencement of implementation or
operations. The complexity of the relationships between data products,
measurements, sensors, and the flow-down from Grand Challenge questions to
research requirements will be documented with sophisticated analysis and a high
degree of collaboration with NEON scientific staff, the CI team, operations
staff as well as external scientific, engineering collaborators and equipment
and software vendors.