* 0808133
* Collaborative Research: The DEEP3 Survey - Three Fundamental Tests of Galaxy Evolution
* MPS,AST
* 12/01/2008,11/30/2016
* David Koo, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 11/30/2016
* USD 1,701,777.00

This team will extend their DEEP2 spectroscopic survey, using high dispersion
spectra with the DEIMOS multi-object spectrograph at the Keck telescopes for
galaxies in the redshift range 0.5 < z < 1.5. This redshift range represents 85%
of cosmic history, over the time when most of the galaxy mass was assembled and
galaxies formed their disks. The new DEEP3 survey concentrates on the extended
Groth strip, an area on the sky that has been observed with many of NASA's great
observatories. The team will use these and other archives to compile a
panchromatic catalog describing their survey galaxies over a wide wavelength
range from radio to X-rays. DEEP3 will push the limit of observations 2.5 times
fainter than DEEP2, tripling the number of measured galaxies.

The team will estimate the rate at which their survey galaxies are forming their
stars, by measuring their brightness in the ultraviolet, infrared and radio, and
by using diagnostics based on the optical emission lines measured in the DEEP2
and DEEP3 surveys. They will investigate a tight relation found in DEEP2 between
the rate of star formation in a galaxy and the mass in stars already present,
and examine how galaxy environment and morphology affect that relation. Team
members will use observations from the DEEP2 and DEEP3 surveys to study how
scaling laws such as the Tully-Fisher relation (between a galaxy's luminosity
and its circular rotation speed) change over time as disk galaxies are
assembled. They will investigate the role of active galactic nuclei in star
formation, and use X-ray observations to search for signs of faint hidden active
nuclei.

Graduate students and postdoctoral scholars will be trained as they participate
in the research. As has been done for the earlier DEEP2 survey, data including
redshifts, photometry, and spectra would be released to the astronomical
community. Multiwavelength images from DEEP2, along with an interactive redshift
catalog, are already available on google sky; more data will be added as the new
survey proceeds.