* 0808053
* SGER: Conducting and Semi-transparent Chemically Active Surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2008,07/31/2009
* Norma Alcantar, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 07/31/2009
* USD 100,004.00

CBET-0808053, Alcantar&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Grant for Exploratory
Research (SGER) project addresses the need to engineer active surfaces for the
detection of nitroaromatic, nitramine, and nitrate ester compounds, which are
the primary constituents of explosive devices. Hybrid, nanostructured surfaces
will be constructed from transparent conductive composites (TCCs) decorated with
conjugated conductive oligomer wires. Selective binding of the target to the
oligomer alters the electron charge mobility in the TCC, which in turn affects
the redox state of the TCC. The binding event, therefore, can be effectively
read out through measuring the conductivity of the TCC or through color changes
to the TCC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will consist of developing thin-film
TCC sensors and testing the sensors with respect to the three representative
nitro-derivatives. TCCs combine gold nanoparticles in a conducting polymer
matrix to create a hybrid material that is conductive, flexible, and
electrochromic. For instance, the TCC can switch from opaque to dark green
depending on its redox state. Conjugated oligomers that are functionalized with
thiol groups at one end and nitro-derivative receptors at the other provide the
basis for selectivity and sensing. The thiol group anchors the oligomer to the
metal sites on the TCC surface and the receptor starts the charge transfer
mechanism when targeted with the appropriate molecule. Key issues that will be
evaluated include TCC formulation, processing of the TCC into thin films
(solution based or solid state), and functionalization of the TCC with the
appropriate oligomer wire.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: Currently,
the most common type of transparent sensor is based on indium tin oxide (ITO)
films. ITO suffers from significant drawbacks including a high processing cost,
the limited supply of indium and its low mechanical robustness. This research
serves to establish a new type of high-impact transparent sensor based on TCCs
without the disadvantage of ITO. However, structure/property relationships are
relatively unknown for TCCs. The research will, for the first time, identify and
establish those relationships to lead to predictable control over TCC
properties. Specifically, this research will explore compositional effects and
will assess film processing strategies in controlling performance. The latter is
important in that there are tradeoffs between scalability of the process and
control over the nanostructure. Such research will have impact beyond just TCC
films, for it will lend invaluable insight into the processing of nanostructured
materials where order and spatial distributions dominate
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: There are many potential
applications of TCC films beyond sensors including nonlinear optical components,
colloidal stabilizers, catalytic agents, and surface coatings that will greatly
improve security and quality of life. The project will lead to outreach programs
that include local high school teachers and students to enhance and diversify
curriculums in chemistry, physicochemistry, and foundations of engineering. It
will also provide a mechanism for including a diverse research group. The PI is
committed to include female and underrepresented graduate students in her
research. Currently, her group has four female students, two with Hispanic
backgrounds.