* 0808164
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Systematics, phylogenetics and the evolution of asexuality in the fungus-gardening ant genus Mycocepurus
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2010
* Christian Rabeling, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 06/30/2010
* USD 11,919.00

SYSTEMATICS, PHYLOGENETICS AND THE EVOLUTION OF ASEXUALITY IN&lt;br/&gt;THE
FUNGUS-GARDENING ANT GENUS MYCOCEPURUS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fungus-gardening
ant Mycocepurus smithii reproduces exclusively via unfertilized eggs. Strict
asexual reproduction makes M. smithii almost unique among insects. Studying M.
smithii contributes to our understanding of why sexuality is so common among
animals, and why asexuality is rare. The proposed research will test theoretical
predictions of obligate and long-term asexuality in an evolutionary context.
First, a modern taxonomic revision of the genus will identify existing species
and describe new species. Second, a molecular phylogenetic analysis will infer
the evolutionary transition from sexuality to asexuality and identify the sexual
sister species of M. smithii. Third, M. smithii will be tested for the presence
(or absence) of genetic signatures indicative of obligate, long-term asexuality.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The presence of sexual reproduction among most animals is
a longstanding puzzle in evolutionary biology. If asexual organisms are able to
persist over evolutionary time, they may have evolved a different solution
insuring the same benefits of sexuality with two sexes. The proposed research
will foster the exchange of information and technology through collaboration
with scientists in Latin America. Several undergraduate research assistants will
be trained in molecular genetic techniques. Scientific progress will be
presented in public outreach programs and scientific meetings. In addition, a
taxonomy &amp; phylogeny workshop will be held at the partner Institute in Rio
Claro, Brazil.