* 0808678
* HCC-Large: Using the Internet without using the Eyes: Models of Online Transactions for Non-Visual Interaction
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* I. Ramakrishnan, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,623,540.00

The Internet has become the primary medium for accessing information and for
conducting many types of online transactions, including shopping, paying bills,
making travel plans, applying for college or employment, and participating in
civic activities. The primary mode of interaction over the Internet is via
graphical browsers designed for visual navigation. This seriously limits the
access of people with impaired vision or blindness, a population that is large
and growing ever larger. Existing assistive technology for non-visual Internet
access typically forces users with visual impairments into an inefficient,
sequential mode of information access. To do better, two kinds of models are
needed. First, we need to build computational models to represent the structure
of web pages and online transactions, and to present them effectively using non-
visual modalities. Second, we need to better understand how users' mental models
for online transactions are built and utilized; we then need to align the
computational models with the users' mental models, so as to combine their
strengths and significantly improve the efficiency of non-visual interactions.
In previous work, the PI developed the HearSay non-visual web browser, which
permits users to perform basic non-visual web browsing and search, contextual
browsing, and online form-filling. However, HearSay does not take full advantage
of the interaction context or the unique perceptual and processing strengths of
people with visual impairments. In the current project, the PI seeks to combine
basic computational and psychological research designed to produce accessibility
technology embodying the synergy of computational modeling and users' mental
models. In terms of computational research, the PI will: (i) automatically track
the interaction context of user browsing actions; (ii) automatically build
models for transactions that users perform online; and (iii) develop ways in
which users can interact with transaction models through non-visual modalities
efficiently and effectively. In terms of psychological research, user studies
will be conducted to examine (i) how people build mental models for online
transactions, and (ii) how they use modality-specific cues and their own short-
term memory to utilize these mental models. The PI will incorporate the findings
from these user studies into the computational models for online transaction
processing, so as to align them with the users' mental
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The ultimate goal of the PI's
research is to empower people with visual impairments to lead completely
independent lives with the help of the Internet. To this end, the PI has planned
an extensive dissemination campaign involving workshops, collaborations with
institutions that serve people who have visual impairments, and online
dissemination of HearSay prototypes and HearSay component technologies. HearSay
will also provide a means, in principle, for anyone who wishes to have non-
visual Internet access (e.g., listening to Internet content while driving).