* 0808418
* Dissertation Research: The Spatial Dynamics of Lead Levels in Urban Soil and Correlations with Land Cover
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2010
* Steward Pickett, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 06/30/2010
* USD 12,000.00

Lead contamination of the urban environment is not a new phenomenon. A great
deal of research has focused on the health effects of lead-based paint. Less
attention, however, has been given to the potential problem of contaminated
soils. Ecologists can help understand this problem by using the tools of
landscape ecology to predict where and how much lead remains in urban
residential soil. This research will address whether certain features found in
the urban environment (trees, lawns, buildings, and roads) can be used to
predict lead concentrations in soil. Using a method that allows for rapid
assessment of lead concentrations in soil, this research will use information
gathered from urban residential yards to generate a model that will predict the
spatial distribution of lead. This research will contribute to the growing field
of urban ecology by advancing our knowledge of how patchiness across properties
and neighborhoods affects the distribution of a critical pollutant in urban
systems. In addition, this research will test the suitability of land cover as a
predictive ecological variable. &lt;br/&gt; Communicating results of this
research through various non-profit organizations will benefit city residents
through an improved understanding of the distribution of an important
environmental contaminant. Although the model created by this research will rely
heavily on data collected from Baltimore, Maryland, this research will
contribute to the understanding of soil lead contamination in other urban areas.
The public health community can use information generated by this model to
streamline current lead remediation efforts.&lt;br/&gt;