* 0808813
* RUI: A Collaborative Investigation into the Aggregate-Induced Emission Phenomenon in Group 14 Metallole and Metallole-like Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* James Ford, University of Southern Maine
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 08/31/2013
* USD 360,000.00

This collaborative RUI award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic
Chemistry program supports research by Professor Henry J. Tracy at the
University of Southern Maine, Professor Nicholas Benfaremo at St. Joseph's
College, and Professor Jerome L. Mullin at University of New England to
synthesize and characterize group 14 metalloles, metalla-fluorenes, and their
derivatives. The research is focused on the photophysical characterization of
these compounds, especially aggregate-induced-emission (AIE) behavior, and the
development of chemical sensors, immunoassay schemes, and electroluminescent
devices constructed using the most promising of the new compounds. Theoretical
and experimental studies will explore AIE in detail, in order to gain improved
insight into the origins of this unusual behavior, and thus guide synthesis of
additional compounds in an effort to produce even more highly efficient
candidate species for use in optoelectronic devices. Efforts will be directed
toward the synthesis of derivatives with varying solubilities, enhanced native
luminescence, and targeted emission wavelength characteristics.

The novel compounds produced may prove to be useful in the production of OLEDs
and other devices. The overall project theme takes advantage of the diverse and
complementary strengths of the collaborators and their institutions, building on
existing collaborations that have led to enhanced research opportunities for
undergraduate students. This research initiative will build research capacity at
all three institutions and expand the scope of research experiences that are
available to students at the three primarily undergraduate institutions.
Research opportunities for women, who make up 57% or more of the chemistry and
biochemistry majors at each institution, will be particularly impacted.