* 0808783
* HCC-Large: Decentralized Virtual Activities and Technologies: A Socio-Technical Approach
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Bonnie Nardi, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2012
* USD 2,997,936.00

This project employs an empirical socio-technical research approach to
understand how to gain maximum benefit from decentralized virtual activity
systems (DVASs). We see growing, widespread interest in the development and use
of decentralized systems and virtual world environments as possible new places
for engaging in collaborative work activities. There is widespread interest in
stimulating new technological innovations that enable people to come together
through social networking, file or media sharing, and massively multi-player
online game play. This new generation of networked computing environments seems
headed towards increased socialization, interaction, communication, and
collaboration that span multiple organizational boundaries as its primary
purpose. But how do we get there from here? Is it sufficient to just let the
market of entrepreneurial vendors and technological innovators simply decide who
needs what? The history of computing reveals a legacy of many failed or
problematic efforts to develop and deploy computing systems that arise from a
lack of understanding or recognition of the ways in which people's work and
social activities are situated in organizational and technological contexts.
These contexts configure, constrain, or enable some types of activities to
flourish while others are displaced, either unintentionally or
intentionally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core of the research focuses on both the
individual and collective study of six critical variables: representations and
realities, conflicting policies and practices, relationship work, processes and
coordination, privacy and awareness, and security and trust. DVAS research
requires a broad interdisciplinary understanding of the problems and a broad and
interdisciplinary approach to their solution. This project is a large multi-
site, multi-partner research endeavor with an interdisciplinary team, that
provides the greatest practical opportunity for generalizable results from
comparative analyses of both in-situ field studies and technology prototyping
efforts. Five research partners serve multiple roles in this project. First,
they serve as a source of real-world problems for the project to tackle. Second,
as organizations facing the daily problems of distributed development, the
partners view these as practical problems, and they will engage directly with
the research team in developing strategies and solutions. Third, they serve as
test-beds for early evaluation of proposed new solutions. In other words,
working with the research partners ensures a continuous engagement with real
world settings at all stages of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research on
DVASs will have a vital impact on society. As development and use of DVASs
becomes more common practice and as organizations continue to become more
decentralized, new methods and policies will need to be identified and tested to
enable people to collaborate successfully. This study has economic value as it
will help organizations to carry out decentralized work effectively with
smoother coordination, so that they can better compete in the global market.
DVASs will be resilient to environmental disruptions as collaboration will be
able to be conducted from anywhere, anytime, using representations of people,
artifacts, and activities. Understanding the unique challenges of work in
decentralized and virtual activities, as well as designing DVAS technologies to
meet the challenges, will have both theoretical and practical impact.
Theoretically, the project will determine the contours of decentralized
activity, allowing comparison to other social forms such as traditional
hierarchies, communities of practice, and rational bureaucracies. Finally, the
results will also benefit higher education as new people entering the workforce
will need to gain skills in developing DVASs, and in working in decentralized
virtual worlds and environments.