* 0808937
* Collaborative Research:   Mesoscopic Transport and Localization in Active Random Media
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Hui Cao, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 08/31/2012
* USD 330,000.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Light scattering accounts
for many phenomena in our daily life, e.g., the sky is blue, milk is white. If
the scattering is strong, light can be brought to a standstill as the particles
of light - photons - get "lost in a jungle". This phenomenon, called
localization, was first introduced in condensed matter physics for electrons.
Unlike electrons, the number of photons can be multiplied. When a photon
eventually emerges from the "jungle", it is hard to tell whether it is the input
one or another one created during the random walk of the original photon. The
goal of the project is to understand the interplay between light localization
and amplification by performing numerical simulations and experimentally
tracking the photons in the "jungle". The physical insight obtained from the
proposed work may lead to the development of new optical techniques for non-
invasive real-time characterization of biological tissues in which light
scattering is strong. Also, the outcome of the project will be instrumental in
understanding the random laser - an unconventional laser made of random medium.
The interdisciplinary nature of this collaborative research program will impact
both condensed matter physics and optics. The graduate and undergraduate
students involved in this program will receive extensive training. The proposed
education activities include the curriculum development and educational
outreach, which will enrich the research and education environments at the
participating institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;**** TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Without a counter-part in electronic systems,
coherent amplification of photons adds a new dimension to the fundamental study
of mesoscopic transport and Anderson localization. The main goal of this project
is to understand the effects of coherent amplification on mesoscopic wave
transport in random dielectric media. The collaborative research program
combines experimental and numerical studies on light transport and localization
in two-dimensional random systems with gain or absorption. Near-field scanning
optical microscopy will be employed to investigate the statistical properties of
local fields and intensities, including the spatial and spectral correlations,
the field and intensity distributions and moments. These studies will provide
physical insight into the intricate interplay between localization and
amplification, enroute to formulating the criterion of Anderson localization in
active random systems. The close collaboration between an experimental and
theoretical group is crucial to the success of the proposed research program.
The graduate students and undergraduate students involved in this
interdisciplinary program will receive extensive training in both condensed
matter physics and optics. The proposed education activities include the
curriculum development and educational outreach, which will enrich the research
and education environments at the participating institutions.&lt;br/&gt;