* 0808342
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Evolution and Development of Petals in Aizoaceae (Caryophyllales)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2008,02/28/2010
* Douglas Soltis, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 02/28/2010
* USD 6,596.00

The origin of the petal in flowering plants has long been a subject of
speculation and controversy among botanists. Traditional theories suggest
multiple independent evolutionary origins of bracteopetals (derived from leaf-
like organs) and andropetals (derived from sterilized male organs). More
recently, the discovery of deeply conserved genetic programs controlling petal
formation suggests that all petal-like organs may be under similar genetic
control. This hypothesis will be tested by examining the genetic pathways
controlling the formation of petals in Aizoaceae: a group of succulent plants
that possess two very different types of petal-like structures derived from
either leaf-like organs or sterilized male parts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Petals
are an extremely important evolutionary innovation that has undoubtedly
contributed to the success of flowering plants in colonizing the terrestrial
ecosystem. Petals are also of major significance for agriculture as many crops
rely on petals to attract pollinators to ensure fertilization, fruit set and
good crop yields. This study, in conjunction with ongoing studies in other
groups of flowering plants, will help to understand how, why and when the petal
evolved. In elucidating the genetic mechanisms underlying petal formation it
will be possible to better appreciate the impact of this evolutionary
innovation. Furthermore, this knowledge could be used to genetically improve
agricultural cultivars.&lt;br/&gt;