* 0808285
* Dissertation Research: The nature of and mechanisms responsible for northern hardwood forest Lepidoptera community dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2008,11/30/2009
* Erik Stange, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 11/30/2009
* USD 11,310.00

Long-term monitoring shows that the abundance of caterpillars tends to fluctuate
dramatically from year to year in hardwood forests of the northeastern U.S.
Notably, these fluctuations involve dozens to hundreds of Lepidoptera species
and have strong impacts on bird populations. Previous research has identified
correlations between climate and the fluctuations in Lepidoptera abundance, but
the specific mechanisms that link climate to caterpillar abundance have not been
elucidated. This project uses four years of systematic sampling of Lepidoptera
abundance to pursue two important questions. First, are the dynamics of these
insects a result of collections of separate species whose populations vary
synchronously? Second, what characteristics are shared by these species that
could produce this synchrony? The project also tests a potential mechanism
causing these synchronous fluctuations: climate variability affects forest
nutrient cycles, thereby influencing the feeding success and population dynamics
of these insects.

Results from this research will show how specific aspects of climate change
influence population growth rates of native insects that are the chief
herbivores in this ecosystem, are the primary food source of Neotropical migrant
birds, and are sometimes defoliating pests. These results will inform
conservation biology, forest management, and science policy. The work has
already improved understanding of the biology and natural history of
Lepidoptera, the major component of native biodiversity in the northeastern U.S.
A product of the research is an online, open-access, database of information
about the hundreds of Lepidoptera species that can be found in these forests.
This will serve as a resource for researchers, educators, policy makers, and
nature enthusiasts. Undergraduates from a number of schools will continue to be
involved in the project, providing opportunities to train students in ecological
research methods and principles.