* 0808320
* Dissertation Research: Allochthonous inputs as invasion mechanism of C. nucifera
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2010
* Rodolfo Dirzo, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 05/31/2010
* USD 12,000.00

Biological invasions are one of our most pressing conservation challenges. These
invasions are currently considered to be one of the major drivers of global
biodiversity loss, among other ills. This research examines the mechanisms and
effects of one unusual invasion: the introduction of the coconut palm throughout
the Pacific. Specifically, this work looks at the negative association between
the relative abundances of this palm and of seabirds. Seabirds will not use the
coconut palm as habitat; therefore palm-invaded islands become depleted in the
nutrients these birds usually bring from the ocean to the land. Because the tree
species native to these islands are adapted to the higher nutrient conditions
usually created by the birds, they can no longer compete and regenerate in these
new, more nutrient deprived conditions. The seabird decline thus ultimately
results in an invasion spiral of coconut palms. This research also examines
other potential feedbacks in this invasion, such as increases to predation on
native species seeds or seedlings in invaded forests. This work has important
applications to conservation science and management. On a global scale, by
increasing knowledge of the breadth of invasion mechanisms, this work will
provide insight into the best way to manage invasive species and prevent their
future spread. Regionally, it will provide tangible recommendations about how
this widely used crop should be managed in the Pacific. Finally, by
demonstrating the role seabirds play in maintaining native species, it will
expand our knowledge about the importance of seabirds and their conservation.