* 0808256
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Evolutionary Genomics of Facultative Social Behavior in a Tropical Sweat Bee
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2010
* Robert Wayne, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 06/30/2010
* USD 11,702.00

ABSTRACT PI Nonacs CoPI Wayne Proposal #IOS-0808256

THE EVOLUTIONARY GENOMICS OF FACULTATIVE SOCIAL BEHAVIOR IN A TROPICAL SWEAT BEE

Evolutionary explanations for altruism have been sought since the time of
Darwin, and are still not agreed upon by many researchers. Cooperation is most
extreme within social insect colonies, in which one or a few members (queens)
reproduce, and most colony members (workers) forego reproduction to specialize
in other tasks. One explanation for social evolution is based on the
similarities between social insect worker behavior and maternal reproductive
traits. The worker caste may have originated in a solitary ancestor when a
mutant female exhibited maternal behavior prior to dispersal. This would have
resulted in sibling-directed, instead of offspring-directed care. If this theory
is correct, genes active throughout the reproductive cycle of solitary ancestors
should be differentially regulated in workers and queens of social descendants.
An ideal test of this hypothesis requires knowledge of gene expression patterns
in representatives of the social and ancestral solitary state. Fortunately an
analogous condition exists in Megalopta genalis bees, where both social and
solitary individuals are found simultaneously within the same population. To
analyze differential gene expression, a custom microarray, (a slide containing
probes corresponding to approximately 5,000 genes expressed in the M. genalis
brain) will be created. Because sociality in M. genalis is flexible and
aseasonal, this proposal represents a better controlled and more informative
study than is possible in any species studied to date. The results will
highlight evolutionary pressures consistently important to the origin of
eusociality, and have a transformative role in understanding how the social
environment affects reproductive behavior. Broader impacts of the work: The new
large-scale genomic resource created within this proposal will be publicly
available, and useful to other researchers from many scientific disciplines. The
proposed laboratory work will provide training in cutting edge molecular
techniques to undergraduate students through an ongoing UCLA program aimed at
increasing minority participation in scientific research.