* 0808704
* Theory and Simulation of the Transition from Amorphous to Nanocrystalline Mechanical Response
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2013
* Michael Falk, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 04/30/2013
* USD 244,238.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical and computational research on
plastic deformation, an inherently non-equilibrium process. The PI intends to
advance understanding of plastic deformation in non-crystalline solids to
materials with increasing degrees of structural order. Non-crystalline solids
find industrial application as metals, ceramics, semiconductors and polymers,
but the fact of their disorder has discouraged the development of adequate
theories for their deformation. Recently large-scale atomistic simulation has
allowed dramatic progress in analyzing the structural disorder in these solids
and in relating their mechanical properties to their structural evolution. In
the process constitutive laws have been developed that use concepts from non-
equilibrium statistical physics to connect macroscale behavior to atomic scale
structure. These constitutive laws differ from existing relations insofar as
they make reference to certain temperature-like intensive variables that
quantify the structure. These structural parameters can be independently
measured in simulation to validate the relations. Evidence of the success of
these methods has been established by predictions of the mechanical response of
metallic glass, an emerging structural material, both during homogeneous flow
near the glass temperature and during the development of plastic localization at
low temperatures. This research project will extend these investigations to
include partially crystalline and nanocrystalline solids. Examining a continuum
of structures over this range will test the generality of these theories of
deformation for predicting plastic behavior in partially ordered solids. This
will lead to a greatly increased understanding of deformation and failure in
materials with varying degrees of disorder.

This computational and theoretical research program will be integrated with an
educational program at Johns Hopkins University (JHU) that addresses a critical
need to integrate computational methods into the Materials Science and
Engineering core curriculum. This will be done in the context of courses on
kinetics, phase transformations, mechanics of materials and physical properties
of materials. The PI is continuing to develop a course on the graduate level
covering computational materials science methods for molecular simulation. In
addition the PI has a history of involving undergraduates in research. This
project will involve both JHU undergrads and undergraduates recruited through
the NSF MRSEC and PREM programs at JHU that bring in students from around the
U.S. and majority-minority institutions.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports research that combines simulation and
theoretical statistical physics to investigate how materials deform when
stressed and to develop a framework to predict plastic behavior. When a small
force is applied to a material, a material will bend or deform in such a way
that the material will spring back to its original size and shape when the force
is removed. As the force is increased, a point is reached where the material
deforms and no longer springs back to original size and shape when the force is
removed. The PI aims to understand how this plastic deformation occurs in a
range of materials from metals that are a mosaic of tiny crystals the size of a
few nanometers to amorphous metals where the atoms are not arranged in any
apparent pattern. The PI aims to directly address issues critical to the
development of emerging new materials with potential applications due to their
high strength and hardness. By making a strong connection between the structure
of the material and the resulting mechanical properties, these investigations
will provide predictive theories that can be used to analyze the connection
between processing, structure and properties and the onset of precursors to
materials failure. These investigations will increase understanding beyond
subject metals to other materials including glassy polymers, granular media,
colloids and the processes that accompany friction. This computational and
theoretical research program will be integrated with an educational program at
Johns Hopkins University (JHU) that addresses a critical need to integrate
computational methods into the Materials Science and Engineering core
curriculum. This will be done in the context of more traditional courses on
materials. The PI is continuing to develop a course on the graduate level
covering computational materials science methods for molecular simulation. In
addition the PI has a history of involving undergraduates in research. This
project will involve both JHU undergrads and undergraduates recruited through
the NSF MRSEC and PREM programs at JHU that bring in students from around the
U.S. and majority-minority institutions.

