* 0808399
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:  Integrating Computer Aided Design and Flexible Multi-Body Codes
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2014
* Ahmed Shabana, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 07/31/2014
* USD 30,000.00

0808399&lt;br/&gt;Shabana&lt;br/&gt;This project supports collaborative research
by Dr. Ahmed Shabana, Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of
Illinois at Chicago and Dr. Sayed Metwalli, Faculty of Engineering, Cairo
University, Cairo, Egypt. The objective of this project is to develop a new
methodology for integrating computer aided design (CAD) systems and flexible
multi-body codes (FMC). This new methodology will allow for the design
optimization, numerical simulation and visualization of multi-body system
computer models that consist of interconnected rigid and deformable bodies. In
developing the computer procedures that will be used in this investigation, the
new and challenging problems of integrating optimization and design sensitivity
analysis methods with large deformation finite element formulations in flexible
multi-body system algorithms will be addressed. Successful integration will lead
to a new generation of simulation codes that can be used in the large
deformation analysis, design and performance evaluation of many mechanical and
aerospace systems. The main application that will be considered in this project
is vehicle dynamics. Special attention will be given to study the rollover
scenarios of sport utility vehicles (SUV). Optimal design of the suspension
system that consist of rigid and flexible bodies, shock absorbers, and leaf
springs modeled using large deformation finite element formulations will be
sought in order to improve the vehicle stability and avoid rollover resulting
from brake sudden application at high speeds. Cairo University has a strong
research program in the CAD and design optimization area, while the University
of Illinois at Chicago has a strong program in the area of flexible multi-body
dynamics and computational mechanics. Both institutions have extensive
experience in software development. In particular, Cairo University developed a
CAD software that has been licensed to industry and various academic
institutions in North America and Egypt. Integration of this software with
general purpose flexible multi-body system algorithms will be explored in this
collaborative research project. It is believed that such an integration of two
advanced approaches will lead to a new and sophisticated design environment that
will have a significant impact on education, design methodologies and research
in this field. Both UIC and Cairo University have ongoing funded research
projects in this research area.&lt;br/&gt;Technical Merit: The integration of
CAD and design optimization techniques with large deformation finite
element/multibody system algorithms is the subject of this proposal. This a new
and emerging area which requires multi-disciplinary efforts from two
institutions with different technical expertise as previously described in this
summary. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The accurate analysis and successful design
of detailed models requires the use of efficient iterative optimization
procedures. The successful integration of CAD and large deformation finite
element/multibody system algorithms is necessary for the design and virtual
prototyping of such detailed models. The resulting new design environment will
have, as previously mentioned, significant impact on the design procedures used
in industry and academic institutions. The results obtained in this research
project can also significantly impact the way computational design methods are
taught at our educational institutions. This project is being supported under
the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to scientists and
engineers in both countries to carry out these cooperative activities.
&lt;br/&gt;