* 0808863
* FODAVA-Lead: Dimension Reduction and Data Reduction: Foundations for Visualization
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2016
* Haesun Park, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2016
* USD 3,539,333.00

FODAVA-Lead: Dimension Reduction and Data Reduction: Foundations for
Visualization&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The FODAVA (Foundations of Data Analysis and
Visualization) Lead research team at the Georgia Institute of Technology
provides unified expertise in the critical areas for providing leadership of the
FODAVA effort, including machine learning and computational statistics,
information visualization, massive-dataset algorithms and data structures, and
optimization theory. The team is focused on the fundamental theory and
approaches to make breakthroughs in data representations and transformations.
The work is directed along the two main axes of scale reduction, data reduction
and dimension reduction, to allow human analysts to absorb and penetrate modern
large-scale high-dimensional datasets cognitively and
visually.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the area of dimension reduction, the team is
extending the theory of automatic feature selection by sparse recovery,
developing effective methods for manifold dimension reduction in terms of
differential operators, developing new scalable manifold methods using convex-
concave saddle-point approaches, and creating dimension reduction methods which
incorporate constraints that increase their understandability, such as
preserving the data's cluster structure. In the area of data reduction, the team
is developing multi-resolution data approximation schemes using hierarchical
data structures and multipole-like expansions, approaches for analyzing data of
heterogeneous data quality using convolution kernel approaches, and approaches
for automatic anomaly cleaning and detection using Lp estimation. The results of
this research impact the theory and practice of data analysis, as well as that
of information visualization, in particular through the Visual Analytics Digital
Library, integration of the resulting methodologies into existing visual
analytics systems, and a series of workshops. Undergraduates, under-represented
groups, and graduate students are educated in this new interdisciplinary area
respectively through Georgia Tech's Threads model, FACES effort, and innovative
PhD introductory course emphasizing cross-disciplinary research and new PhD
program in Computational Science and Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;