* 0808234
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Is bacterial persistence an altruistic, selfish, or kin-selected social trait?
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2010
* Robert Ford Denison, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 06/30/2010
* USD 10,515.00

Bacteria that become "persisters" can survive stress (such as starvation or
application of antibiotics), but cannot reproduce. Persisters consume less food,
making more food available for other bacteria. Did the persistence trait evolve
because it helps individuals to survive stress, or because it is advantageous to
bacterial groups, especially close relatives? Computer models and experiments
with different mixtures of harmless bacteria under different conditions will be
used to investigate this issue. Bacteria that fluoresce different colors will be
used, so that they can be distinguished for
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Diseases caused by persister bacteria are
more difficult to cure because they are hard to kill, even with antibiotics that
kill active individuals of the same strains. This research may suggest how
hospital conditions and treatments affect the rapid evolution of bacterial
persistence, even within a single patient. In addition, if persistence is in
fact an example of individuals sacrificing their own success for the common good
of their relatives, then this system can be used to study the evolution of
cooperation, doing experiments in days that would take decades with
multicellular organisms. This research will provide training opportunities for
high school and undergraduate students.