* 0808442
* Dissertation Research:  Origin and Diversification of Pseudoscorpions on Granite Outcrops in Southwestern Australia
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2008,09/30/2010
* Elizabeth Jockusch, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 09/30/2010
* USD 11,992.00

Pseudoscorpions, an arachnid order with at least 3300 species, are distributed
worldwide yet they remain understudied. This grant explores the evolutionary
diversification of one genus of pseudoscorpions, Synsphyronus Chamberlin, which
occurs in Australia and New Zealand. This project aims to 1) assess the
diversity and evolutionary relationships of Synsphyronus in southwestern
Australia, where the group has diversified on habitat islands formed by granite
outcrops and 2) to understand the evolutionary origins of the outcrop-endemic
species of Synsphyronus. Relationships among populations will be inferred using
DNA sequences. Specimens will also be examined with scanning electronic
microscopy to search for distinguishing morphological traits. The resulting
phylogeny will be used to test hypotheses about outcrop colonization events and
character evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A critical issue facing the biological
community is to describe the biota of recognized global biodiversity hotspots,
while facing a decline in the number of taxonomists, particularly in lesser-
known groups such as pseudoscorpions. Southwestern Australia is recognized as a
global biodiversity hotspot and while its floristic richness is well known,
documentation of its invertebrate fauna lags behind. This project will enhance
the infrastructure for research through an international partnership with a
pseudoscorpion taxonomist in Australia. A graduate student will be trained in
taxonomy by her collaborator and together they will describe up to six new
species that have been discovered through her fieldwork.&lt;br/&gt;