* 0808242
* Dissertation Research: Testing Phylogeographic Hypotheses of Holocene Plant Migration and Endemism in the Solidago simplex Species Complex
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2011
* Jess Peirson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 06/30/2011
* USD 11,920.00

Paleoecological evidence indicates that Pleistocene glaciations caused broad
scale changes in vegetation across North America, but how individual plant
species responded to these repeated cycles of glaciation remains largely
unstudied. This project will examine how the widespread, North American,
Solidago simplex species complex responded to the most recent period of
glaciation. Analyses of chloroplast DNA sequence data will be used to 1)
describe and assess the structuring of genetic diversity across the range of S.
simplex in North America and 2) test the long-standing hypothesis that some
widespread species survived glaciation in western North American refugia and
migrated to eastern, glaciated regions of the continent more recently during the
Holocene.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will be one of the first molecular
phylogeographic studies to examine the biogeographic patterns and glacial
history of an herbaceous plant species across the entirety of its North American
range. The information generated by this work will provide us with more refined
understandings of 1) how plant species responded to historical climate change
and 2) how Pleistocene glacial cycles affected population differentiation and
speciation. This information can provide valuable insight into how extant
species may respond to future climate change and can therefore significantly aid
current habitat and species conservation efforts. &lt;br/&gt;