* 0808298
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Evolution of floral symmetry in the petaloid monocot order Zingiberales
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2008,04/30/2011
* Madelaine Bartlett, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Charles Lydeard
* 04/30/2011
* USD 12,000.00

An award has been made to the University of California at Berkeley under the
direction of Dr. Chelsea D. Specht to study the role several genes affecting
flowering and floral symmetry in a family of plants that includes gingers,
bananas, and the bird of paradise plant. The grant will improve the doctoral
dissertation research of Madelaine Bartlett. Flowering plants are astoundingly
diverse, and changes in floral symmetry are thought to have been one driving
force in the evolution of this diversity. The goal of the proposed research is
to investigate the role of two candidate gene families, the CYC-like genes and
the B and C class MADS box genes, in the initiation and elaboration of floral
symmetry in the monocotyledonous order Zingiberales, which contains about 2,000
species. Multiple changes in floral symmetry have occurred in the Zingiberales,
making it an ideal order in which to study the evolution of this important
ecological trait. It is hypothesized that there will be shifts in gene sequence,
number and expression accompanying shifts in symmetry across the order. Modern
phylogenetic methods will be used to investigate the evolutionary history of
these gene families. Their expression patterns in developing flowers with
differing symmetries will be assessed using in situ hybridization and RT-PCR.

Understanding the genetics of how flowering plant diversity evolved is
critically important in deciding how to protect and maintain such diversity now
and in the future. This study is one of the first to expand our knowledge of
floral development to the petaloid monocots, and the first to expand this
research to tropical monocots. Through the continuation of this research
project, at least two additional undergraduate students will be trained in
molecular lab work and the scientific process. This research will also result in
the dissemination of knowledge through publications, presentations at scientific
meetings, and a website with procedures and protocols for extending molecular
genetic research to non-model systems.

