* 0808535
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Understanding the influence of eolian dust on soils in the San Juan Mountains, CO
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2008,11/30/2010
* Jason Neff, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 11/30/2010
* USD 11,859.00

Dust deposition has increased by as much as 500% over the past 200 years in the
San Juan Mountains for southwestern Colorado. This increase in dust is evident
in alpine lake sediment chemical composition, however it is unclear if these
increases in dust have influenced soil chemistry in this region. The purpose of
this research is to quantify the role of dust deposition to soil essential
element pools relative to the weathering of local bedrock in the San Juan
Mountains. This study will exploit the difference in strontium isotope chemistry
between dust and local bedrock in order to quantify the contribution of these
sources of elements to soils. Furthermore, the isotopic methods used in this
study allow for an assessment of the availability of the dust-derived elements
for plant and microbial uptake. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will not
only quantify the accumulation of dust in soils, it will also serve to assess
the contribution of dust to productivity of plants and microbes in these soils.
In addition, this work will provide insight into the importance of dust for soil
formation and weathering fluxes over long time-scales. This will also lend
perspective to the role of changing land-use and climate in dust deposition in
this region. This project will also provide the opportunity for the
investigators to serve in education and outreach programs based in southwestern
Colorado for populations that are traditionally underserved in such
activities.&lt;br/&gt;