* 0808338
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: How mammals impact plant functional diversity of a neotropical forest
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2010
* Rodolfo Dirzo, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 07/31/2010
* USD 12,000.00

Throughout the tropics, animal populations are experiencing alarming declines
due to poaching and over-hunting. Surprisingly, hunted tropical forests have up
to 66% lower plant biodiversity than un-hunted forests. Why? This study seeks to
answer that question, using an experiment which mimics the effect of hunting by
keeping animals out of forest patches with fences. Changes in plant composition
and diversity inside and outside the fences have been monitored for 14 years. In
this study, characteristics of plants which mediate plant-animal interactions
are being measured for each plant species. Plants with contrasting
characteristics are compared to see if they respond differently to the absence
of animals. The responsive plant characteristics act as 'fingerprints', allowing
researchers to identify the mechanisms of species loss.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Why
care about tropical biodiversity loss? Tropical biodiversity provides humanity
with important ecosystem services and natural resources, often for free. For
humans, wild tropical plants represent a vast resource of disease resistance
genes for domesticated relatives, new food plants, potent anti-microbial
compounds, effective anti-cancer drugs, and more. Plant diversity improves the
quality of ecosystem services such as pollination and carbon storage.
Biodiversity is not a renewable resource. Once species are extinct, they cannot
be recovered. Knowledge gained from this study about an under-appreciated threat
to biodiversity, hunting, will enable park managers, biologists, and policy
makers to better protect this irreplaceable resource.