* 0808375
* Analyses of Global Climate Variability in Data and In Models
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2008,04/30/2012
* Ka-Kit Tung, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 04/30/2012
* USD 553,887.00

Novel methods of temporal and spatial data analysis will be applied to study
global climate variability in the troposphere and the stratosphere. These
methods include: Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA), Composite Mean Difference
(CMD) Projection, Empirical Mode Decomposition (EMD) and the Continuous Wavelet
Transform (CWT). In the troposphere, and more importantly at the surface,
patterns of warming and cooling on decadal time scales will be studied, with the
intent to separate the warming response to solar variations from that due to
greenhouse gases. Multiple datasets will be examined, with in situ measurements
used to confirm results from global reanalyses. Global climate model (GCM)
output from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Fourth Assessment
(IPCC AR4) repository will be analyzed in the same way as the observed data, to
confirm that some of these coupled atmosphere-ocean models are capable of
correctly simulating the response to solar-cycle forcing and to use this result
to constrain modeled transient climate responses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the
stratosphere, statistically significant perturbations to the polar stratosphere
from the El Nino-southern Oscillation (ENSO), from the solar cycle and from the
Quasi-Biennial Oscillation (QBO) will be extracted, in order to understand how
these "external" perturbations interact with each other. The LDA method has
proven to be important in extracting the spatial patterns of these perturbations
and establishing their statistical significance. CWT can be used to objectively
study the decadal modulation of the period and amplitude of the QBO, possibly by
the solar cycle. The mechanisms responsible for the climate response to solar-
cycle forcing are to be elucidated through data and model analyses, and the
responses to other natural external forcings better quantified.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of these studies are in their application
to the problem of anthropogenic climate change. A major uncertainty in the
prediction of climate change is the magnitude of Earth's climate sensitivity.
The coupled atmosphere-ocean models participating in IPCC AR4 span a large range
in their transient climate response, but there are very few independent
constraints that can be used to narrow the uncertainty. This uncertainty has led
to a large range of predicted global warming. The results from this work can be
used as an independent observational constraint for the calibration of GCMs in
their ability to predict transient warming.