* 0808994
* Workshop:  i-Conference Doctoral Research Colloquium
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2008,01/31/2009
* Jonathan Furner, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 01/31/2009
* USD 34,880.00

IIS-0808994 PI: Jonathan Furner University of California, Los Angeles $34,880 -
12 mos

i-Conference Doctoral Research Colloquium

This is a 12-month standard award to support a Doctoral Colloquium program at
the i-Schools i-Conference to be held on the campus of the University of
California, Los Angeles (February 28 - March 1, 2008). This will bring together
30 dissertation-stage doctoral students in diverse information and informatics
subfields for one day of talks and interaction with 9-10 faculty members
selected from among distinguished information researchers. This project provides
support for the travel, lodging and registration of students, plus the
registration for the participating faculty mentors, as well as the direct
expenses of putting on the Doctoral Colloquium at the meeting.

Intellectual Merit

The focus of the i-Conference Doctoral Colloquium is the students' doctoral
dissertations. These represent state-of-the-art research in the field of
information. The Doctoral Colloquium provides an opportunity both for these
projects to be shaped through intellectual exchange and to communicate the
character of the work to a key group of young professionals.

Broader Impact

The i-Conference Doctoral Colloquium brings together the best of the next
generation of information researchers. This allows them to create a social
network both among themselves and with several senior researchers, which plays a
major role in their enculturation into the profession. Since the students and
faculty are a very diverse group on several dimensions (nationality, scientific
roots, methods), the students' horizons are broadened at a critical stage in
their professional development.