* 0808145
* Fundamental Properties of Low Mass Stars in Eclipsing Binaries
* MPS,AST
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2012
* Jerome Orosz, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Womack
* 06/30/2012
* USD 264,748.00

Dr. Orosz will undertake the observation and modeling of a wide variety of close
binary systems using in large part telescopes at San Diego State University's
Mount Laguna Observatory. Binary stars offer the best opportunity for accurate
measurements of the radii and masses of stars, measurements essential to verify
stellar evolution theory and to determine the properties of other diverse
objects such as white dwarfs, neutron stars, black holes, and extra-solar
planets. Here, accurate physical parameters for a wide variety of close binary
systems will be determined, including main sequence stars and black holes. A
specific goal of this project will be to measure accurate masses and radii for
low-mass main sequence stars in order to provide needed constraints on
evolutionary models for the lower main sequence (namely the mass-radius
relation).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program builds upon recent advances in
computer models for binary systems made by Dr. Orosz, most notably the
incorporation of specific intensities from model atmosphere computations into a
light curve synthesis code and a fitting code based on a genetic algorithm. It
has been shown that in some cases the observed light curves can be reproduced
much better with these tools, and that the resulting masses and radii of the
component stars can be significantly different from what was previously
thought.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project also makes use of NSF-funded
improvements to the Mount Laguna Observatory, including a completed high-speed
Internet connection between San Diego State University and the observatory,
substantial upgrades to the existing 1-meter telescope at the observatory, and a
robotic 1-meter telescope that will be constructed using new mirror technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is expected that fundamental parameters will be found
for a large number of binary systems, with a broad impact across diverse areas
of astrophysics. The modeling code will be made publicly available, to the
benefit of the wider astronomical community. This research will involve advanced
San Diego State undergraduate students, graduate students working on Master's
Theses, and undergraduate students participating in the NSF-funded Research
Experiences for Undergraduates program at San Diego State. Dr. Orosz will also
discuss his research in his classes, and to the wider community through outreach
events on campus and at the Mount Laguna Observatory.