* 0808356
* Dissertation Research: The roles of genetic variation and competition in resource niche expansion
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Daniel Bolnick, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 06/30/2009
* USD 12,000.00

Previous experiments by the investigators have shown that genetic diversity and
competition separately increase species' ability to adapt to novel resources
(niche expansion). The current project will test whether genetic diversity and
competitive interactions between individuals act synergistically to achieve
this. Growth of flour beetle populations, initiated with varying degrees of
genetic diversity and competition and supplied with ancestral and novel
resources, will be monitored for eight generations. Diet of beetles sampled
periodically from each population will be quantified using stable carbon isotope
analysis, a powerful method of quantifying diet variation. The rate of temporal
change in resource use will then be measured as a function of experimentally
manipulated genetic diversity and competition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Niche
expansion is commonly invoked to explain species distributions and ranges.
Hence, experiments that enhance knowledge of factors that constrain or
facilitate niche expansion are windows into the causes and consequences of
changes in biodiversity. This project represents the first experimental study of
this phenomenon in sexual organisms. The experimental design also mimics
conservation strategies seeking to increase population size and genetic
variation of threatened species. Therefore, results also have direct
applications in conservation biology.