* 0808696
* Sustainable Engineering for Urban Needs: Research Experiences for Middle and High School Teachers
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2014
* Anant Kukreti, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 05/31/2014
* USD 455,000.00

This award provides funding for a 3 year continuing award to support a Research
Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering Site program at the University of
Cincinnati (UC) entitled, Sustainable Engineering for Urban Needs: Research
Experiences for Middle and High School Teachers", under the direction of Dr.
Anant Kukreti. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research Experiences for Teachers
(RET) in Engineering Site is a renewal of a successful RET Site program hosted
by the UC College of Engineering which annually supports, 12 in-service and 6
pre-service middle and high school math and science teachers from Cincinnati
public schools, who will participate in a six-week summer research program and
academic year follow-on activities. The primary goals of this RET site are three
fold: (1) To educate, cultivate, and enrich experiences for science and math
teachers by exploring the scientific methods of inquiry and the critical
research skills used by engineers to solve open-ended real-world problems. (2)
The participating teachers will become role models by applying their research
experiences in their classrooms with colleagues. (3) The teachers' new skills
will enable their students to directly link their education to current events
and the needs of their community and encourage them to become effective citizens
in a technology-driven society.