* 0808636
* SGER: Prototype Test Bench for Stellar Intensity Interferometry with Atmospheric Cherenkov Gamma Ray Telescopes
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2009,02/29/2012
* Tugdual Lebohec, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Eric Bloemhof
* 02/29/2012
* USD 55,624.00

For the most part, astronomers prefer to use their telescopes during the dark of
the moon and for some projects the moon adds so much background light that
telescopes go unused every month for the eight to ten nights surrounding full
moon. For example, there are arrays of telescopes used to measure the intensity
and the direction of electromagnetic radiation (Cherenkov radiation) caused when
cosmic rays enter the earth's atmosphere. Because these signals are very weak
and the resulting light very faint, the telescopes typically sit idle nearly a
third of the nights. However, research projects that investigate brighter
objects like nearby stars can still be conducted while the moon is shining. In
order to make use of such available telescopes during "bright time," Dr. Stephan
LeBohec of the University of Utah is planning to use them during bright time as
an intensity interferometer to measure the diameters of stars. This kind of
measurement has been done before using intensity interferometry, but the
technique has fallen out of favor and been superseded by so-called phase
interferometers. Phase interferometry works well for cooler, red stars where the
red and infrared light has longer wavelengths. However, for stars like our
yellow sun as well as for hotter and bluer stars intensity interferometry
performs much better. NSF's Division of Astronomical Sciences Advanced
Technologies and Instrumentation Program is providing funding for Dr. LeBohec to
acquire and develop the instrumentation necessary for the intensity
interferometry measurements to be made on the Cherenkov telescopes.