* 0808913
* Collaborative Research: CRI: CRD: A JML Community Infrastructure -- Revitalizing Tools and Documentation to Aid Formal Methods Research
* CSE,CNS
* 09/28/2007,06/30/2010
* Gary Leavens, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 06/30/2010
* USD 291,000.00

Proposal #: CNS 07-09217 07-07874 07-07701&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Leavens, Gary T.
Cheon, Yoonsik Clifton, Curtis C.&lt;br/&gt; Basu, Samik; Rajan, Hridesh
&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Iowa State University UTEP Rose-Hulman Institute
Tech&lt;br/&gt; Ames, IA 50011-2207 El Paso, TX 79968-0587 Terra Haute, IN
47803-3920&lt;br/&gt;Proposal #: CNS 07-07885 07-08330 07-09169&lt;br/&gt;PI(s):
Flanagan, Cormac Naumann, David A. Robby&lt;br/&gt;Institution: UC-Santa Cruz
Stevens Institute of Tech Kansas State U&lt;br/&gt; Santa Cruz, CA 95064-4107
Hoboken, NJ 07030-5991 Manhattan, KS 66506-1103&lt;br/&gt;Title: CRD: Collab
Rsch: JML Community Infr-Revitalizing Tools and Documentation to Aid Formal
Methods Rsch&lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project,
revitalizing tools and documentations to aid formal methods research, aims
to&lt;br/&gt;. Enhance JML's infrastructure including its type checker, runtime
assertion checking compiler, and IDE support;&lt;br/&gt;. Make JML's software
infrastructure more extensible; &lt;br/&gt;. Substantially improve the
documentation of the language and its supporting tools; &lt;br/&gt;. Develop
course materials and tutorials to facilitate classroom use of JML;
and&lt;br/&gt;. Disseminate a well-documented, extensible, open source suite of
enhanced JML tools.&lt;br/&gt;JML (Java Modeling Language), a formal
specification language that can document detailed designs of Java and
interfaces, has been used in different projects with great benefit. Feedback is
obtained from users who are attracted by the ability to check Java code against
JML specifications using a variety of tools. New research problems, however, are
forcing re-inventing the infrastructure that JML provides, slowing the
innovation, since JML does not support many of the new features of Java version
5, most notably generics. The Verified Software grand challenge has identified
lack of extensible tools for formal methods research as a major impediment to
experimentation. This project responds to the challenge by enhancing, extending,
and well-documenting the infrastructure to advance and accelerate Java formal
methods research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The infrastructure is
expected to open barriers to formal methods adoption among software engineering
professionals by endowing a large collection of tools that share a common,
mature specification language. These advantages should attract more educators
and improve reliability in safety- and mission-critical systems. Moreover,
strengthening the formal methods component in software engineering curriculum,
courses will be developed and targeted to undergraduate research,. The
collaborative involves two minority-serving institutions and an institution in
an EPSCoR state.&lt;br/&gt;