* 0808473
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Effects of Soil Nitrogen Enrichment on the Chemical Mediation of Multi-Trophic Interactions
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2010
* Mary Jamieson, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 05/31/2010
* USD 6,627.00

While most temperate terrestrial ecosystems remain nitrogen limited, nitrogen
inputs from human activity are increasing at a rapid rate. This project will
examine the influence of nitrogen enrichment on plant-herbivore and herbivore-
predator interactions. Soil nitrogen enrichment may influence such interactions
through changes in plant productivity, nutritional quality, and defensive
chemistry. These direct effects on plants, in turn, may affect both herbivores
and predators. This project examines interactions between an invasive plant that
is chemically defended (Dalmatian Toadflax, Linaria dalmatica,
Scrophulariaceae), a specialist insect herbivore that stores these plant defense
compounds (Toadflax Defoliator, Calophasia lunula, Noctuidae), and several
invertebrate predators. These interactions will be investigated in greenhouse
and field experiments in which plants are grown under varying levels of nitrogen
addition. The results will contribute to understanding the explicit mechanisms
by which soil nitrogen enrichment may influence such interactions. This project
represents the first study of the chemical ecology of this invasive plant and a
biological control insect that has been introduced to manage this species.
Invasive plants pose an important threat to native biodiversity and the
aggressiveness of these species to invade a habitat may be facilitated by
nitrogen deposition. Information from this research will provide insight for
improving biocontrol efforts for an invasive plant that has ecological and
economic significance as a rangeland weed. Further, the broader impacts of this
research include fostering collaborations between researchers and land managers
as well as educating the public about environmental change and plant invasions.