* 0808001
* Infrared Dark Clouds
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2013
* James Jackson, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* James Neff
* 07/31/2013
* USD 649,151.00

Infrared Dark Clouds are the birthplaces of both high-mass stars and star
clusters. Dr. James Jackson (Boston University) and his team will analyze a
large suite of observations at centimeter, millimeter, sub-millimeter, and
infrared wavelengths, supplemented by new observations at the Very Large
Telescope, the Australian Telescope National Facility 22-m telescope, Plateau de
Bure, and Institut de Radio Astronomie Millim√©trique 30-m telescopes to explore
the poorly understood processes at play in high-mass protostellar evolution. The
team will complete six key science projects in this funding period: (1)
Measuring the spectral energy distributions, and hence, bolometric luminosities,
of ~100 high-mass protostars, (2) Searching for high-mass "pre-stellar" cores,
(3) Testing the suggestion of "competitive accretion" by searching for
circumstellar disks surrounding high mass stars, (4) Testing the idea that young
O stars actually enter the main-sequence as B stars and then continue to accrete
material on their way to becoming main-sequence O stars, (5) Measuring the clump
mass function in high-mass star forming clouds, and (6) Studying the chemical
evolution of high-mass protostellar cores. When this project is complete, the
team will have made a significant contribution to the understanding of the
poorly-known processes at play in the earliest stages of high-mass star
formation and will have also tested two key theoretical ideas: "competitive
accretion" and the idea that O stars first enter the main-sequence as accreting
B stars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Jackson's group has led the way in identifying
and characterizing Infrared Dark Clouds (IRDCs). Their characteristic sizes
(~few parsecs) and masses (~few 1,000 solar-masses) resemble those of cluster-
forming molecular clumps such as those in Orion and Ophichus. Their cold
temperatures, however, suggest that they are in an earlier evolutionary state.
Imaging of the mm/sub-mm dust continuum reveals that IRDCs contain compact
cores, whose sizes (&lt;0.5 parsecs) and masses (~100 solar masses) match those
of "hot cores" associated with high-mass protostars. An examination of these
cores reveals that about 1/3 contain unambiguous evidence of star formation. The
large bolometric luminosities of the embedded protostars within several IRDC
cores show that they are currently forming high-mass stars. Interferometric
observations reveal that these high-mass stars are accompanied by a number of
lower mass protostars. All of the initial evidence, therefore, suggests that
IRDCs host the earliest stages of the formation of high-mass stars and star
clusters. In addition to the research that will be carried out under this award,
this proposal will fund the training and education of two female graduate
students and one female post-doctoral student. Moreover, the Boston University
Astronomy Department has entered into a collaborative agreement with Fisk
University, a historically black college, and Vanderbilt University to
participate in the Fisk-Vanderbilt Masters-Ph.D. Bridge Program which allows
Fisk students to pursue their Master's degrees at Fisk with guaranteed admission
into Ph.D. programs at Vanderbilt and Boston University.