* 0808275
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Vegetation Effects on Nitrogen Cycling Hotspots in an Alpine-Subalpine Ecosystem
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2010
* William Bowman, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 05/31/2010
* USD 11,882.00

By burning fossil fuels and using nitrogen fertilizers, humans have doubled the
global rate of nitrogen inputs to the atmosphere and natural ecosystems. These
higher nitrogen inputs contribute to a multitude of environmental problems
including air pollution, acid rain, climate change, higher abundance of invasive
species, and biodiversity loss. To aid in understanding and managing these
environmental problems, researchers have developed a detailed understanding of
how nitrogen is processed in ecosystems based on small-scale plot-based
measurements. While forming an important foundation, these small-scale
measurements may not be representative of whole landscapes, especially in
mountains. In this study, the investigators work toward a landscape-scale
understanding of nitrogen cycling in an alpine-subalpine ecosystem. The research
seeks to locate hotspots (unusually active areas) of nitrogen cycling within an
alpine-subalpine ecosystem on Niwot Ridge in the southern Rocky Mountains, near
the Denver metropolitan region. The research will address the relative roles of
biological and non-biological factors in controlling nitrogen cycling rates. To
accomplish these goals, the investigators will measure nitrogen cycling rates
across the landscape in conjunction with field-collected and remotely-sensed
data that describe physical, chemical, and biological
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will contribute to: (1) basic
knowledge of variation in nitrogen cycling rates across diverse landscapes; (2)
information for land management agencies responsible for setting limits on human
nitrogen emissions that influence natural resources in mountain ecosystems; and
(3) development of new methods for ecological measurements at larger spatial
scales.&lt;br/&gt;