* 0808453
* Dissertation Research: Feedback between ecological interactions and evolutionary processes in a trophic cascade
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2010
* Sharon Strauss, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2010
* USD 0.00

Trophic cascades, ecological interactions in which predators suppress herbivores
and so indirectly benefit plants, are among the most widely studied multi-
species interactions. This research will examine how trophic cascades affect
natural selection and evolution of the common monkey flower plant (Mimulus
guttatus). The presence of both arthropod herbivores and predatory spiders will
be manipulated in the field and responses of several genetically-variable plant
traits will be measured to assess changes in selection pressures associated with
those treatments. Changes in plant traits also have the potential to influence
the strength of trophic cascades. The importance of this feedback mechanism will
be measured directly, by growing offspring of plants from each treatment in
every treatment the following season, and indirectly, by using artificial
selection to manipulate plant traits and then placing selected lines into each
treatment. &lt;br/&gt;Understanding complex multi-species interactions in
ecological communities remains a key challenge for ecology. The intellectual
merit of this research is that it will add to our understanding of the interplay
between genetic variation, natural selection, and multi-species interactions in
complex ecological communities. The broader impacts of the research include
student training, and that it will generate important insights for managing both
species diversity and genetic diversity in natural and agricultural systems.
Understanding potential feedbacks between the variable interactions among
different species and the genetic variation present within species will also
help in predicting how ecological communities will change as species diversity
and genetic diversity are altered by humans.