* 0808120
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Repeated Reverse Island Colonization of Hawaiian Bark Lice
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2010
* Kevin Johnson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 06/30/2010
* USD 11,630.00

The Hawaiian Islands are a hotspot of biodiversity and a natural laboratory for
the study of evolution and how quickly new species arise. In fact, Hawaiian
insects have the fastest speciation rates documented among invertebrates. One
diverse and rapidly speciating group in Hawaii is the bark louse (Order
Psocoptera) genus Ptycta, which has 51 described species and more than an
estimated 100 species, but has received little attention. This research focuses
on the study of Hawaiian Ptycta, including documenting the diversity of Hawaiian
Ptycta, analyzing relationships among Ptycta species, and investigating the
geographic origin of the Ptycta colonist(s) that reached Hawaii. Preliminary DNA
sequence data suggest that Hawaiian Ptycta may have diversified extremely
rapidly, with a speciation rate higher than any other insect lineage. These data
also support novel patterns that challenge the standard patterns of colonization
and diversification on the Hawaiian Islands. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
will improve understanding of the processes driving speciation on the Hawaiian
Islands, offer insights into how quickly new species arise, and provide
important information on diversity and habitat use of Hawaiian bark lice.
Description of new species, documentation of species distribution, and
identification of local diversity hotspots will also result, providing important
information for conservation of biodiversity in Hawaii.&lt;br/&gt;