* 0809347
* Deformation of Directionally Solidifying Alloys, and the Earth's Inner Core
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2008,05/31/2012
* Michael Bergman, Simon's Rock of Bard College
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 05/31/2012
* USD 114,403.00

The Earth?s central, solid inner core exhibits some intriguing seismic
properties, in particular, elasticity and attenuation that depend on the
propagation direction of the seismic wave. This directionality, or anisotropy,
is presumably giving us insight into the evolution of the Earth?s core, which
this study will explore. The elastic and attenuation anisotropies are nearly
aligned with the rotation axis, though seismologists are beginning to reveal a
more complex structure. Most explanations for the elastic anisotropy rely on an
alignment of the hexagonal close-packed iron crystals that likely compose the
inner core, because an alignment of crystals that are individually anisotropic
yields a non-zero average anisotropy. The explanations for the alignment fall
broadly into two classes, solidification texturing and deformation texturing.
However, it seems increasingly likely that no one explanation may suffice to
understand the complex inner core structure. The primary intent of this study is
to understand deformation of metallic alloys during solidification, with a goal
of understanding the origin of the unusual seismic properties of the Earth?s
inner core.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This study will examine experimentally the
high temperature deformation of a hexagonal close-packed zinc-rich tin alloy
that has been directionally solidified. The directionally solidified castings
will have the columnar, dendritic structure that has been proposed for the inner
core. Slices of the castings will then be heated to a high homologous
temperature, at which the small fraction of interdendritic tin will melt. While
held at this temperature, a slice will be given a differential twist to produce
a constant strain rate. Each slice will be examined before and after deformation
for crystalline orientation, microstructure (morphology and grain size), and
chemical variations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The Principal Investigator intends to
understand the high temperature deformation mechanism of directionally
solidifying alloys, the relevant lengthscale for deformation (grain size or
dendritic spacing), the role of dynamic recovery and recrystallization, and the
resulting changes in microstructure and lattice preferred orientation
(alignment). The study will examine a range of high temperatures, strain rates,
and total strains, while measuring the torque to infer the stress. The hope is
that this study will help to interpret inner core elastic and attenuation
anisotropies, and to give insight on the grain size and viscosity of the inner
core, both of which relate to the deformation mechanism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Although the primary motivation for the study is geophysical, the deformation of
directionally solidifying alloys is also interesting for materials science,
because of the multiplicity of lengthscales associated with columnar dendritic
crystals. The study will involve diverse undergraduates in all aspects of the
work, allowing undergraduates the opportunity to get involved in research at an
institution that is actively trying to improve its science education for
students across the spectrum in interest and background in science.&lt;br/&gt;