* 0809328
* Nanoporous Solid-Contact Sensors /OISE
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2013
* Philippe Buhlmann, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 06/30/2013
* USD 90,000.00

This project supported by the Office of International Science and Engineering is
through the U.S.-Egypt Joint Science and Technology fund and coevaluated through
the NSF by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program. The project is
conducted on the US side by Philippe Buhlmann &amp; Andreas Stein of the
University of Minnesota-Twin Cities, and develops solid-contacted potentiometric
sensors that overcome instability and drift shortcomings of conventional
electrodes by using 3-D ordered macroporous carbon as an electrode material
infused with an ionophore-doped polymeric phase to achieve selectivity. The
project takes advantage of the unique qualifications of the 4 participating
groups, i.e., the expertise of the Abbas group (Egypt) with potentiometric
sensors, and the Stein group expertise in the use of ionophores covalently
attached to polymers, the experience of the Buhlmann group to employ selective,
fouling resistant fluorous phases in these carbon sensors, and the expertise of
the Abdel Ghaffar group (Egypt) in polymer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed work will be executed in collaboration between two research groups from
the National Research Centre, Egypt (Departments of Applied Org. Chem. and
Polymers &amp; Pigments) and the University of Minnesota Chemistry Dept. The
program allows training of younger Egyptian scientists in the USA and will also
benefit US graduate and undergraduate students. The program will attract
students from minority groups to summer research programs through specific UMN
programs. The results of the project will be useful for high quality sensors for
clinical diagnostics, biomedical, industrial and environmental applications.