* 0809542
* RUI: Investigating the Interplay Between Electronic Environment and Molecular Association
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Helen Leung, Amherst College
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 07/31/2012
* USD 377,936.00

In this project, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division, Prof. Helen O. Leung and Prof. Mark D. Marshall of Amherst
College and their undergraduate research students will continue spectroscopic
studies of gas-phase van der Waals complexes formed in a pulsed jet. These
experiments include studies of fluoro- and chlorofluoroethylenes complexed with
protic acids in order to determine the effect of charge distribution changes on
the free-space geometries of the resulting complexes. A laser ablation source
will also be used to create complexes of metal atoms that can not be produced
via the usual helium-nanodroplet method, in order to explore the role of charge
transfer between the metal atom and its partner. The PIs will also construct a
chirped-pulse Fourier transform microwave (CP-FTMW) spectrometer that will allow
complete rotational spectra to be acquired in a small fraction of the time taken
by standard FTMW spectrometers, thereby increasing the productivity of the
undergraduate researchers.

Besides the potential broader scientific impact of the proposed research on a
fundamental understanding of molecular interactions, Prof. Leung and Prof.
Marshall will provide their undergraduate research students with a challenging
opportunity to perform difficult research, the results of which they will
present at national professional meetings and publish in the scientific
literature.