* 0809171
* SGER: Improved quantification of Hsp101 tissue content and discovery of natural study populations differing in Hsp101 expression.
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Stephen Tonsor, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 08/31/2009
* USD 60,312.00

This project will develop a new system for applying the tools of genomic
research that have been developed in the model system of the Mouse-eared Cress
(Arabidopsis) to gain a better understanding of the interplay between mechanisms
of drought tolerance and mechanisms of heat tolerance. Work with laboratory
strains has demonstrated that genotypes exhibiting increased production of heat
shock protein 101 (Hsp101) over their whole lifetime also show reduced root
growth. Non-functional mutants of Hsp101 demonstrate that this reduced root
growth is a direct effect of Hsp101 production. Thus the increased root mass
necessary for tolerating drought stress is prevented if plants protect
themselves from heat stress by producing increased quantities of Hsp101. This
project will set the stage for large-scale combined field and laboratory studies
of this phenomenon through two initiatives. First, the development of a more
precise mass-production method of assaying for Hsp101 production. Second, the
use of this method in screening of genotypes of Arabidopsis collected from
diverse locations within its native range that differ in the extent of heat and
drought stress. This project will be the first to explore the consequences of
Hsp101 expression variation on survival and reproduction in the natural
environment. The results will help in the understanding of the evolution of
diverse physiological stress compensation mechanisms in natural populations.
Broader impacts include valuable information for breeding heat and drought
tolerant agricultural crops. This is especially important as the climate warms
and rainfall patterns shift. At least six undergraduates will receive individual
research training on this project, three of them women. Two graduate students
will also be involved, one of them a member of a minority population. All are
U.S. citizens. This work will also be used in Tonsor's outreach work through the
Phipps Conservatory and Botanical Garden.