* 0809161
* Dynamical Data-based Modeling of the Magnetospheric Magnetic Field
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2007,03/31/2009
* Mikhail Sitnov, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
* kile baker
* 03/31/2009
* USD 121,550.00

Many research topics concerning the Earth's magnetosphere depend on models of
the magnetic field. The existing empirical models are global in space, time, and
in the amplitude of field variations, and they are fitted to observations using
a limited set of custom-tailored basis functions representing each
magnetospheric current system. Although the current models have proven to be
very useful to the space science community they have a number of limitations. In
particular, they do not have the spatial resolution that would be desired and
they do not take into account the time history of the variations. This project
will combine the empirical modeling techniques that have been used in the past
with modern methods of spatial data interpolation and nonlinear time-series
analysis. This will advance the models of the geomagnetic field and make it
possible to systematically increase their spatial resolution and to take into
account the variable solar wind driving on the timescales involved in magnetic
storms and substorms.

The research will pursue three complementary lines. First, the project will
explore the timescales of the response of the main magnetospheric field sources
to solar wind density, speed, ram pressure and the interplanetary magnetic field
(IMF) variations. The response functions will be parameterized using simple
loading-unloading equations with respect to the solar-wind input. Second, a
finite element technique will be implemented, in which the fields of individual
current systems are expanded into a series of basis functions, taking into
account geometrical constraints, imposed on a given current system via its
specific boundary conditions. Combined with a progressive extension of the
spacecraft database, this approach will improve the spatial resolution, maximize
the information derived from observations, and minimize the number of a priori
assumptions on the structure of the magnetosphere. The third line of the
research will explore the possibility of replacing the global time and amplitude
fitting with the local ones, using the dynamical system approach and modern
techniques of the local fitting of data in phase space. This technique will be
based on the concepts of time delay embedding, nearest neighbors, and
conditional probability. An important technical improvement will be the
parallelization of the existing and newly developed codes, providing a much
faster update of the model using supercomputers.

The proposed study will be based on the largest available amount of spacecraft
data, including a significantly extended set of interplanetary and
magnetospheric observations. The data set includes coverage of more than 50
major magnetic storms. The new generation of empirical geomagnetic field models,
will enable space weather forecasting of the magnetic field and will promote our
understanding and prediction of the coupling between the solar wind and the
magnetosphere on timescales relevant to geospace disturbances. The new
geomagnetic field models and the database will be made openly available to other
researchers.