* 0809462
* RUI:  A Theoretical Investigation of Multireference Diradical Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2008,12/31/2012
* Carol Parish, University of Richmond
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 12/31/2012
* USD 293,227.00

Carol Parish of the University of Richmond is supported by a Research in
Undergraduate Institutions (RUI) award from the Theoretical and Computational
Chemistry program for theoretical investigations of cyclization reactions
involving radical intermediates. The work is focused on 1) Utilizing and
comparing the Spin-Flip, Singlet-type Strongly Orthogonal Geminal (SSG),
Multireference Averaged-Quadratic Coupled Cluster (MR-AQCC) and Completely
Renormalized Coupled Cluster (CR-CC(2,3)) methods for describing the
multireference character, energies and structures of diradicals; 2) Applying one
or more of these methods to the characterization of novel electro-cyclization
reactions involving diradical intermediates; 3) Investigating reactions
involving tetraradicals; 4) Using the force field based hybrid Monte Carlo-Low
Mode method of conformational analysis to evaluate the ensemble of structures
for larger natural product diradical precursors; 5) Developing algorithms for
using Kohonen's self-organizing map to evaluate the geometrical clustering
properties of ensembles, and; 6) Employing the KNIME scripting language to
provide "wrappers" to facilitate the use of these methods by
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to characterize properly open-
shell radical species and the corresponding investigation of novel cyclization
reactions holds significant promise for advancing the fields of multireference
theoretical chemistry, mechanistic organic chemistry, materials design and drug
optimization. This work is contributing to furthering understanding of radical
behavior and is expected to positively impact these fields of application. The
work is being performed by undergraduate researchers as early as their first
year of study. The students are receiving intensive training in computational
chemistry, and, from this experience, are developing skill sets that will serve
them well in their post-baccalaureate scientific careers. The PI is a founding
member of the MERCURY consortium which was designed to mentor new computational
and theoretical chemistry faculty at other predominately undergraduate
institutions in achieving teaching and research excellence. Students involved in
this project are participating in MERCURY activities, further broadening the
impact of this project.