* 0809832
* Telechelic polymers by RAFT polymerization and application to stable bFGF-polymer conjugates
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Heather Maynard, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2011
* USD 423,000.00

This project will continue work on the use of controlled radical polymerizations
to synthesize well-defined protein-polymer conjugates. Many proteins exist as
multimers in the active state, yet most conjugates contain only one protein due
to the lack of high yielding, efficient synthetic strategies to make the
polymers. In this research, a straightforward method to synthesize biocompatible
polymers with protein-reactive groups at one or both ends will be developed. The
polymers will then be applied to produce conjugates of a growth factor that is
critical in wound healing. Because this growth factor exists as a dimer in the
active state, the growth factor conjugate is expected to be more bioactive.
Conjugates containing polymers that mimic polysaccharides in the body will also
be prepared to form growth factors resistant to denaturation upon application
and storage.

With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting
the research of Professor Heather D. Maynard of the Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry at the University of California, Los Angeles. Professor Maynard's
research focuses on the synthesis of well-defined multimeric protein-polymer
conjugates by controlled radical polymerizations. This work will contribute to
the synthesis of active and stable conjugates for therapeutic applications.
Successful development of the methodology will have an impact on the polymer,
biomedical and materials communities.