* 0809034
* Student Research Workshop in Computational Linguistics at the ACL 2008 Conference
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2008,02/28/2009
* Janyce Wiebe, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 02/28/2009
* USD 18,180.00

The Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) is the primary international
organization&lt;br/&gt;in the field of natural language processing. The ACL's
annual conference is the major international&lt;br/&gt;conference in this field.
This project is to subsidize travel, conference, and housing expenses
of&lt;br/&gt;students selected to participate in the Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL) Student&lt;br/&gt;Research Workshop, which is
part of the ACL conference on June 15-20, 2008 in Columbus, Ohio.&lt;br/&gt;The
workshop consists of two tracks: full paper presentations and poster
presentations. All selected&lt;br/&gt;work has only student authors. The full
paper sessions are composed of paper presentations followed&lt;br/&gt;by a
discussion panel led by respected researchers in the field. The workshop is
organized and run by&lt;br/&gt;students. The workshop provides a valuable
opportunity for the next generation of natural language&lt;br/&gt;processing
researchers to enter the computational linguistics community. It allows the best
students&lt;br/&gt;in the field to take their first important step toward
becoming professional computational linguists&lt;br/&gt;by receiving critical
feedback on their work from external experts, and by making contacts
with&lt;br/&gt;other students and senior researchers in their field. The
students who are involved in running and&lt;br/&gt;selecting papers for the
workshop also gain valuable opportunities for professional growth and
interaction&lt;br/&gt;with the researchers on the organizing committee of the
main conference. The workshop contributes&lt;br/&gt;to the maintenance and
development of a skilled and diverse computational linguistics and
natural&lt;br/&gt;language processing workforce, helping to produce a pool of
researchers with the scientific and&lt;br/&gt;engineering knowledge for natural
language processing.&lt;br/&gt;