* 0809751
* Kinetics of Anion Exchange in Nanodimensional Layered Metal Hydroxides
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Jeanne Hossenlopp, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2012
* USD 381,965.00

In this project supported by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division, Prof. J.M. Hossenlopp of Marquette University will
investigate the anion exchange kinetics of layered metal hydroxides that are
comprised of metal hydroxide layers with replaceable anions in the
nanodimensional inter-layer galleries. The versatility of these materials
enables chemists to easily alter the physical and chemical properties via
changes in the identity and relative stoichiometry of the metals in the
hydroxide layer and/or the identity of the interlayer anions, thus making them
useful for many applications. The primary goal of this project is to develop a
comprehensive view of the fundamental anion exchange reactions of hydroxy double
salts, HDSs, and other closely related compounds. The effects of anion size,
shape, and chemical functionality will be explored in reactions of HDSs with
different metal ion compositions. The temperature-dependence of the anion
exchange kinetics will be determined and model-free and model-based approaches
will be implemented for analysis of the data, providing a rigorous approach for
characterizing the kinetics. In addition, spectroscopic methods will be
developed for in-situ studies of these reactions. The data obtained in these
experiments will provide a systematic framework for identifying the key features
in anion exchange reactions of HDSs and other structurally-similar materials.
These structural modifications are also critical for the broader impact
exploiting the potential of these materials for applications of societal impact.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental insight obtained here will be used to
inform future development of these materials for use in polymer fire retardant
additive formulations and in chemical sensor development for detecting aqueous
anions of interest in environmental monitoring. In these applications, the
ability to tune chemical and physical properties is critical. The research
program will also support a broad range of educational activities including the
training of graduate and undergraduate research students in nanomaterials
science and development of undergraduate laboratory curricular materials for use
at Marquette. In addition, the project will include the development of hands-on
experiences in making and characterizing nanomaterials for high school students
from underrepresented groups and/or economically disadvantaged backgrounds in
order to encourage careers in science&lt;br/&gt;