* 0809722
* Quantification of Unsteady Fault Slip and Fold Growth, Apennine Front, Italy
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2013
* Kenneth Kodama, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 08/31/2013
* USD 318,701.00

This research group proposes that blind thrust faults in the core of growing
anticlines exhibit variable slip at 10,000 to 100,000 year time scales and that
this slip is rooted in crustal-scale processes of stress transfer among faults
responding to climatically-driven processes at the Earth?s surface. Studies
along the mountain front of the northern Apennines, Italy will delineate the
slip history of two related, but physically disconnected faults at a
approximately 20,000 year resolution over a five million year Pliocene - Recent
time span. Because this record of fault slip coincides with the well-known large
amplitude oscillations in global climate that contribute to the filling and
deformation of the Po foreland, the team further hypothesizes that the 100,000
year, and potentially 40,000 year climatic cycles will be reflected in observed
slip rates as faults are differentially lubricated by changing ground water
conditions, sea-level and structural emergence, and differentially loading by
the redistribution of sediment at the surface. The project will employ
cyclostraigraphy of anhysteretic remanent magnetization calibrated to accurate
models of Earth's orbital motions, which constitutes a high-resolution metronome
with a precision, accuracy and continuity that outperforms modern radioisotope
geochronology, magnetostratigraphy, and biostratigraphy and transcends the
problems of resolution and length of record that have limited GPS and
paleoseismic approaches. Fault slip unsteadiness with a periodicity in line with
known climatic cycles at 40,000-100,000 year time spans will prove the
hypothesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Knowledge of fault slip rate variation on a
fault with 10,000-100,000 year resolution has important geodynamic, and seismic
hazard implications particularly for the case of blind thrust faults that can
generate significant earthquakes, such as the 2008 Los Angeles basin
earthquakes. Similar kinds of earthquakes resulting from blind thrust faults are
well documented for the northern Apennine (Italy) mountain front, home to 4
million residents where deformation rates and seismic hazards remain poorly
defined. Here spatial and temporal gaps in earthquake activity are considered as
places where damaging earthquakes do not or will not occur. This research
suggests that such gaps are simply the result of fault slip unsteadiness and
aims to determine a cause for the unsteadiness by studying the geologic record.