* 0809483
* Mechanisms of Nucleic Acid Oxidation and Cross-linking
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Cynthia Burrows, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 07/31/2012
* USD 490,000.00

With the support of the Organic Dynamics Program in the Chemistry Division,
Professor Cynthia J. Burrows of the Chemistry Department at the University of
Utah will formulate a detailed molecular picture of how DNA is oxidized in the
presence of reactive species such as protein, polyamine and catecholamine
nucleophiles. A complete mechanistic picture of how such adducts form is
important in order to understand the fundamental processes in damage to genomic
DNA. Studies outlined in this proposal build upon recent results showing that
8-oxo-7, 8-dihydroguanosine is sensitive to further oxidation by one-electron
oxidants leading to a quinonoid intermediate that is nucleophilically trapped to
generate hydantoin products. Recent progress has shown that other oxidized bases
are subject to the same facile oxidation/nucleophilic trapping mechanism.
Experiments proposed include NMR and LC/MS characterization of amino acid and
polyamine adducts to nucleosides and to DNA oligomers, and investigation of
their mechanisms of formation and chemical stability. Methods will be developed
to understand the chemical structures responsible for DNA-protein cross-linking
via both DNA oxidation and protein oxidation. Adducts of phenols and catechols
to guanosine in DNA will be prepared and analyzed for their ability to mediate
further oxidative damage to DNA. A major part of the new research will focus on
characterization of reactive quinonoid intermediates in 8-oxoguanosine and uric
acid oxidation. Nucleosides and synthetic oligonucleotides will be studied by
stopped-flow spectrophotometry and spectroelectrochemistry to decipher
individual steps in the formation and decay of the quinones. Mechanistic
parallels are proposed between purine oxidation and the pterin and flavin redox
cofactors, leading to the transformative hypothesis that RNA damage products
were ancestral to the evolution of nucleotide
coenzymes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research by Professor Burrows of the
University of Utah will include the training of undergraduate and graduate
students who will be well versed in mechanistic organic chemistry, gain
biotechnical skills in the manipulation of nucleic acids and proteins, and
contribute to our molecular understanding of DNA damage, which underlies
processes leading to aging, cancer, and neurological disorders. A major new
effort in this project is the development of a library of DNA adducts that will
be prepared by undergraduate research students. The organic synthesis is
straightforward and appropriate for students with little or no prior research
experience. Students will prepare new nucleoside adducts by selecting from a
wide variety of commercially available nucleophiles (e.g. primary amines such as
amino acids), then purifing 5 mg of each adduct by HPLC, and loading them onto
96-well plates. Students will then analyze the plates by UPLC/ESI-MS and submit
them for a battery of screening tests for biological activity at the University
of Utah?s new core facility for biomolecular screening. Undergraduate
researchers are recruited from the University?s ACCESS program, which fast-
tracks high achieving women high school students into research labs in their
freshman year. Professor Burrows is the Director of the Chemistry-Biology
Interface Training Program from which minority undergraduate researchers will be
recruited. &lt;br/&gt;