* 0809656
* Determining Soil Water Evaporation and Subsurface Evaporation Zones
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Robert Ewing, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 09/30/2012
* USD 382,351.00

Evaporation from the soil largely determines both water availability in
terrestrial ecosystems, and the partitioning of solar radiation between sensible
and latent heat. It is key to both hydrology and climate. The evaporation
process is complex, involving movement and phase change of water, varying with
depth and time. Following water inputs, evaporation occurs at the soil surface,
controlled by atmospheric demand. As surface soil water is depleted, evaporation
becomes soil-limited and shifts below the surface; nonetheless it is generally
viewed as a strictly surface process. As a result, measurement methods and
understanding of these near-surface phenomena have lagged behind demand for
accurate data. Much current research emphasizes large-scale areal estimates of
soil moisture and temperature, but poor understanding of the soil water
evaporation process causes low accuracy in water and energy balances. This poor
understanding is largely due to our current inability to make the needed
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of the proposed research is to develop and
test a new approach to measure evaporation within the soil. Recently developed
sensors and concepts enable us to quantify sensible heat transferred into and
out of mm-scale near-surface soil layers, as well as the change in sensible heat
stored within each layer. Combined with conservation of energy, these
measurements can locally quantify subsurface evaporation, showing the temporal
patterns of in situ evaporation. Research will test four hypotheses: (1) that a
sensible heat balance method can accurately estimate the mass of water
evaporated from subsurface soil layers, (2) that the heat balance method can be
extended to determine the latent heat flux from the soil surface layer (0-3 mm),
(3) that through combined heat and mass balance, estimates of other hydrological
components (transpiration and soil water flow) will be quantified or
constrained, and (4) that the sensible heat balance method can quantitatively
partition ET into evaporation and transpiration. Hypotheses 1-3 will be tested
with both laboratory and field experiments, and Hypothesis 4 only by field
experiments. Laboratory experiments will measure soil thermal properties, water
content, and water flux under a combination of 2 energy regimes, 3 surface
conditions, and 3 soils. Calculated evaporative loss via heat balance will be
compared to evaporation measured by mass balance. In the field experiments,
independent measurements of evaporation and transpiration will allow rigorous
testing of heat balance estimates of transpiration and soil water
evaporation.&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed work is a new
measurement-based methodology for quantifying soil water evaporation. The
proposed research addresses current knowledge gaps by developing and testing in
situ soil water evaporation measurement with novel sensors and analysis.
Information obtained in the study will elucidate important evaporative
processes. The research will quantify observation of soil water evaporation at
and below the soil surface. This represents a notable advancement over
descriptions of evaporation as a surface-only process.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
work carries broader impact by providing educational, scientific, and societal
opportunities. Fundamental experience is provided for an early-career scientist,
graduate students (including a minority student who is a NSF AGEP Fellow), and
undergraduates. Results will be widely disseminated to the scientific community
via website and published articles, and measurement techniques will have
immediate repercussions for weather, climate, and environmental monitoring.
Achieving the project goals will significantly improve our understanding of
fundamental critical-zone properties and processes, enable better environmental
monitoring and management, and enhance our predictions of large-scale
hydrological and climate dynamics.