* 0809195
* Collaborative Research:  Imaging Subcontinental-Scale Slip Events near the Moho
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* James Davis, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 07/31/2011
* USD 199,934.00

Technical Description of Research&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The addition of
continuous GPS to traditional seismotectonics and geophysical imaging is
revolutionizing our understanding of active tectonic systems, most notably in
the forearc regions of subduction megathrusts. In virtually every example
studied, interseismic 'slow slip events' (SSEs) occur over large patches of the
subduction interface, with moment release in the M6 to M7 range. A decade of
geodetic results from the Basin and Range Geodetic Network (BARGEN), situated in
the intraplate, orogenic plateau setting of the Basin and Range province, has
demonstrated similar behavior. A prototype of NSF's Plate Boundary Observatory
(PBO) known as the Basin and Range Geodetic Network (BARGEN) has documented
subcontinental-scale variations in tectonic velocity that are unexpectedly
large, coherent, and difficult to explain in the context of existing models of
lithospheric dynamics. Our recent synthesis of these results and other
geophysical data in the region have led to the development of the
'megadetachment hypothesis,' which explains the observed velocity variations as
an SSE of extraordinary scale, caused by stick-slip behavior along the Moho
rather than along a subduction interface. The objective of this project is to
test this hypothesis by collecting and analyzing data from a 22-station
subnetwork of BARGEN sites not incorporated into PBO, through 2010. This network
is situated between PBO sites in eastern California and Arizona, Utah and
northern Nevada. This project strongly leverages an existing infrastructural
resource (a $1,000,000 continuous GPS network with time series back to 1999,
previously supported by the Department of Energy) in a key region that will
otherwise not be investigated. Our previous results predict the onset of a
regional SSE in the 2008-2010 time frame, which should appear as a regional
slowing of site velocities in Nevada relative to North America. We will analyze
the GPS data, including (1) basic processing to generate time series and
velocity fields, combining them with key PBO sites relevant to the
megadetachment hypothesis; and (2) advanced processing and data interpretation
of key subsets of the data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Explanation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theory of plate tectonics predicts the
relative motions between the earth?s tectonic plates, through reconstruction of
ancient magnetic stripes on the ocean floor generated by the process of sea-
floor spreading over millions of years. Geodetic motions measured over the last
two decades strongly confirm the theory. But the boundaries between plates,
where most of the world's earthquakes and volcanic eruptions occur, are not
razor-thin faults that accommodate all of the interplate motion as predicted by
plate theory. Instead, they are broad zones of complex deformation that in some
cases are more than 1000 km wide. One of the most important recent discoveries
bearing on the physics of these broad zones of deformation are 'slow slip
events' (SSEs). In terms of energy release, these events are of similar size to
damaging earthquakes. Unlike earthquakes, which occur over a matter of seconds,
SSEs last from a few days up to several years, and thus are too slow to generate
seismic waves detectable by seismometers. The discovery of SSEs was only
possible through the advent of continuous GPS networks built across plate
boundary deformation zones over the last decade, such as the Basin and Range
Geodetic Network (BARGEN), which straddles the 1000 km-wide Pacific-North
America plate boundary deformation zone. Given their importance to the overall
deformation budget along plate boundaries, their mere existence is
revolutionizing our physical understanding of plate boundaries, including the
problem of the physics of earthquakes. Nearly all SSEs observed to date occurred
along subduction megathrusts, the zone of contact between plates where one plate
dives beneath another. The one exception is a large SSE imaged by BARGEN that
began in 1999 and ended in 2005 in the Basin and Range province. The SSE was
manifest by the slowing of tectonic velocity of GPS sites across Nevada by 1
mm/yr relative to their pre-1999 rates. Monitoring though 2010 will the test
hypothesis that the Basin and Range SSEs are periodic. With the added benefit of
some 80 GPS sites in the region sponsored by PBO, we will gain a much more
detailed picture of the kinematics of these transient events.