* 0809106
* Collaborative Research: Synthesis of Thwaites Glacier Dynamics: Diagnostic and Prognostic Sensitivity Studies of a West Antarctic Outlet System
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2007,03/31/2012
* Todd Dupont, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 03/31/2012
* USD 168,058.00

&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a three-year study to isolate essential physical
processes affecting Thwaites Glacier (TG) in the Amundsen Sea Embayment (ASE) of
West Antarctica using a suite of existing numerical models in conjunction with
existing and International Polar Year (IPY)-proposed data sets. Four different
models will be utilized to explore the effects of embayment geometry, ice-shelf
buttressing, basal-stress distribution, surface mass balance, surface climate,
and inland dynamic perturbations on the present and future dynamics of TG. This
particular collection of models is ideally suited for the broad nature of this
investigation, as they incorporate efficient and complementary simplifications
of the stress field (shallow-ice and shelf-stream), system geometry (1-d and 2-d
plan-view and flowline; depth-integrated and depth-dependent), and mass-momentum
energy coupling (mechanical and thermo-mechanical). The models will be
constrained and validated by data sets (including regional maps of ice
thickness, surface elevation, basal topography, ice surface velocity, and
potential fields) and geophysical data analyses (including increasing the
spatial resolution of surface elevations, improving regional estimates of
geothermal flux, and characterizing the sub-glacial interface of grounded ice as
well as the grounding-zone transition between grounded and floating ice). The
intellectual merit of the research focuses on several of the NSF Glaciology
program's emphases, including: ice dynamics, numerical modeling, and remote
sensing of ice sheets. In addition, the research directly addresses the
following specific NSF objectives: "investigation of the physics of fast glacier
flow with emphasis on processes at glacier beds"; "investigation of ice-shelf
stability"; and "identification and quantification of the feedback between ice
dynamics and climate change". The broader impacts of this research effort will
help answer societally relevant questions of future ice sheet stability and sea-
level change. The research also will aid in the early career development of two
young investigators and will contribute to the education of both graduate and
undergraduate students directly involved in the research, and results will be
incorporated into courses and informal presentations.