* 0809384
* Spectroscopically Determined Excited State Properties and Photochemical Reactivities of Inorganic Compounds
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2011
* Jeffrey Zink, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 06/30/2011
* USD 413,000.00

The Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program and the
Experimental Physical Chemistry Program support the work of Professor Jeffery I.
Zink of the University of California-Los Angeles to examine the excited
electronic states and reactivities of metal-containing molecules. His research
program has four complementary objectives: 1) to spectroscopically characterize
the excited electronic states of metal-containing compounds, 2) to understand
the effects of potential surface coupling on electronic and resonance Raman
spectra, 3) to study large-amplitude molecular motions, and 4) to explore
spectra, photochemistry and photodeposition from volatile molecules in the gas
phase. These studies may contribute to the development of photoactivated
molecular machines and nanovalves that can trap useful molecules such as drugs
and release them on demand. The research group recruits undergraduate students
from UCLA's Student Research Participation Program and the Center for Academic
Excellence (CARE) Program. The CARE Program focuses on the retention students
from educationally or socioeconomically disadvantaged backgrounds. These
students as well as other graduate, undergraduate and high schools student and
teachers also participate in the California NanoSystems Institute to introduce
students to various aspects of science and technology in the core curriculum set
by the state of California. Professor Zink also promotes communication with the
public as he regularly participates in the American Chemical Society's Speaker
Tour, giving public lectures on Excited State Distortions.