* 0809186
* SGER: Information Retrieval and Exchange under Extreme Pressure
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2008,07/31/2009
* Jin Kyu Lee, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 07/31/2009
* USD 61,999.00

Crisis Management Organizations (CMOs) have been criticized for their less-than-
ideal-performance through the major disasters of the past few years. In order
for emergency responders to make right decisions under extreme time constraints
and psychological pressure,it is necessary to begin to understand the
information retrieval and exchange behaviors of emergency responders, and trace
the information back to find out which CMO produces and consumes what types of
information, how they interact, and what facilitates developing more readily
acceptable information exchange systems for emergency responders.

This grant will begin the process of analyzing information retrieval and
exchange behavior in various pseudo emergency response exercises. These are
Dutch COPI(Commander Place Incident Team) exercises that will be conducted in
the Port of Rotterdam. The US research will collect data from participants of
the exercises, which will shed light on relationships between a) the value of
information and the value of optimal decision timing, b) control over shared
information systems and valuation of information quality, c) immediate public
safety needs and security of sensitive information, and d) (dis)aggregation of
information and (de)centralization of information processing under severe
pressure. This grant will support the development of an international research
partnership with Dutch researchers who have access to the inter?organizational
disaster response exercises (i.e., COPI) in Dec. 2007, February 2008 and May
2008.

Intellectual Merit This research will build a foundation (i.e., categorization
and scaling schemes for information and relationships) for larger, potentially
transformative research that can fundamentally change the way that CMOs share
information. Future research will develop mechanisms and protocols for an
adaptive Emergency Responder Information Exchange (ERIX) system. The envisaged
system can ensure a satisfactory level of inter?organizational information
sharing in extreme pressure conditions and help establish information exchange
relationships among relevant CMOs, even if the CMOs have never shared their
information before. The proposed research will provide initial parameters (e.g.,
taxonomy, metrics, attributes of emergency information and organizational
relationships) and feasibility measures to the transformative research,
Information systems for emergency responders can also be improved by
incorporating findings from this project.

Broad Impact The data to be collected under this grant will contribute to a
better understanding of the flow of information and related decisions in the
crisis management and response arena. Expansion of our knowledge and
understanding of these topics clearly stand to benefit the broader society; this
is only made more appealing by the international aspects of the research.

