* 0809142
* Intramolecular Anodic Olefin Coupling Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Kevin Moeller, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2012
* USD 399,000.00

This project will continue work on the development of new oxidative cyclization
reactions. Oxidative cyclization reactions are powerful tools for constructing
organic molecules because they both generate new ring systems without giving up
the functionality used to initiate the reaction, and reverse the polarity of
electron-rich functional groups so that they can be used in entirely new ways.
The combination of these features creates unique opportunities to develop novel
synthetic pathways to highly functionalized products. For this reason, an
intensive study will be conducted examining both the scope of the reactions and
the nature of the reactive radical cation intermediates that are central to
their success.

With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting
the research of Professor Kevin D. Moeller of the Department of Chemistry at
Washington University in St. Louis. Professor Moeller's research capitalizes on
the use of electrochemistry to explore new oxidative cyclization reactions. The
use of electrochemistry to effect the reactions avoids the need for a chemical
oxidant, and hence, the need for disposing the waste that inevitably results
from such a reagent. This minimizes the environmental impact of the reactions.
In this way, the chemistry being studied not only illustrates the power of the
synthetic methods being developed, but also highlights the potential of
electrochemistry for developing sustainable chemical processes in the future.