* 0809578
* PV-Grid-Connected System for Emergency Health Clinic
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2010
* Mohammed Fadali, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* George Maracas
* 09/30/2010
* USD 30,000.00

The research objective of the project is the design of a photovoltaic (PV) grid-
connected system for remote rural health clinics in Egypt. The work encompasses
data collection of load and weather parameters, selection and comparison of PV
grid-connected system configurations, modeling and simulation of PV-grid-
connected operation, design of power management system, economic assessment of
the proposed system and specification of the proposed system.

This project is being supported by the U.S.-Egypt Joint Board For Science and
Technology which is funding both the U.S. and Egyptian sides of the
collaboration.

Intellectual Merit:

The project represents a natural continuation of the scientific cooperation
between the Electronics Research Institute and the University of Nevada in the
new research area of photovoltaic (PV) energy as an alternative and clean energy
source. The project will focus on a detailed study of PV-grid connected energy
system configuration, components, mode of operation and control, and costs. The
second main objective of the project is to study the utilization of PV grid-
connected energy systems to supply remote rural emergency health clinics in
Egypt with electrical energy. This includes assessing the required size of the
PV system.

Broader Impacts:

The project's objectives are to develop new approaches to energy systems that
will provide reliable service to remote hospitals in Egypt where grid power is
currently unreliable. Moreover, the approach to PV grid-connected energy systems
will encourage government and private investment in PV energy in Egypt. This
will provide currently underserved areas with access to reliable clean energy
while saving fossil fuels and protecting the environment from harmful emissions.
In addition, some of the developed solutions will benefit states with remote
sparsely populated areas, like Nevada. As part of the effort young Egyptian
scientists will be trained in the use of sophisticated software for power system
analysis that is not available in their institutions.