* 0809520
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:  Production of New Biocidal Textiles Using Advanced Nano and Melt Spinning Techniques
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Richard Kotek, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2010
* USD 24,300.00

0809520 Kotek This project supports collaborative research by Dr. Richard Kotek,
College of Textiles, North Carolina State University, Raleigh and Dr. Samiha
Mahmoud, National Research Center, Cairo, Egypt. They plan a study on
?Production of New Biocidal Textiles Using Advanced Nano and Melt Spinning
Techniques?

Technical Merit: Biocidal textiles are becoming more important due to the
appearance of fatal diseases in the world. Production and functionalization of
these textiles which are produced from non-woven or woven synthetic fibers &
their blends are done with the aim to be introduced to the textile industry.
Melt spinning process of synthetic fibers in presence of biocidal nano-particles
(inorganic or organic compounds or ploy active monomers) is used to create
biocidal fibers containing quaternary ammonium salts sites or others. Biocidal
textiles of antimicrobial & insecticidal activities will be produced from
polypropylene, polyamide & polyester on a pilot scale & then transferred to the
industry. The effectiveness of antimicrobial finish and its durability to
repeated washing or dry cleaning is to be tested. Improvement properties of
synthetic fabrics to thermal treatment, moisture regain and dyeing will be
evaluated. Production cost and end-uses of the fibers specified. The
antimicrobial and insecticidal activities of these fibers will be effected and
compared to the blanks. The work should result in the development of new
potential means of incorporating nanoparticles of different physical/chemical
characteristics into textile materials using the nano and melt spinning
technology. The collaboration is expected to be successful, given the expertise
and past and current research activities of both laboratories.

Broader impacts: New nano biocidal-based textile materials will be produced and
this could lead to possible development of patented technologies that will be
available to the Egyptian laboratory. In turn this will provide Egypt with the
opportunity to establish a new industry related to biocidal textile materials
production. The project will enhance collaboration and capabilities in the
research areas, and may also create patented materials. This project is being
supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to
scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out these cooperative
activities.