* 0809015
* Multiscale Simulation of Laser Processing and Ablation of Semiconductor Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Patrick Schelling, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2011
* USD 150,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This award support research and education in
optical interactions of lasers and semiconductor materials. This award is
jointly supported by Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport
Systems in the Division of Engineering and the Division of Materials Research.
Research investigates how materials interact with lasers under conditions
relevant to laser processing of covalent semiconductors. The work develops
methods for predicting how processing conditions affect the resulting material
structure. The work includes the development and use of novel computer
simulation methods to elucidate the fundamental physical processes relevant to
laser processing of covalent semiconductors. The general approach applies to
intense femto-second pulses interacting with silicon. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers address the fundamental technical challenges relevant to the
development of a multiscale model of heat and mass transport appropriate for
far-from-equilibrium conditions. Electronic heat transport is treated at the
continuum level, while the lattice dynamics are treated using classical
molecular-dynamics. A crucial component of the proposed work is that the
interatomic interactions will depend on the local electronic temperature TE.
Parameters in the interactions will be based on a new modification of the
popular Tersoff potential, with the dependence of the parameters on TE
established by fitting to a large database of energies from finite-temperature
ab initio calculations. This novel approach will capture nonthermal effects
known to be important for sub-picosecond melting. Heat transport by excited
charge carriers is addressed using ab initio simulations of excited liquids and
the Kubo-Greenwood method. The coupling between the continuum description of the
electrons and the lattice will be driven using Langevin dynamics with the
damping parameter fit to experiment. The focus of the proposed work develops a
model for silicon as a test case. The model will be tested in its treatment of
the fundamental physics of laser ablation of crystalline silicon and laser
annealing of amorphous silicon. Comparison to experiment is used to validate the
results of the model, and produce new insight into the role of bond-weakening
and ultrafast non-thermal processes to melting and
ablation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carrying out this project requires researchers to
address the fundamental technical challenges relevant to the development of a
multiscale model of heat and mass transport appropriate for far-from-equilibrium
conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effort includes both scientific and
educational elements. The theoretical and computer simulation methods will
expand researchers' ability to model the fundamental physics of laser ablation
and will be applied to the technologically relevant processes for crystalline
silicon and laser annealing of amorphous silicon. The work as educational value
in developing student skills, particularly the graduates and undergraduates who
are directly involved in the research and the activities aid in recruiting new
students for graduate study in materials simulation. The researchers and
students engage in workshop activities that introduce students to materials
simulation, including molecular-dynamics simulation and visualization which is
coordinated with the Florida Society for Materials Simulation. The work
integrates education and research through the development of course in materials
simulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This award
support research and education in optical interactions of lasers and
semiconductor materials. Research investigates how materials interact with
intense lasers beams under conditions relevant to laser processing of
semiconductors. The work develops methods for predicting how processing
conditions affect the resulting material structure. The work includes the
development and use of novel computer simulation methods to elucidate the
fundamental physical processes relevant to laser processing of covalent
semiconductors. The general approach applies to intense ultrafast laser pulses
interacting with silicon. In carrying out this project, researchers will address
the fundamental technical challenges relevant to the development of a multiscale
model of heat and mass transport appropriate for far-from-equilibrium
conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effort includes both scientific and
educational elements. The theoretical and computer simulation methods will
expand researchers' ability to model the fundamental physics of laser ablation
and will be applied to the technologically relevant processes for laser etching
of silicon. The work as educational value in developing student skills,
particularly the graduates and undergraduates who are directly involved in the
research and the activities aid in recruiting new students for graduate study in
materials simulation. The researchers and students engage in workshop activities
that introduce students to materials simulation, including computer simulation
and visualization which is coordinated with the Florida Society for Materials
Simulation. The work integrates education and research through the development
of course in materials simulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;