* 0809547
* SYMPOSIUM - REPTILE GENOMICS AND EVOLUTIONARY GENETICS, to be held January 2008 in San Antonio, TX.
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2008,12/31/2008
* Nicole Valenzuela, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 12/31/2008
* USD 7,010.00

Birds and mammals evolved from reptiles, yet little is known about how avian and
mammalian developmental genetics reflect their reptilian ancestry. Birds and
mammals vary tremendously in their reproductive traits and genomic constitution.
For example, although sex is determined by individual genotype in birds and
mammals, avian and mammalian sex chromosomes systems are different. In mammals,
males produce two types of sperm that carry either an X or a Y chromosome,
whereas in birds, females produce two types of eggs that carry either a Z or a W
chromosome. Both mechanisms exist in reptiles, along with temperature-dependent
sex determination. Also, bird genomes are, on average, smaller than the genomes
of mammals and reptiles owing to differences in the amount of their genome that
is composed of active and extinct interspersed repetitive elements, the
diversity of which remains largely unexplored in reptiles. Thus, comparative
data on gene structure and regulation, developmental patterns and processes, and
genome architecture of reptiles are critical for understanding genetic and
genome-wide evolutionary trends not only in reptiles, but also in birds and
mammals. This symposium, which will be held at the 2008 meeting of the Society
for Integrative and Comparative Biology, will highlight advances and progress
made in sequencing of reptile genomes (including birds), characterizing
reptilian genome architecture, and describing the evolution of reptilian traits
(i.e., sex-determining mechanisms, physiology, endocrine pathways, and
chromosome structure). The symposium participants constitute a diverse group of
speakers in terms of gender, geographic origin, as well as career stages, and
include members of underrepresented groups in science. The symposium will foster
the sharing of ideas and protocols, and help build collaborations that will
contribute to the advancement of the field. Presented papers will be broadly
disseminated by publication in the journal of the Society for Integrative and
Comparative Biology.