* 0809993
* Collaborative research: The generation of triggered tremor
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Heidi Houston, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2012
* USD 150,851.00

The investigators plan to address some fundamental issues behind non-volcanic
tremor. Where does triggered tremors occur along the transform plate boundary in
California, and elsewhere in the world? Are tremors preferentially triggered in
a limited range of tectonic regimes? Why do the geothermal regions have many
triggered earthquakes, but no apparent triggered tremors? Is there a stressing
threshold for triggered tremors? Their initial survey has shown that only a few
teleseismic earthquakes triggered tremors around the Parkfield section of the
SAF, but the triggering threshold is still not clear. A systematic examination
of surface waves of many earthquakes with different amplitudes and frequency
content is needed. It is still not clear whether fluid flow induced by
volumetric changes of Rayleigh waves, or transient shear stresses from Love
waves is the most effective mechanism for tremor triggering. A systematic survey
of tremors triggered by many teleseismic events will help to distinguish
different triggering mechanisms. Are the triggered tremors the same phenomenon
as the ambient (non-triggered) tremors and do they follow the new scaling
relationship of slow earthquakes? Does slow slip and triggered earthquake
accompany triggered tremors? Is there a constant background of tremor?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will provide better understanding of fault slip,
and would have a transformative impact for seismology, geodesy, geology,
friction and rock mechanics, and perhaps more. A better understanding of tremor
occurrence along the SAF system in California and elsewhere and its relation to
slow slip events and occurrence of large earthquakes is directly relevant to
seismic hazard mitigation. The research will involve the education of graduate
students in both participating institutions, and will also involve undergraduate
students.