* 0809325
* Collaborative Research:  Time-Dependent Hydrothermal Convection within the Great Basin, Nevada
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2010
* Martin Appold, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 09/30/2010
* USD 59,167.00

Collaborative Research: Time-Dependent Hydrothermal Convection &lt;br/&gt;within
the Great Basin, Nevada&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Is groundwater flow
restricted to high permeability fault planes driven by free-convection? Or, is
flow driven by water-table topographic gradients with some combination of matrix
and fault controlled fluid circulation? Are these systems fundamentally
transient and self-sealing due to gaunge mineralization, or , is permeability
enhanced by carbonate dissolution? To evaluate these problems we will develop a
suite of 3D, single-phase, hydrothermal models using a new parallel finite
element code (PGEOFE) for two field sites within the Great Basin. We will
utilize a new three-dimensional (3-D) geologic model of the modern Beowawe
geothermal system and, with USGS colleagues, develop another 3-D geologic model
of the Eocene Carlin system; two sites with rich , isotopic, geochemical and
geothermal data sets. Using LaGrit mesh generation software, these hydrogeologic
models will honor known fault geometries, widths, and stratigraphy. This mesh
generation software will allow us to honor low grid aspect ratios (required by
the AZTEC parallel solver package) as the grid transitions from strata to faults
while allowing sufficient refinement to minimize numerical grid dispersion when
solving the heat and mass transport equations. We will use multiple constraints
including temperature profiles, shallow heat flow maps, fluid/rock ä 18O
composition, and the age of hot springs deposits to constrain our models. At
Beowawe, by dating pollen in the sinter terrace and adualria in exposed veins
nearby we can get a sense of the timing of episodic discharges of hot fluid up
the faults and on the duration of such discharges recorded by the sinter
deposits. More sophisticated reactive-transport geochemical models will be
developed using PFLOTRAN to evaluate porosity-enhancing carbonate dissolution
reactions and ?sealing gangue precipitation reactions in each system. Our models
will be validated by comparing modern and fossil geochemical and thermal proxies
. The project will support two graduate students at New Mexico Tech and
University of Missouri at Columbia. Initial results will be presented to
industry representatives from Beowawe power plant, Barrick and Newmont gold
mines for their input and feedback to improve the final result. Results will be
published at the Geological Society of Nevada 2010 symposium and scientific
journals to reach local and international audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;