* 0809733
* Collaborative Research: The Geodynamics of the Andean Southern Volcanic Zone, A Geochemical Approach
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Erik Hauri, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 06/30/2012
* USD 72,771.00

Intellectual merit. Knowledge of the distribution and composition of the
chemical components associated with convergent margin magmatism is a fundamental
requirement for understanding the origin, composition and evolution of the
continental crust and the heterogeneity of the mantle. Establishing the budget
and distribution of volatiles in the mantle at convergent margins is a necessary
step to understand the processes responsible for the generation of arc
volcanoes. Volatiles influence mantle melting, magma crystallization and
volcanic eruption, and their abundances and spatial distribution provide
important constraints on models of mantle flow, slab dehydration and crustal
recycling. Over the last 30 years, the Andes Southern Volcanic Zone (SVZ) has
been extensively investigated, with geochemical, petrological, geophysical,
tectonic and geological studies providing important information on the
composition of the magmatic arc, and the structure and evolution of the crust
and mantle. However, data on volatile concentration and stable isotopic
composition of lavas from the SVZ are virtually nonexistent. &lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to fill this gap by determining regional variations in volatile
contents and isotopic composition in selected SVZ basalts. The new data will
help us build a more integrated and realistic portrait of the inner-workings at
convergence margins in continental environments. They will be used to
discriminate sources of volatiles (e.g., slab dehydration vs. subducted
sediments) and to test models of slab-flux versus decompression melting.
Combination of the existing seismic information, and two-dimensional temperature
and flow models with the geochemical data will provide a more reliable
representation of the mantle flow, melt production, migration, and extent of the
mantle hydration beneath the SVZ. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. This
project will promote collaboration between geophysicists, geochemists and
geodynamicists from six domestic (Brown U., DTM, FIU, Cornell U., CWRU, WHOI)
and five foreign institutions (U. Cordoba, Argentina; U. Concepcion, Chile; IFM-
GEOMAR and GFZ-Postdam, Germany; Okoyama U., Japan). These collaborations will
allow cross-fertilization that will benefit all scientists involved, where the
sharing of samples, data, models and ideas will flow freely between the parties.
Three laboratories: the Eprobe at Brown U., the ion-probe at DTM-CIW, and the
ICPMS-labs at WHOI will be financially supported by this research. The project
will support one PhD student and several undergraduates from Brown University
and undergraduates from University of Cordoba. We anticipate several senior
theses from both institutions. Thus, research on recent Andean volcanism will be
represented for the first time in the Geology Department at the Universidad de
Cordoba.