* 0809007
* Scalable Parallel Algorithms for Partial Differential Equations
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2010
* Xiao-Chuan Cai, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2010
* USD 25,000.00

Scalable Parallel Algorithms for Partial Differential
Equations&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Scalable algorithms for partial
differential equations play a key role in Computational Science and Engineering.
As the number of processors in today's supercomputers grows rapidly, scalability
becomes one of the most important issues in algorithm design. Tremendous
progress has been made in this research area in the past few years. The
conference brings together experts in this field from all over the world to
discuss the latest development of scalable algorithms, and to introduce junior
researchers to this exciting research field. The conference also supports the
participation of graduate students and provides them with a unique opportunity
for exposing their research to a large audience and for learning from
experts.&lt;br/&gt;The primary focus is on domain decomposition METHODS which
COMPRISE by far the most common scalable paradigm for large-scale simulation on
massively parallel distributed, hierarchical memory computers. In domain
decomposition, a large problem is reduced to a collection of smaller problems,
each of which is easier to solve computationally than the un-decomposed problem,
and most or all of which can be solved independently and concurrently.
Typically, it is necessary to iterate over the collection of smaller problems,
and much of the theoretical interest in domain decomposition algorithms lies in
ensuring that the number of iterations required is very small. Indeed, the best
domain decomposition methods share with their cousins, multigrid methods, the
property that the total computational work is linearly proportional to the size
of the input data, or that the number of iterations required is at most
logarithmic in the number of degrees of freedom of individual subdomains.
Algorithms whose work requirements are linear in the size of the input data in
this context are said to be optimal. Optimal domain decomposition algorithms are
now known for many, but certainly not all, important classes of problems that
arise in science and engineering. Much of the current research interest in
domain decomposition algorithms lies in extending the classes of problems for
which optimal algorithms are known. Domain decomposition algorithms can be
tailored to the properties of the physical system as reflected in the
mathematical operators, the number of processors available, and even to specific
architectural parameters, such as cache size and the ratio of memory bandwidth
to floating point processing rate.