* 0809657
* GOALI:  Understanding Oxide-Polymer Interfaces to Enable Green Coating Technology
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* James Hamilton, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 07/31/2012
* USD 466,148.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Researchers at the Pennsylvania State University
(PSU) will join in collaboration with two industry leaders, Rohm &amp; Haas and
Johns Manville, to develop a fundamental understanding of glass/polymer
interactions at the molecular level. This will enable development of less
hazardous and more chemically benign polymers that have the capability of
transforming an entire industry. This research will study the interactions of
organic probe molecules and polymer components with scientifically significant
and technologically important multicomponent oxide surfaces. These materials and
their surfaces are important in several energy, display, and bio-technologies.
Specifically, the research will focus on alkali-free glasses containing
aluminum, silicon, and boron oxides, as these materials present surfaces that
are easily modified through changes in chemical composition but are subject to
modification by environmentally friendly water-borne polymers (e.g., adhesives
and binders). Well-controlled synthesis and processing of materials will be
followed by characterization with a combination of techniques that will explore
the structure of reactive sites on the surfaces as well as the energies of
interactions of the surface sites with probe molecules. The PSU faculty and
industry participants will meet with each other on a regular basis, including
extended visits by faculty to industrial research centers. The research will
also involve two graduate students and two undergraduate students working in
collaboration across the labs of the two PSU faculty members. In addition to
reporting research results in scientific articles, all data acquired in this
project will be uploaded to ChemXSeer, a portal for academic researchers in
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: Physical and chemical
knowledge obtained from simple oxide materials is often applied to
multicomponent oxides even though it is widely recognized that unique reaction
sites and atomic/molecular scale heterogeneity exist at the surface of the more
complex systems. The increased complexity of multicomponent surfaces, and the
resulting implications for polymer binding to the surfaces of these materials,
will be studied through analysis of chemical interactions with alkali-free
aluminoborosilicate gels and glass fibers. Interactions with small organic
molecules and polymer precursors will be probed using a combination of inverse
gas chromatography (IGC) and solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR). By
collaborating closely with two industrial teams, one from a glass company and
the other from a manufacturer of polymer coatings, the proposed studies are
intended to bring about a paradigm shift in the development of materials that
rely upon an understanding of polymer/oxide interfaces. The results will enable
enhanced performance, lower the environmental and health impact, and/or reduce
the time and cost of new materials development. Students involved in this
research will gain an appreciation for the value of fundamental research in
product development, green chemistry, and manufacturing. Results from the IGC
and NMR characterization of oxide surfaces and polymer adsorbates will be
extended to allow translation of this work to industrial labs. At the same time,
the work is sufficiently fundamental to impact other fields and other
applications of oxide/polymer interface systems through its rapid and effective
dissemination in the open literature and via cyber-enabled routes.