* 0809637
* Ligand Scaffold Optimization for Catalytic Asymmetric Hydroboration
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* James Takacs, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2012
* USD 420,000.00

This project will continue work on the development of chiral self-assembled
ligands and catalysts for the catalytic asymmetric hydroboration of alkenes.
Chirality-directed self-assembly enables the rapid in situ preparation of
dozens, even hundreds, of unique ligand scaffolds and thus permits the subtle
structural manipulation of catalyst topography in ways not available with
classical ligand designs. While stoichiometric asymmetric hydroboration is
widely used, the catalyzed reaction is underdeveloped relative to its potential
utility in asymmetric synthesis. Combinatorial type screening of chiral self-
assembled ligands will be carried out to identify new useful supramolecular
catalysts. Studies to further elucidate the reasons for the success of these
catalysts will be undertaken to provide new fundamental insight into asymmetric
catalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Professor Takacs of the
Department of Chemistry at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln. Professor Takacs?
research efforts revolve around the development of supramolecular catalysts
using self-assembly to generate macromolecular scaffolds that define the shape
and characteristics required for efficient catalysis, an approach that mimics
biological catalysts. This application focuses on the formation of synthetically
useful and versatile C-B bonds via metal-catalyzed hydroboration, a reaction
that holds significant untapped potential for asymmetric synthesis. Such
chemistry holds the promise to replace a stoichiometric reaction protocol with a
catalytic one and thus contribute to environmentally benign methods for chemical
synthesis. Successful development of the methodology will have an impact on
synthesis in the pharmaceutical and agricultural industries. &lt;br/&gt;