* 0809622
* Reactant Translational vs. Vibrational Energy in Insertion Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2012
* H. Floyd Davis, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 06/30/2012
* USD 490,000.00

In this award, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Division of Chemistry, Professor H. Floyd Davis of Cornell University, together
with his graduate, and undergraduate students, will investigate the dynamics of
how transition metal atoms insert into chemical bonds. The investigations will
be carried in a crossed molecular beam. Prof. Davis will study how changing
reactant translational or vibrational energy influences chemical reactivity. In
addition to his research work, Prof. Davis proposes to continue his development
of inexpensive spectrophotometers (ca. $50) for use in high schools, along with
curricular materials to go with them.

Transition metal-containing species catalyze a large number of industrial
processes. The ultimate goal of research like that of Prof. Davis is to develop
a better understanding of how metal atoms react in these processes. A better
understanding of these reactions should lead to better processes. In addition to
the broader impact of the proposed research work, Prof. Davis' work in
developing rugged, inexpensive laboratory equipment will help to bring science
experiments to schools, here and abroad, which operate with limited resources.
The graduate and undergraduate research students supported on this award will
also enter the technical workforce with superb training in chemistry, physics
and modern laboratory science.