* 0809487
* Collaborative Research:  Community Ecology as a Framework for Understanding Disease Dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2007,08/31/2009
* Jason Rohr, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2009
* USD 329,299.00

Despite parasites being found in nearly every community, the relationship
between community and disease ecology remains poorly understood. Our goal is to
determine the mechanisms by which species interactions and common environmental
stressors influence disease properties and community dynamics. Our focal hosts
are amphibians, a group of global conservation concern that has been impacted by
the recent emergence of infectious diseases. The focal parasites are the
trematodes (flatworms) Ribeiroia ondatrae and Echinostoma trivolvis. They are
transmitted from snails to amphibians and induce mortality associated with limb
deformities and kidney damage, respectively. Our hypothesis is that trematode
transmission, associated mortality, and amphibian fitness will depend upon
community composition and abiotic stressors. We will conduct surveys to identify
relationships among amphibian trematode infections and biotic and abiotic
characteristics of wetlands and their surrounding landscape. We will use
mesocosm communities to examine how the independent and combined effects of
competition and predation (biotic stressors) and pesticides and conditions
associated with climate change (abiotic stressors) influence amphibian fitness
and disease properties. Additionally, we will elucidate the relationships among
amphibian immune responses and biotic and abiotic stressors and infection risk
by conducting immunological assays on amphibians from each of our experiments.
Finally, we will formulate predictive mathematical models for the spread of
trematodes in human-altered environments. This project represents a pioneering
effort in the integration of community ecology, immunology, and epidemiology
that will improve our ability to forecast future vector-borne disease outbreaks
by shedding light on general principles governing host-parasite interactions.