* 0809179
* Excited-State Proton Transfer in Chemistry and Biology
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Kyril Solntsev, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 06/30/2011
* USD 478,000.00

Elucidating the mechanism of ultrafast reactions requires molecules which are
activated upon photoexcitation. For photoinduced electron transfer, such
molecules are readily available. For photoinduced proton transfer, molecules are
required which become strong acids (photoacids) in the excited state. Although
molecules which rearrange to generate permanent acids, i.e., photoacid
generators, are important in the lithographic industry, molecules which are
transient acids are more elusive. This program has sought to develop such
molecules--of general interest to a variety of investigators in the field--and
is unique in using the principles of theoretical organic chemistry and organic
synthesis to provide such reagents. The group, in the process, is producing
photoacids with acidities approaching that of strong mineral acids. More
recently, these methods have been extended to photoacids in biology, taking
advantage of the unique mechanism of the green fluorescent protein (GFP), which
exhibits a proton transfer cascade through a relay mechanism. By taking GFP
apart and putting it back together, the group is elucidating the details of the
photophysics of this revolutionary protein and applying them to a number of
related systems. In addition to continuing these studies, they propose to apply
these principles to the development of GFP chromophores, stripped of their
protective protein barrel,and to a new category of sensors which use both
fluorescence off-on switching and proton transfer to give two variables in the
sensing process. They further propose to continue studies on new photoacids
which reveal details of ion-pair dynamics and effects of diastereoselectivity on
acid dissociation. A wide array of objects including supercritical media and
molecular jets will be studied.

The intellectual merit of the proposed activity lies in the design and synthesis
of new "super" photoacids, the validation of models for the molecular details of
ultrafast proton transfer, and the use of those models in proton transfer in
biology. The broader impacts of the proposed activity encompass the development
of new spectroscopic and mechanistic tools for the larger community of
spectroscopists and photobiologists, the transfer of this technology and
knowledge base through dissemination of these results at conferences and the
literature, the collaboration with scientists in a number of laboratories, and
the development of a set of future scientists skilled in organic synthesis,
spectroscopy, mechanistic chemistry, and collaborative research. As part of this
effort, Prof. Tolbert will visit 10 historically black universities the first
year of the grant to compare their efforts in building undergraduates for
graduate school in chemistry and compare those with his experience at Clark
Atlanta University in order to improve his effectiveness in recruitment of
African-Americans to Clark Atlanta.