* 0809048
* SGER:  Automated Reflection Laue and Serial Sectioning Characterization of Magnetic and Martensitic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2010
* Marc De Graef, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Ardell
* 06/30/2010
* USD 200,000.00

TECHNICAL: The microstructure of materials is intimately connected to multiple
material properties (mechanical, electrical, magnetic, etc.). To fully
understand the important aspects of a microstructure, it is often necessary to
obtain three-dimensional structural and chemical information about grain
boundaries, second phase particles, large scale defects, and so on. One of the
primary ways of obtaining this kind of information is through the process of
serial sectioning. Recent advances in robot technology now make it possible to
completely transfer the human tasks of metallography to a robotized setup, which
is more precise and can work around the clock. In the PIs laboratory, a
robotized metallography instrument will be installed in the early Spring of
2008; this device generates optical serial section images or montages for
material volumes of around a cubic millimeter, far larger than any of the more
conventional serial sectioning methods, such as focused ion beam milling. In
this high-risk, high payoff, and transformative SGER program, PI will augment
this instrument with a refection Laue camera, develop automated indexing
software, and integrate the diffractometer into the RoboMet.3D control hardware.
In the first year of the program, PI will implement the indexing algorithms, and
in the second year PI will apply the technique to determine the 3D
microstructures of magnetic materials and materials that exhibit martensitic
transformations. There is very little 3D information available on either of
these material classes, and PI will acquire data sets that will enable
subsequent numerical analysis of their macroscopic material properties. Material
systems investigated will include Fe-3% Si transformer steel (in which the
problem of abnormal grain growth is still poorly understood), Cu-Al-based
martensitic alloys (which exhibit the shape memory, etc.), and also the Ni2MnGa
system, which is a ferromagnetic shape memory alloy (i.e., it exhibits both
magnetism and a martensitic transformation). The simultaneous acquisition of
optical images and orientation data (through the indexing of Laue patterns) for
material volumes of the order of cubic millimeters will enable the detailed
study of materials that thus far have not been studied in 3D. The research will
create the tools to routinely obtain this kind of microstructural information,
and will also apply the method to several important engineering materials. In
the long run, this instrument has the capability to transform the way we look at
materials; it will help us change our usual 2D view of a microstructure (from
optical or electron micrographs) to a truly 3D understanding of real-world
microstructures. NON-TECHNICAL: The development of a fully automated device
capable of both serial section imaging and orientational data acquisition has
the potential to impact a large portion of the materials community. In the short
term, the program may lead to a more widespread commercial availability of this
new instrument. This will have an immediate effect on materials education, since
the 3D visualizations of microstructures acquired on this instrument can be
incorporated directly into courses and textbooks, thereby making 3D
metallography for the future generation of materials engineers as basic a tool
as 2D metallography has been in the past.