* 0809770
* Electrochemical Deposition and Characterization of Mixed Metal Oxides For Energy
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2011
* Keith Stevenson, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 06/30/2011
* USD 330,017.00

In this research supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry program, new
electrode materials and architectures will be prepared and studied using
structure-directing templates to control and assemble mixed metal oxide
materials with desired porosity and surface area. At present, the understanding
of structure-property relationships of redox-active mixed metal oxides is
insufficient, as characterization of these materials is challenging due to their
disordered and heterogeneous nature. The intellectual merit of this proposal
derives from the systematic preparation of new metastable metal mixed oxide
materials with unique valence states via low-temperature electrochemical
deposition. Additionally, thorough characterization of their structural,
compositional and electrochemical properties will be used to elucidate
mechanistic aspects and to correlate ion insertion and optical behaviors of
mixed metal oxide materials. These characterization techniques include not only
conventional methods (e.g., Raman, XPS, and XRD) but also a suite of
spectroelectrochemical and scanning probe microscopy techniques newly developed
in our laboratories. Although the research focuses on lithium insertion in mixed
metal oxides, clearly the results of this study will advance understanding of
materials properties with applications toward catalysis, chemical sensing and
photonics. &lt;br/&gt; The broader impacts of this proposal involve the
development of new material design concepts and high-resolution analytical tools
for understanding complex interfacial phenomena at heterogeneous, mesoporous
surfaces. Educational broader impact will be achieved through an
interdisciplinary plan focused on preparing a new generation of talented young
scientists with the intellect and motivation necessary to solve problems related
to energy storage and electrochemical materials. Graduate students working on
the project will receive diverse training in several areas including
electrochemistry, materials science, surface analytical characterization methods
(XPS, AFM, EQCM), ellipsometry, UV-vis and Raman spectroscopies. Additionally,
several undergraduates and high school students will be involved in this
research program by coupling the research to a recently funded NSF Freshman
Research Initiative (FRI) at UT-Austin that focuses on the synthesis of
nanomaterials. Community outreach efforts will be pursued with the Austin
Children's Museum (ACM) and with local K-12 schools to develop hands-on modules
that highlight the importance of technologically useful materials.