* 0809747
* Novel Asymmetric Routes to 2-Oxetanones and Their Application
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2011
* Daniel Romo, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2011
* USD 405,000.00

This project will continue work on the development of concise methods for the
asymmetric synthesis of novel beta-lactones (2-oxetanones) via organocatalysis.
In particular, further development of Lewis base-promoted, aldol-lactonizations
(net cycloadditions) that construct a C-C bond and a C-O bond simultaneously
will be pursued to access these versatile strained heterocycles. In addition to
studies of novel Lewis-base promoters, mechanistic studies will be undertaken to
gain further insights into the overall reaction pathway including a potential
acyl substitution proceeding via an SN2 pathway. In addition, novel
transformation of these heterocycles including ring expansions by way of
dyotropic rearrangements of bicyclic and tricyclic beta-lactones will be
explored further. Hypothesis driven studies of novel reaction pathways involving
ammonium enolates and including extended and interrupted Morita-Baylis-Hillman
processes will be pursued. The utility of the methods and processes developed
will be highlighted by applications to the total synthesis of spongiolactone and
curcumalactone. With respect to educational objectives, the translation of
laboratory research into the teaching laboratory will continue along with
further development of multimedia approaches for conveying the societal
relevance of organic synthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the
Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research of
Professor Daniel Romo of the Department of Chemistry at Texas A&amp;M
University. Professor Romo's research efforts revolve around the development of
catalytic, asymmetric methods for the synthesis of beta-lactones and their
application in synthesis including natural product total synthesis. The results
of this research will contribute significantly to further use and application of
these underutilized heterocycles, which possess a diverse array of reactivity
modes making them highly versatile intermediates for organic synthesis.
Successful development of the proposed methods will have an impact on organic
synthesis in the pharmaceutical and agricultural industries as the methods being
developed are robust and "user friendly." In addition, synthesis of the targeted
natural products will have broader impacts in enabling the further understanding
of fundamental cellular processes.