* 0809521
* Multifunctional Mesoporous Silica Nanoparticles for Intracellular Controlled Release
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Brian Trewyn, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 06/30/2012
* USD 390,000.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program
in the Division of Chemistry and the Biomaterials program in the Division of
Materials research supports Professor Victor Lin at Iowa State University to
synthesize biocompatible, multi-functionalized mesoporous silica nanoparticle
(MSN) materials with well-defined particle morphology and tunable surface
properties for efficient penetration across different cell membranes. A series
of pore-capping and uncapping strategies will be developed that can be triggered
by cellular chemicals and enzymes for studying intracellular controlled release
of a variety of guest molecules, such as drugs, imaging agents, peptides,
proteins, and nucleotides, inside of animal and plant cells. The specific
objectives are to: 1) Synthesize biocompatible mesoporous silica nanoparticles
for controlling membrane trafficking, 2) Fine-tune surface properties of MSNs
for loading and release of chemicals, 3) Develop an arsenal of different pore-
capping and uncapping strategies, 4) Study mechanisms of endocytosis,
intracellular transportation, and controlled release. Various interactions
between the multifunctional MSNs with different particle morphologies and animal
and plant cells will be studied in vitro. These interactions include: the
adsorption of MSNs to cell membranes, the mechanism and kinetics of
internalization, the intracellular localization of internalized MSN, the
biocompatibility, and the effects of MSNs on cellular metabolism. A series of
imaging, cytochemical, and cell sorting techniques will be employed to study the
dynamics of cellular uptake of the MSNs and the kinetics of intracellular
controlled release of biologically active molecules from MSNs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research offers new nanomaterials for chemists,
biologists, and material scientists to study the chemical nature and
biochemistry inside living cells. The interdisciplinary work will also provide
valuable training to the students working on this project. Other broader impacts
include: The development of new curricular materials for graduate and
undergraduate courses and outreach to local elementary and high
schools.&lt;br/&gt;