* 0809093
* Assembly and spectroscopic interrogation of large atomic and molecular clusters in helium droplets
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2011
* Andrey Vilesov, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 07/31/2011
* USD 466,599.00

In this award, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Andrey Vilesov of the University of Southern
California, together with his graduate student researchers, will study the
aggregation of atomic and molecular species in ultracold, superfluid helium
droplets. Species to be studied include metal atoms, methane, water, ammonia,
hydrogen chloride and parahydrogen clusters, among others. Cluster sizes span
the range from a few atoms/molecules to tens of millions of solute species. The
goal of these studies is to investigate how molecules interact with each other
and with this rather unusual solvent over a wide range of size. The experiments
will be carried out in the gas phase with mass spectrometric and laser
spectroscopic methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate aim of research like
this is to learn about new ways in which matter can interact in a highly unusual
environment. The large clusters to be studied in this work are intermediate
between molecular and bulk (mesoscale) and are predicted to have unusual
properties. The very large helium droplets that Vilesov proposes studying may be
useful vehicles for making interesting kinds of new materials. Students working
with Prof. Vilesov will receive excellent training in a number of areas of high-
technology -- including lasers, vacuum science and electronics. Prof. Vilesov
has a strong history of international collaboration, and this will likely
continue with this work.&lt;br/&gt;