* 0809543
* Lava Dome Collapses : Their Mechanisms and Short-Term Forecasting
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Eliza Calder, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 07/31/2012
* USD 260,890.00

Lava domes are piles of viscous magma that, in essence, form bulbous plugs on
top of volcanic vents. They grow slowly as partially solidified magma is
squeezed up the volcanic conduit, and they can host high internal pressures as
gases exsolving from the magma try to escape. Lava dome eruptions are notorious
for they often suddenly transformation from being benignly effusive to violently
explosive. Sudden removal of these plugs, either by vertically-driven
explosions, caused once the internal gas pressure exceeds the tensile strength
of rock, or sudden collapse and spontaneous disintegration as the piles grow and
become unstable, can have devastating consequences. These collapse events spawn
one of the major hazard in volcanology; devastating pyroclastic density
currents, which move down the flanks of the volcano at speeds of up to 60 m/s.
This project concerns the improved understanding and forecasting of lava dome
collapses and has immediate and practical applications pertaining to the
management of several on-going volcanic crisis. The work will be based on the
Soufrière Hills volcano (SHV) eruption, Montserrat, combined with preliminary
comparative studies from two other active lava dome eruptions, Mount St Helens,
USA, and Santiaguito, Guatemala. Such eruptions occur with relative frequency,
are potentially extremely destructive and can continue for years-to decades. The
real merits therefore, will be reaped when relationships unearthed during this
study are usefully and successfully applied to dome forming eruptions
elsewhere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental objective of this work is to
stringently quantify aspects of activity associated with lava dome failure and
collapse including information on the timing and location of rockfalls and
pyroclastic flows, as well as the nature of other precursory activity. The
project will address three issues that require further attention:
differentiating failure modes; identifying structural controls; and treating
collapses as part of a continuous process of mass wasting rather than discrete
independent events. By investigating along these themes, this work will validate
existing models and constrain a number of current limitations. The results of
this work will provide the basis from which statistically-driven models can be
developed, in order to construct a short-term forecasting model of mass wasting
at lava domes. The novelty and impact of this study hinges on: Innovative
techniques for comparing disparate data sets of monitoring data, and the
generation of an important record of dome activity that will be useful to the
volcanological community; Understanding continuous growth and wasting processes
allowing assessments to be made about physical mechanisms but also providing a
basis for testing statistical models (the quality of which is enhanced by
collection of large data sets); The fusion of data from digital elevation
models, thermal images, and gas plume maps, developing a truly integrative
approach to understanding dome instability.