* 0809525
* Folding of Genetically Engineered beta-Sheet Forming Fibrillogenic Polypeptides
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Igor Lednev, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 07/31/2011
* USD 372,000.00

With the support of the Organic Dynamics Program in the Chemistry Division,
Professors Igor Lednev and John Welch of the Chemistry Department at the State
University of New York at Albany (SUNY-Albany) will perform research where the
long-term goal is to identify the crucial intermolecular interactions involved
in the folding and fibrillation of proteins. Beta-Sheet folding in large
synthetic, fibrillogenic polypeptides will be investigated by establishing the
primary sequence-property relationship governing beta-sheet nucleation and the
role of aggregation on formation of beta-sheet nucleus. The mechanism of folding
will be determined using deep UV resonance Raman (DUVRR) spectroscopy combined
with advanced statistical analysis including 2D-correlation spectroscopy. The
variation of polypeptide length and selective site-specific introduction of
beta-hairpins will enable determination of the role of intra- and intermolecular
folding initiation. The selective control of amino acid sequence possible by
using genetically engineered polypeptides as models for native protein folding
will enable careful investigation of the influence of polypeptide charge and
electrolyte interactions on folding, both properties associated with the in vivo
folding of amyloidogenic proteins. With a firm understanding of the influence of
primary sequence on folding, the effect of templating will be investigated. The
researchers hope to understand what changes in an aggregate structure
compromises its ability as a template.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research by
Professors Lednev and Welch of SUNY-Albany will address the fundamental
biophysics behind folding processes and may lead to insights, made possible by
the use of simplified model compounds that may also have relevance to the basis
for disease states with protein misfolding etiology. The research results
clearly have direct applicability to understanding the etiology of protein
deposition diseases, such as the neurodegenerative diseases Alzheimer's,
Parkinson's, and Creutzfeld-Jacob diseases. This cross-disciplinary project will
train undergraduate and graduate students in biophysics, biochemistry and
molecular biology thus preparing future professional scientists and engineers
with multidisciplinary backgrounds and versatile skills. Professors Lednev and
Welch will continue to involve undergraduate students from historically
underrepresented groups in their research projects. The advanced knowledge
acquired through this NSF funded program will be integrated into undergraduate
and graduate courses.&lt;br/&gt;