* 0809164
* Molecular dynamics simulations of chemical reactions and interactions at liquid interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2013
* Ilan Benjamin, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 07/31/2013
* USD 442,000.00

Ilan Benjamin of the University of California Santa Cruz is supported by an
award from the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry program for research to
develop molecular dynamics techniques for the simulation of liquid-liquid
interfaces. Two different processes are being considered: photoinduced electron
transfer at liquid-liquid interfaces; and phase transfer catalyzed SN2 reactions
at liquid-liquid interfaces.

Many chemical reactions of importance to diverse fields such as environmental
sciences, energy storage and catalysis occur at liquid interfaces. To understand
the influence of the interface region on chemical reactivity, a molecularly
detailed understanding of these systems is required. Advances in surface-
specific experimental techniques have provided numerous new results on the
spectroscopy and reactivity of chemical species at liquid interfaces. While
these have helped gain valuable insight into the nature of molecular
interactions at liquid interfaces, the vast complexity of the interfacial region
requires complimentary progress in the theoretical modeling and understanding of
these systems. This work is havintg a broader impact by providing a fundamental
understanding of the effect of the liquid interface region on chemical
reactivity. It is having a further broad impact through the education and
training of students involved in the research.