* 0809610
* Rupture Propagation and Arrest in Geometrically Complex Fault Systems: Branches, Stepovers, and Damaged Border Zones
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2008,12/31/2012
* Renata Dmowska, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 12/31/2012
* USD 540,000.00

The project group focuses on a major problem in earthquake science, namely, to
understand the interaction of seismic slip-rupture with geometrical and
structural complexities of fault zones. Such interactions include transitions of
the failure path among fault strands at bends, branches and stepovers, rupture
arrest, and induced inelastic deformations in fault border zones, which are
generally damaged (highly cracked and/or granulated) and fluid-saturated. Prior
work of the group, on which the current studies build, provided new
understanding of how rupture paths are chosen at branch-like geometric
complexities, and of how inelastic response of the fault bordering zone affects
rupture propagation and shear localizations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The new
areas for theory and modeling in current work are as follows: (1) Understanding
how interactions of deformations with ground fluids and frictional elastic-
plastic responses in the damage zone couple to the dynamics of rupture
propagation. That includes explaining the effects of different types of across-
fault material dissimilarity (in elastic properties, strength and extent of
damage, and near-fault permeability to fluids); such dissimilarities are common
for mature, highly slipped faults. (2) Assessing if, and to what extent, current
understanding of how rupture paths are chosen at branch intersections, and of
whether rupture passes through or arrests at step-overs, is affected by the
presence of extensively damaged material, capable of elastic-plastic response,
near such fault junctions. (3) Determining how residual stress states imprinted
in fault-border material by the previous rupture affects response in the next
event, and how that depends on rupture directivity in the past and pending
events; (4) Devising procedures to rigorously analyze strain localizations that
arise in modeling inelastic response of damaged/granulated fault border zones,
by imposing localization-limiting procedures that eliminate grid dependence,
thus ultimately evolving a methodology that can predict spontaneous development
of localized fault-rupture paths through damaged material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Correlation of theory and modeling with field examples and lab experiments is a
hallmark of the group's work, and new thrusts in that direction are as follows:
(I) Adopting methodology like in (4) above to understanding when a damaged pull-
apart stepover, like in the 1992 Landers earthquake between the Johnson and
Homestead Valley Faults, and between the Homestead Valley and the Emerson Fault,
is breeched by a through-going rupture, and similarly for the 1920 M8 Haiyuan,
China event, which ruptured through a sequence of pull-aparts. (II)
Understanding mega-branches of great thrust ruptures onto splay faults through
the sediment cover of accretionary subduction zones, like documented or
suspected at Alaska, Cascadia, Nankai and Sumatra, as well as when and by what
processes branching onto landward- versus seaward-vergent splays can occur, and
what that means for tsunami generation. (III) Testing the evolving theoretical
understanding of rupture branching and interactions with damaged border zones
against results of lab experiments (conducted by colleagues elsewhere) which are
devised to address the same issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The understanding of
when and how earthquake ruptures stop, which often involves geometric
complexities of the type we address, is central to understanding seismic risk.
New ways of using relic fault geometries to constrain directivity and other
features of past events is also a potentially valuable outcome.&lt;br/&gt;