* 0809039
* IMR:  Development of  a TEM Testing Stage with Atomic Position Resolution for Student Training, Education, and Research
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2007,08/31/2009
* Rodney Ruoff, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2009
* USD 330,037.00

The ultimate cohesive strength of an ideal, defect-free crystalline solid has
long been an interesting theoretical abstraction: 'real' materials never exhibit
their ideal strengths due to ever-present defects. However, mechanical failure
in nanostructures is qualitatively and quantitatively distinct from the failure
behavior of bulk materials, thus providing a tremendous opportunity to connect
the 'real' to the 'ideal'&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent developments in the
synthesis, characterization, and modeling of nanostructures warrant the
development of an instrument that will operate in conjunction with high-
resolution transmission electron microscopy, and will enable a comprehensive
study of fracture in, e.g., semiconductor and insulator nanowires, and single
walled carbon nanotubes. A novel TEM MEMS-based mechanical loading stage with
sub-Angstrom-level resolution is proposed. The hardware of the proposed
instrument consists of five components: a compliant transmission mechanism, a
motion actuator, a MEMS specimen holder (coupon), a TEM holder, and a position
control system. This instrument will allow study of material systems that are of
fundamental interest due to their novel structure, and of practical importance
due to their electrical, thermal, and mechanical properties.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose (i) to develop and fabricate this new
instrumentation (ii) to develop robust methods for configuring nanowires and
nanotubes onto testing platforms (iii) to perform preliminary experimental
measurements of the mechanics of nanostructures to verify system performance,
and (iv) to interact with experts in multiscale theory and modeling that
combines electronic structure, molecular mechanics and continuum mechanics
calculations, who have an intense interest in the proposed instrument and the
measurements it can perform. The proposed team has the skills necessary to
design, fabricate, test, and use the TEM MEMS-based testing stage, for the study
of materials response under mechanical load, and of fracture and fatigue of
nanostructures having zero to a few atomic-scale defects.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The importance of a fundamental understanding of fracture and fatigue
in nanowires is underscored by the broad range of potential applications
envisioned for Si, Ge, doped Si and Ge nanowires, as well as nanowires of
modulated composition such as 'striped' and core-shell structures, TiO2
nanowires, and single walled carbon nanotubes. A new instrument and important
new methods will result, to address the influence of defects, interfaces,
chemical environment, cyclic mechanical loading (fatigue), strain rate, and the
presence of an electric current, on the fracture mechanics of nanowires.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is envisioned that nanowires (100 times
smaller in diameter than a hair) will be used in a host of important
applications, such as in nanoelectronics (as logic and memory and interconnect
elements), as chemical sensing elements due to their high surface to volume
ratio and exceptional sensitivity to surface interactions, in
nanoelectromechanical systems (NEMS; as mechanical components, electromechanical
components, actuators, strain gauges, flow sensors, others), in structural
composites where the crystalline perfection of single crystal nanowires is
expected to confer exceptional stiffness, strength, and toughness, and
potentially in energy conversion devices (as thermoelectric elements). It is for
these reasons, among others, that it is critically important to understand the
detailed mechanics of single crystal nanowires and their failure behavior. An
understanding of nanowire fracture (how a material breaks) and fatigue (how a
material that is repeatedly loaded, for example, eventually will fail) will
provide an important base of knowledge for their subsequent use in diverse
applications where mechanical stress will be present.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
work will have a strong impact on novel instrumentation, which will be further
developed and sold in the United States. The TEM MEMS-based testing stage (this
is a tiny testing stage that can fit into a transmission electron microscope and
has microelectromechanical systems components that allow it to function), and
studies of the mechanical response of individual nanowires, will capture the
imagination of scientists and engineers around the World, so that an
international effort on mechanics of nanostructures will be ignited. This same
"capturing of the imagination" of scientists and engineers and the general
public will mean that the work outlined here will provide textbook examples of
the use of clever engineering to develop instruments that can controllably
deform nanostructures at such fine levels of control, and of fundamental studies
of mechanical response, fracture, and fatigue that result from such approaches.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This instrument development effort includes a significant
program in education outreach, including research programs for graduate students
and postdoctoral fellows, summer research training for undergraduate (including
minority) students and high school teachers, additions to course materials being
offered both in chemistry and engineering courses, and curriculum development
for grades 7-12 in coordination with the NSF Center for Learning and Teaching in
Nanoscale Science and Engineering centered at Northwestern University. There is
also a plan for the important second phase of technology transition to
interested companies, and thus of follow through to ensure that such
instrumentation will be available to researchers in the USA and around the
World, for rapid acceleration of their use. This will increase the rate of
creation of databases of important mechanical and electromechanical properties
of nanowires, which will also accelerate their use in important applications.
&lt;br/&gt;