* 0809185
* U.S.-EGYPT Cooperative Research:   Magnetic Nano-Composite as Photocatalyst Prepared by the Sol-Gel Technique for Degradation of Organic Dyes
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2010
* Wolfgang Sigmund, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/2010
* USD 30,000.00

0809185&lt;br/&gt;Sigmund&lt;br/&gt;This project supports collaborative research
by Dr. Wolfgang Sigmund, Department of Materials Science and Engineering,
University of Florida, Gainesville and Dr. Reda Ouf, Central Metallurgical
Research and Development Institute (CMRDI), Helwan, Egypt. The objective of this
project is a study on ?Magnetic Nano-composite as Photocatalysts Prepared by
Sol-Gel Technique for Degradation of Organic Dyes?.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Merit: The pollution of water resources by
sewage and industrial wastes with toxic or organic compounds presents a serious
problem. TiO2 nanoparticles have large specific surface areas and high catalytic
performance allow reactions to convert these compounds in presence of UV light
on their surface. However, their effective commercial applications are hindered
by two serious disadvantages. The first is the agglomeration of the nano-powders
resulting in an adverse effect on catalyst performance. The second is the
separation and recovery of TiO2 nano-powders from wastewater is difficult. The
aim of this project is to develop a photocatalyst that is magnetic, photoactive,
and stable using a wet synthesis method, for easy removal and recovery from
slurry-type photoreactor. Specific aims include: (i) developing a reproducible
synthesis method based on the sol-gel process for preparing magnetic
photocatalyst, by coating a magnetic material with TiO2; (ii) characterizing the
physical and chemical properties of the prepared samples, and (iii) studying
their photocatalytic performance by degrading dye as the model organic compound
The intellectual merit of this proposal is an enhanced understanding of magnetic
photocatalytic nanocomposites for degradation of organic compounds that might be
useful for environmental remediation.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The broader
impact is the education of graduate and undergraduate students in the U.S. and
the education of young Egyptian researchers thus fostering the international
bonds&lt;br/&gt;between Egypt and the US. Furthermore, the exchange program will
provide a scientific&lt;br/&gt;and cultural experience for the US undergraduate
and graduate students that allows them to grow into teachers for other US
students and bring international experience to the companies or government units
that they will work with in the future. Additionally, the photocatalysts, if
proven successful, can be applied in the U.S., in Egypt or other developing
countries to purify water and remediate the environment. This project is being
supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to
scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out these cooperative
activities. &lt;br/&gt;