* 0809725
* The Catalytic Mechanism of Oxalate Decarboxylase Studied by Advanced EPR Experiments
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Alexander Angerhofer, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 06/30/2012
* USD 476,350.00

This research award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
program supports work by Professor Alexander Angerhofer at the University of
Florida to study the molecular mechanism by which the bacterial enzyme oxalate
decarboxylase (OxDC) catalyzes the cleavage of the carbon-carbon bond in oxalic
acid. Its presence in gut bacteria helps prevent the formation of kidney stones.
Advanced electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) techniques will be used in this
project to study the electronic structure and local coordination environment of
its two Mn-ions in the protein subunit. A multi-frequency approach using high
magnetic fields of up to 25 Tesla will be used to identify the active site.
These experiments will yield important kinetic, thermodynamic, and structural
information about substrate and inhibitor binding to the enzyme and test the
current working hypothesis in which Mn and an associated bound oxygen molecule
act as redox shuttles in the breaking of the oxalate C-C bond. Freeze-quench
experiments will be employed to investigate the pre-equilibrium kinetics of
enzyme-substrate interaction and yield time-dependent snapshots of the catalytic
process. &lt;br/&gt;While the investigation of OxDC is of interest in its own
right and may lead to future treatments of various oxalate-related pathologies
(hyperoxaluria), the enzyme will also serve as an example of how the protein can
modulate and affect catalytic reaction mechanisms. Site-directed mutants have
been generated that have decreased oxalate decarboxylase but increased oxalate
oxidase activity. Work with these mutants will help to elucidate how the
structure of the active site can guide the chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;This project is
tightly integrated into the HHMI-funded Science for Life initiative at the
University of Florida which serves its undergraduate population by bringing them
into the research lab early on. At least five of the most promising
undergraduate science majors are expected to be involved in this project early
in their years of study. They will receive intensive mentoring by Dr. Angerhofer
and his collaborators and be given the opportunity to perform cutting-edge
research which will not only enrich their education but also provide for them a
perspective for a future career in the natural sciences.