* 0809480
* Exploring the Physical Chemistry of Clathrate Hydrates at Low Pressures and Temperatures (100-150K)
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2013
* J. Paul Devlin, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2013
* USD 222,000.00

Professor J. Paul Devlin of Oklahoma State University is supported by the
Experimental Physical Chemistry Program in his project to explore the process of
formation of clathrate hydrates at low temperatures and pressures. Clathrate
hydrates are solid water networks that resemble ice, but include cage-like
structures containing trapped small guest molecules such as methane, carbon
dioxide or even hydrogen. Professor Devlin and his undergraduate research
students will use Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy of icy
nanoparticles to study the formation rates of clathrate hydrates in the presence
of small amounts of special guest molecules (proton-acceptor molecules), which
can catalyze clathrate hydrate growth even at low temperatures (100 - 150
degrees Kelvin) and pressures (a few thousandths of an atmosphere). The Devlin
group will also study the exchange rates of guest molecules within the clathrate
hydrate structure, for example the replacement of trapped methane with carbon
dioxide. Professor Devlin will work with theoreticians, including Professor
Victoria Buch of the Hebrew University in Jerusalem to compare his experimental
results with simulations based on ab initio molecular dynamics code. The
transport of guest molecules to (or from) reaction zones at ice - hydrate
interfaces has been identified as rate controlling. The computer simulations
should reveal the most basic steps of this transport. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project will reveal important fundamental information about an
interesting class of ice-like solid materials. The undergraduate students
involved will receive a rich and rigorous experience in spectroscopy, kinetics,
and physical chemistry in general. The research may ultimately be relevant to
future carbon capture and sequestration technologies.