* 0809625
* Collaborative Research: A Paleoseismic Record of Great Earthquakes on the Sunda Subduction Megathrust, Northern Sumatra
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2008,08/31/2013
* Charles Rubin, Central Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 08/31/2013
* USD 244,209.00

The loss of more than a quarter million lives on December 26, 2004 revealed the
susceptibility of the Indian Ocean region to devastating earthquakes and
tsunamis. Based upon preliminary fieldwork it now appears that newly discovered
buried soils on the Sumatran coastal plain of northernmost part of the Sumatran
subduction zone contain evidence for Holocene (10,000 years ago to the present)
predecessors to the 2004 Andaman-Aceh earthquake. A research team from Central
Washington University, Humboldt State University, the University of
Pennsylvania, and the Indonesian Institute of Sciences and Research Center for
Geotechnology are studying these deposits in order to understand and chronicle
the Holocene seismic behavior of the Sunda megathrust of northernmost Sumatra.
Through integration of paleoseismology, geodesy, geochronology, and
paleoenvironmental reconstruction using microfossils, the team will establish a
subduction zone chronology for the northernmost past of the Sumatran subduction
zone offshore of northern Sumatra going back approximately five thousand years.
The results will chronicle earthquake-induced rapid subsidence and gradual sea-
level changes precursory to, and subsequent to, the coseismic land level
changes. The documented relative sea-level changes will help constrain the
extent and magnitude of slip before, during and after the main subduction zone
earthquake. A long-term record of subduction zone earthquakes that spans at
least three or four earthquake cycles will provide realistic estimates of the
average time between earthquakes and tsunamis similar to the earthquake and
ensuing tsunami that struck the west coast of northern Sumatra in December 2004.
Preliminary work demonstrates that a paleoearthquake record is present in
coastal wetland stratigraphy and that wetland sediment contains both datable
material and abundant microfossils that will permit reconstruction of the timing
and magnitude of vertical land level changes at the coast that precede,
accompany and follow subduction zone earthquakes.

Written history had failed to forewarn of the possibility of a giant Sunda
megathrust earthquake and the resulting tsunami of December 26, 2004. Based on
preliminary work, the research team has identified tropical environments where
the record of former megathrust earthquakes is most likely to form and endure.
These deposits will yield a long-term record of subduction zone earthquakes over
thousands of years and will provide realistic estimates of the average time
between earthquakes and tsunamis such similar to the 2004 earthquake and ensuing
tsunami. Results from this project will be disseminated within the Sumatran
coastal communities and with Sumatran and national governmental agencies. These
results will establish that earthquake and tsunami are recurrent events that
should be anticipated and that require disaster planning.