* 0809357
* Planning US Partnership in Galactic Structure with the Chinese LAMOST Telescope
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/2008,11/30/2010
* Heidi Newberg, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Thomas S. Statler
* 11/30/2010
* USD 144,107.00

Because the Milky Way is the only galaxy for which we can measure the three-
dimensional spatial positions, three dimensional velocities, and the individual
metallicities of its component stars, it is a cornerstone to understanding the
history of star formation and galaxy assembly, the distribution of dark matter
in galaxies, and the creation of galactic disks. Only now, with the availability
of large aperture telescopes with thousands of fibers, is it becoming possible
to view a large enough part of our own galaxy in sufficient detail to piece
together its global structure and merger history star by star. The Large Sky
Area Multi-Object Fiber Spectroscopic Telescope (LAMOST) is the most promising
facility for obtaining, in the near term, the millions of spectra of Galactic
stars that are needed for this project.

Under this award, Dr. Heidi Newberg (Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute) will seek
to establish a partnership between a dozen Galactic astronomers in the United
States and a similarly sized group of astronomers in China. These scientists
will work together to develop a science case for doing a Galactic structure
stellar survey using the LAMOST facility, currently under construction at the
Xinglong Observing Station in China. Significant assessment of the LAMOST
project will be carried out to determine what is necessary to create a formal
relationship between United States astronomers in general, the Participants in
LAMOST US (PLUS) team, and the LAMOST project itself.