* 0809454
* Synthesis and Characterization of Polymeric Nanofibers and Nanowires
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2010
* Maher Amer, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2010
* USD 17,100.00

TECHNICAL ABSTRACT:

This research, submitted to the US-Egypt International Collaboration and funded
by the NSF Office of International Science and Engineering, proposes a
fabrication method that can produce continuous polymer nano-fibers with
submicron cross-section. This technique can spin fibers from polymeric
precursors that would be considered "unspinnable" by any other current method.
As such, this technique may allow the fabrication of novel fiber structures,
assist in the fabrication of nano-fibers from new materials, and allow the use
of novel chemical routes in fiber spinning. Produced nano-fibers will be
characterized by means of a powerful spectroscopy technique, Raman spectroscopy,
which is capable of probing structural characteristics on the molecular level.
The correlation between processing conditions and nanofiber characteristics will
also be investigated in order to optimize the processing conditions. Once nano-
fiber processing has been optimized, we shall explore the development of a new
approach of manufacturing insulated nanowires, where single-walled carbon
nanotubes or conducting polymers will be used as a conducting core encapsulated
in an insulating polymer. Several applications are expected for such insulated
nanowires spatially in the field of nanoelectronics.

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT :

Polymer fibers are very important constituents in almost every field in our
modern life. Textile industry, water purification and waste management, and
environmental filters, fishing nets, structural composites, surgical masks,
vascular grafts and heart valves are few examples of applications that could
benefit from advanced polymeric nanofibers. Some of these fibers are from
natural origin while the majority is made of various types of synthetic
polymers.

The new challenges facing us necessitate the development of new materials using
very efficient and innovative techniques on the nanoscale. The proposed work is
an international collaboration between USA and Egypt. Once successful, the
proposed technology enables the production of nano-fibers that are much needed
in both advanced and developing countries. The proposed work establishes a well
needed production method for advanced nano-fibers and nanowires with potential
applications in several fields, such as medical, environmental, nanoelectronic,
water treatment, fishing industry, structural applications, etc., that would
definitely benefit both the US and Egyptian economy. In addition to the
education and training of Egyptian graduate students in US, and use of project
findings in undergraduate courses, the proposed work establishes an
international collaboration between Wright State University (USA), and British
University, Egypt. Such collaboration would naturally grow into more
collaborations that includes student exchange, visiting professorships, and
scientific workshops.