* 0809240
* MRI: Development of a Micro-Optical Stress Sensor for Fluid  Mechanics Research
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2007,08/31/2010
* M. Volkan Otugen, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2010
* USD 331,943.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: MRI: Development of a
Micro-Optical Sheer Stress Sensor for Fluid Mechanic
Research&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
CTS-0619193-MRI&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: M. Volkan
Otugen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Polytechnic University of New
York&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research, a
novel micro-optical wall shear stress sensor will be developed for a number of
fluid mechanics research projects at Polytechnic University. The micro-optical
sensor is based on dielectric micro-beads that are excited by coupling light
from an optical fiber. The technology exploits the morphology-dependent shifts
in resonant frequencies that are commonly referred to as the whispering gallery
modes (WGM). A minute change in the size, shape or optical constants of the
micro-bead causes a shift in the resonant frequency (or the WGM). This shift can
be related to the stress on the micro-bead. The sensor will provide direct,
time-resolved, high-sensitivity, large bandwidth measurement of wall shear
stress that is well resolved in space. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will develop a new concept for micro-optical wall shear stress sensors
that is based on the WGMs of dielectric resonators which exploits recent
technological developments in the telecommunications field. The effort will
demonstrate a micro-optical wall shear stress sensor concept that has superior
resolution and dynamic range than the currently available sensors and that has
applications for both water and gas flows. The optical phenomenon that will be
used in this effort can be exploited for the development of a new class of
micro-sensors that can be used for a wide range of fluid dynamic applications;
any physical stimuli that can directly or indirectly change the size, shape or
optical constants (thereby causing a shift in the WGM) can be detected with
resolution that are beyond what can be realized by the existing mechanical
sensors. Further, the concept can be easily extended to a system of distributed
micro-sensors providing spatial data that is also time-resolved. Although it is
presently proposed to apply this optical phenomenon to develop wall shear stress
sensors for use in fluid mechanics research projects, many other applications
are possible including high-resolution temperature sensors. With the growth of
wide-band communications through optical fibers, the use of WGMs of miniature
optical elements are rapidly becoming commonplace in the telecommunication
industry where components that are several wavelengths of light in size are
used. However, such components are seldom manipulated mechanically to develop
new sensor technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the primary area of
application for the proposed sensor is fluid mechanics research, the proposed
activity will have a much broader impact: the micro-optical wall shear sensor
can have a significant impact on the modeling of pipeline networks, process
control in manufacturing industries, and medical field uses. Further, the
successful completion of this effort will lay the groundwork for the development
of a much broader range of WGM-based sensors for temperature, pressure and
species concentration. Therefore, with the development of rugged, reliable
optical sensors of this kind, the long-term payoff are likely to be very
significant. An interdisciplinary team of researchers will carry out the
development activity. The development effort, along with the research projects,
will have a direct impact on undergraduate and graduate education at Polytechnic
University. These activities will form the basis of graduate student (PhD)
dissertations and undergraduate student (Honors Program) theses. Further,
through the Youth in Engineering and Science (YES) program at Polytechnic, a
number of high-school students with diverse backgrounds from the New York
metropolitan area will be trained during the summer months. Additionally, a
number of undergraduate and graduate courses will directly benefit from the
instrument development activity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;