* 0809845
* Synthesis and Mechanistic Studies of New Series of Ferroelastic and Ferroelectric Crystals
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Mark Hollingsworth, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 06/30/2011
* USD 468,000.00

One of the principal goals of modern crystal engineering is the design,
synthesis and optimization of new materials with specified function. This
research program focuses on the technologically useful properties of
ferroelastic and ferroelectric domain switching, in which
the&lt;br/&gt;orientations of domains or regions within a crystal can be changed
by application of anisotropic stress (ferroelasticity) or electric fields
(ferroelectricity). The rational design of such materials (which can act as
light gates or memory devices) requires a deeper understanding of the mechanisms
of domain switching, a visible, macroscopic phenomenon that is controlled at the
molecular, nanoscopic and mesoscopic scales. Building upon earlier work on the
molecular determinants of ferroelasticity, this work will focus on mechanistic
studies of domain switching in series of ferroelastic
and&lt;br/&gt;ferroelectric crystals in which the cooperative, elastic barriers
to domain switching and ferroelectric ordering can be optimized and tailored.
Because such a large number of closely related structures can be generated and
compared, it concentrates on the design, synthesis and mechanistic studies
of&lt;br/&gt;series of inclusion compounds, co-crystals and organic salts that
exhibit ferroelastic and/or ferroelectric domain switching.&lt;br/&gt;Because of
the insights they can provide about the barriers to domain switching, this work
will utilize a variety of techniques (e.g., X-ray diffraction, synchrotron white
beam X-ray topography, solid state nuclear magnetic resonance, ultrafast
videomicroscopy, birefringence mapping) to probe&lt;br/&gt;the phenomenon of
"memory effects" or "rubber-like behavior," in which the daughter domain that is
generated by stress (or electric field) spontaneously reverts back to the parent
orientation. A more thorough understanding of such memory effects will
facilitate a targeted and iterative approach to&lt;br/&gt;forming series of
ferroelectric crystals with well-defined properties.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
Because they will be required to integrate results from various methods and to
utilize these results in the design of new materials, this research program will
provide a broad-based training for undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral
students who will pursue careers in materials&lt;br/&gt;chemistry. By
integrating numerous experimental results on a series of closely related
structures,it should be possible to develop a more fundamental understanding of
the factors controlling domain switching and memory effects in a variety of
ferroelectric materials. This work will be disseminated&lt;br/&gt;widely in
papers and presentations and utilized in graduate-level courses and
undergraduate laboratories.