* 0809841
* Adsorption and Reaction at Ferroelectric Surfaces: Chemical Switches and Switchable Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Eric Altman, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 06/30/2012
* USD 387,675.00

In this research supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, we
will investigate the conditions under which ferroelectric materials in thin film
form can be used as chemical sensors as well as more broadly elucidate the
fundamental factors that govern chemistry at the surfaces of these materials.
Ferroelectrics are materials that develop macroscopic electric fields that can
be switched by applying an external field in analogy to ferromagnets. The
electric fields create high surface energies that drive surface restructuring
and adsorption of polar molecules; in recent work we have shown that the
adsorption is sensitive to the direction of the ferroelectric poling. In this
project, we seek to exploit this finding to instead switch the polarization of a
thin ferroelectric film where the differences in adsorption energies are
sufficient to drive a change in the polarization direction. Because the poling
direction can be readily detected, it is anticipated that this effect can be
exploited to form chemical sensors. In addition, we seek to further understand
the roles of electrostatic, chemical, and structural effects in determining the
magnitude of the effect of ferroelectric poling on surface chemistry. Based on
the results, strategies will be employed to enhance the effect to not only
influence adsorption but to also enable control of catalytic activity and
selectivity by switching the ferroelectric polarization. These strategies
include deposition of co-catalysts to impart complementary functionality to that
found on at least one of the polar surfaces; and growth of reactive epitaxial
oxide layers where structural differences on oppositely poled surfaces, would
yield one side of the crystal unreactive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
have a broad impact through its contributions to education and training and
emerging areas of science and technology. The students working on this project
will get a unique opportunity to develop new strategies for chemical sensing and
reversibly controlling surface chemistry. To meet these objectives the students
will need to develop expertise in a number of fields including surface science,
materials science, chemical kinetics and dynamics, and spectroscopy. Because of
the large polarizations that develop in ferroelectrics, the results promise to
broadly impact chemical sensing by making new types of chemical devices such as
chemical switches where adsorption on the ferroelectric is sufficient to turn on
a field effect transistor without requiring any gate voltage or even a gate
electrode. Laying the groundwork for creating catalysts whose activity or
selectivity can be altered by applying an electric field will impact catalysis
by providing a new reversible lever to control reactions, which will
particularly impact the emerging area of microreactors.