* 0809914
* SGER: Support of Research Involving Captive Spotted Hyenas
* BIO,IOS
* 12/15/2007,05/31/2010
* Kay Holekamp, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 05/31/2010
* USD 200,000.00

Little is currently known about how prenatal exposure to androgenic hormones
influences aggressive behavior in adult mammals, or about how variation in early
androgen exposure ultimately affects survival and reproduction. We propose to
investigate these questions using spotted hyenas as subjects. In striking
contrast to other female mammals, female spotted hyenas are bathed in the womb
with high concentrations of androgens, which are traditionally thought of as
male hormones. Interestingly, spotted hyenas are also sex-role reversed relative
to other mammals, in that females are far more aggressive than males. Spotted
hyenas are therefore ideal model organisms for studying effects of early
androgen exposure on the development of aggressive behavior, its neural and
hormonal mediation in adulthood, and its fitness consequences. A large-scale
experiment is under way in which female spotted hyenas are treated throughout
pregnancy with anti-androgens, and the offspring resulting from those
pregnancies are later evaluated as adults, with respect to their aggressive
behavior, nervous system, and reproductive tract. Availability of the captive
hyenas also permits researchers to test the "social brain" hypothesis, which
suggests that the evolution of large brains and great intelligence were favored
in primates by selection pressures associated with life in complex societies. If
so, then cognitive abilities and nervous systems with primate-like attributes
should have evolved convergently in non-primate mammals living in large,
elaborate societies, in which social dexterity enhances individual fitness. The
societies of spotted hyenas are remarkably similar to those of old-world
primates with respect to size, structure, and patterns of competition and
cooperation. These similarities set the stage for a unique comparative analysis
of cognition and neural organization, utilizing a social carnivore. In addition
to shedding significant new light on the neural mediation of both aggression and
intelligence, this research offers unique training opportunities for
undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral scientists in the areas of
neuroendocrinology, comparative endocrinology, behavioral neuroscience and
cognitive science