* 0809644
* Collaborative Research: Time-Dependent Hydrothermal Convection within the Great Basin Nevada
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Mark Person, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 09/30/2011
* USD 243,826.00

Groundwater flow systems within the Great Basin, Nevada are remarkable in many
respects. Despite the arid conditions and relatively low permeability volcanic
rocks and basin fill, this region hosts active geothermal systems and world
class Eocene age gold deposits. Temperature profiles, fluid inclusion studies,
and isotopic evidence suggest that modern and fossil hydrothermal systems share
many common features including the absence of a clear magmatic fluid source,
discharge areas restricted to fault zones, and remarkably high temperatures (
&gt;200 째C) at shallow depths (200-1500 m). Many of the Great Basin geothermal
systems exhibit some of the highest shallow crustal heat flow levels ever
recorded ( &gt; 2000 mW/m2 at Beowawe) within the continental crust. Geochemical
and isotopic data collected at the Beowawe geothermal system suggests that fluid
circulation is deep (&gt; 5 km) and comprised of relatively unexchanged
Pleistocene meteoric water with small 채18O (&lt; 2.5 ?) shifts from the meteoric
water line (MWL). Fossil ore-forming hydrothermal systems associated with
Carlin-type gold mineralization have similar temperature patterns but exhibit
fluid-rock interactions with larger 채18O shifts of 5 to 20 ? from the
MWL.&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this proposal is to understand the three-dimensional
plumbing, fluid flow impelling mechanisms, and temporal evolution of modern and
fossil hydrothermal flow systems within the Great Basin. We wish to evaluate two
end member questions regarding the nature of hydrothermal circulation within the
Great Basin: A) Is flow restricted to high permeability fault planes driven by
free-convection? or B) is flow driven by water-table topographic gradients with
some combination of matrix and fault controlled fluid circulation? Because of
the lack of broad low heat flow anomalies adjacent to Great Basin geothermal
fields, we suspect that these flow systems must be episodic in nature due to
permeability reduction associated with silica mineralization. By including the
systematics of silica precipitation (and associated porosity/permeability
reduction), we hope to constrain the duration of these geothermal systems. We
will develop a suite of 3D, single-phase, hydrothermal models using a new
parallel finite element code (PGEOFE) for two field sites within the Great
Basin. We will develop geologically/geophysically constrained, three-dimensional
hydrothermal models of the modern Beowawe and fossil Carlin geothermal systems;
two sites with rich , isotopic, geochemical and geothermal data sets. Using
LaGrit mesh generation software, these hydrogeologic models will honor known
fault geometries, widths, and stratigraphy. A unique feature of the proposed
work is that we will use multiple constraints including temperature profiles,
shallow heat flow maps, fluid/rock 채 18O composition, and the age of hot springs
deposits to test our models. We will also develop more sophisticated reactive-
transport geochemical models using PFLOTRAN incorporating porosity-enhancing
carbonate dissolution reactions to constrain how long the Carlin flow systems
remained active before becoming clogged by gangue mineralization. By dating
organic matter (pollen) within the hot springs deposits at Beowawe using 14C
dating methods, we hope to determine whether or not these hot springs deposits
formed during a single event or in several episodes.&lt;br/&gt;Our study may
help document the existence of time-dependent natural convection systems within
the Great Basin. Understanding the mechanisms and patterns of fluid circulation
within this region is of great societal relevance because this region may soon
host our nation?s high level nuclear wastes. The project will support two
graduate students at New Mexico Tech and University of Missouri at Columbia.