* 0809643
* Archaeological Survey of Late Postclassic Tlaxcala, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Richard Blanton, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2010
* USD 117,028.00

The Mesoamerican Late Postclassic Period (ca. CE 1200-1520) featured radical
transformations in society, culture, and demography. World-system exchanges of
valuable goods grew in volume as did competition for trade routes and raw
materials. The Central Mexican Highlands emerged as Mesomerica's major economic
and political core zone, and here economic change spurred political change as
large empires asserted control over the growing economic system. A sorting-out
period of competition between imperial aspirants was finally resolved as the
Aztec Triple Alliance (Aztec Empire) consolidated control over the Central
Highlands and beyond. Wars between Central Mexican polities were among the
bloodiest and most closely-fought during this period. While the Empire was
eventually able to dominate, one polity alone, Tlaxcala, remained unconquered
(this is highly relevant to later colonial history, since Cort√©s would not have
defeated the Aztecs except for the fact that he allied with free Tlaxcala). The
goal of this project is to combine ethnohistoric and archaeological data to
better understand how the Tlaxcalans successfully resisted imperial
incorporation. What this project's research has discovered to date, mostly from
ethnohistoric sources, is that during the post-1300 period the Tlaxcalans
crafted a new political regime that, although borrowing from some conventions of
Nahua political culture, in many ways radically departed from them. Most
notably, the Tlaxcalans rejected the typical pattern of Nahua rulership in favor
of a council-based form of government that allowed voice to a broad cross-
section of the polity's population. Secondly, new modes of recruitment to
official positions were instituted that favored achievement over noble status.
Both of these strategies also aimed at the effective incorporation of diverse
ethnic groups into the governing body and society more broadly. As a result, the
polity attracted large numbers of persons who had emigrated from imperial areas
as political dissidents or to escape political turmoil and war. A key strategy
of the Tlaxcalan state-builders was the foundation of a new capital center,
located on a high ridge-line and adjacent low hills near the polity's
geographical center. This settlement both symbolized the new polity, and forged
a settlement system consistent with council-based rule and military defense.
Prior research by this project indicates that the location chosen for the
capital had no prior occupation, and that following its founding there was a
flurry of construction that shaped the ridge-line zone and other city zones into
a suitable setting for the new political regime. Mapping and surface collection
of artifacts will confirm the chronology of the capital's foundation and
subsequent rapid population growth, and will confirm preliminary findings of
this project's prior work suggesting that the city-planning represented a
radical departure from Nahua architectural and urban conventions. The goal of
city planning was to create an open and highly connected settlement pattern
interspersed with large open and highly accessible plaza features that might
have served for ritual and market transactions. Lastly, mapping and surface
collection of artifacts will aim to better understand to what degree there was
an economic, as well as political, basis for the center's growth.