* 0809709
* The Geomagnetic Field during the past Million Years
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2013
* Catherine Constable, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 05/31/2013
* USD 479,999.00

The geomagnetic field is an important part of Earth's environment, serving as a
shield from cosmic rays and protecting Earth's atmosphere from the solar wind.
The internal field is maintained by the geodynamo, the name given to dynamical
processes in Earth's liquid outer core that are influenced by thermal and
compositional convection. Paleomagnetic data from lava flows and sediments will
be used to study long term structure and temporal change of the geomagnetic
field, which are considered likely to reflect thermal or compositional
geographical heterogeneities on the core-mantle boundary, as well as outer core
processes. It is probable that, if such heterogeneities exist, they control the
nature of the geodynamo and provide important insight for understanding deep-
earth processes of broad geophysical interest. Paleomagnetic data also provide
the means to study specific conditions associated with geomagnetic excursions
and reversals and assess whether these events relate to distinct core processes.
Careful assessment of data accumulated over the past decade has generated
challenges to earlier views about paleosecular variation, that may prove
important for ground-truth of numerical geodynamo models and give corresponding
insight for core dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two distinct strategies will be
exploited: the first is for lava flow data which have uneven geographic and
temporal sampling but are amenable to statistical modeling; the second is for
times series of data acquired from sediments, which have so far lacked reliable
intensity calibrations, and may suffer from temporal smoothing or from
undocumented temporal variations in sediment accumulation. The investigators
propose the following:&lt;br/&gt;1. Update and assess the global lava data
compilation for improved geographic coverage;&lt;br/&gt;2. Construct time-
averaged magnetic field models for the past &lt;br/&gt;million years with
appropriate temporal and spatial resampling; 3. Use a parametric model based on
the paleomagnetic power spectrum to include temporal covariance in statistical
models for paleosecular variation; 4. Construct a limited resolution time
varying geomagnetic field model for 0-1 Ma; 5. Investigate more detailed time
varying field models for geomagnetic excursions and the most recent reversal; 6.
Use results from the foregoing activities to evaluate dynamo
processes.&lt;br/&gt;