* 0809216
* Probing Highly Unstable Organic Molecules with Matrix Isolation Spectroscopy and Photochemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2013
* Robert Sheridan, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 06/30/2013
* USD 428,800.00

Probing Highly Unstable Organic Molecules with Matrix Isolation Spectroscopy and
Photochemistry

Intellectual Merit

This proposal describes a plan for the generation and investigation of organic
molecules whose properties are at the limits of stability and reactivity. The
proposed systems will be investigated primarily at cryogenic temperatures by
matrix isolation methods, with IR and UV/visible spectroscopy. These results
will be complemented by collaborative laser flash photolysis studies both in
solution and in low temperature solid media, which will provide important
reaction rate data. Density Functional Theoretical calculations will play a
significant role in aiding the spectroscopic characterization of these systems
and in initial examinations of their electronic and structural properties. With
collaborators, applications of higher level theory will also be used to explore
the complex electronic structures of these species in greater depth, as well as
quantum mechanical tunneling in their reactions. Primary objectives of the
project include the following: (1) New, highly strained cyclic cumulenes and
related species will be sought, and efforts will be made to understand their
unusual electronic structures through a combination of spectroscopy and
calculational modeling; (2) Unimolecular and bimolecular reactions of carbenes
and carbocations at very low temperatures will be investigated, and new
instances of quantum mechanical tunneling will be sought; (3) Extremely strained
bridgehead alkenes, as well as mechanistic details of their formation, will be
investigated; (4) A new collaborative project will attempt to utilize highly-
sensitive laser cavity ring-down spectroscopy to explore the kinetics of low-
temperature tunneling reactions in solid media. The above studies will revolve
around a variety of halo- and, in particular, trifluoromethylcarbenes as
starting points.

Broader Impact

The new high-energy organic reactive intermediates that will be investigated in
this proposed work have relevance to such broad areas as interstellar chemistry,
combustion, soot formation, fullerene production, magnetic materials, enzymatic
transformations and organic synthesis. Moreover, these investigations will
provide new information on systems which are widely utilized for photoaffinity
labeling and offer the potential for discovery of new labeling agents. These
studies will provide experimental data on molecules which pose significant
challenges for theory. Scientists have long sought to understand the effects of
quantum mechanical tunneling in a very wide variety of systems, ranging from
enzyme kinetics to interstellar reactions; the proposed studies promise to
provide unique information on the tunneling reactions of organic molecules, both
at very low temperatures and in solution. Collaborations with a theoretical
group, and with solution and solid state laser spectroscopy groups, broaden the
applicability of this work to many areas in science. The investigations will
offer especially broad training for students and co-workers, including organic
synthesis, sophisticated spectroscopy, photochemistry, physical organic
techniques, and modern theoretical methodology.