* 0809612
* SGER: Channel Modeling and Adaptive Transmitter/Receiver Design for Outdoor Ultrawideband Communication Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2008,08/31/2009
* Hans Hallen, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Andreas Weisshaar
* 08/31/2009
* USD 74,861.00

Integrative, Hybrid and Complex Systems&lt;br/&gt;Alexandra Duel-
Hallen&lt;br/&gt;Channel Modeling and Adaptive Transmitter/Receiver Design for
Outdoor Ultrawideband Communication Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this research is to alleviate potential outages in outdoor
ultrawideband communications systems due to shadowing and other challenging
propagation environments by exploiting the frequency-dependent distortion of
individual multipath components. The approach is to create a novel physical
model and to use it in testing robust receiver algorithms and adaptive
transmission methods for outdoor ultrawideband systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: A novel outdoor ultrawideband channel
model that provides typical and challenging data sets and insights required for
designing and validating communications methods is developed. Robust low-
complexity receivers and adaptive transmission methods for ultrawideband radio
frequency channels with frequency dependent propagation gains are investigated.
The transformative idea involves transmission of pulses either in the lower (up
to 1 GHz) or upper (above 3 GHz) band of the ultrawideband spectrum (as
specified by the Federal Communication Commission's mask), depending upon which
is stronger. Ultrawideband research to date has focused on transmission of
pulses only in the upper band. The benefits and feasibility of selecting
different parts of the spectrum adaptively are exploited in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The project advances the state of
the art in physical wireless channel modeling and ultrawideband transceiver
algorithms. It has the potential to improve physical layer ultrawideband systems
and cross-layer wireless network design. This research is an interdisciplinary
effort in communication theory, physics, and signal processing. Through thesis
and class projects this research will provide diverse graduate and undergraduate
students with versatile skills essential for future career success. &lt;br/&gt;