* 0809470
* NIRT:    Intuitive Toxicology and Public Engagement
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2007,08/31/2012
* David Berube, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Layne
* 08/31/2012
* USD 1,419,221.00

Introduction. It is well documented that inexpert audiences reason and react
differently than experts when exposed to information about toxicological risks,
but almost none of the existing studies have examined how the public and experts
react differently to risks associated specifically with the applied
nanosciences. To address this weakness, we propose to reveal which factors are
most significant in affecting public perception of the risks of applied
nanosciences and what, if any, relationship exists between the modes of public
deliberation, sources of information (e.g. use of new media), and the effects of
new information on risk perception. Five methodological stages are proposed:
refine and develop key variables and instruments (stage 1), determine the
contribution of variables to perceived risk (stage 2), elucidate the effect of
civic engagement and new media on risk perception (stage 3), verify key
variables related to risk perception (stage 4), and provide outreach to the
public (stage 5). Stage 1 will be accomplished by hosting an interdisciplinary
conference to isolate key variables and to produce appropriate instruments with
which we can assess public perceptions of the risks of applied nanosciences.
After refining our methodology based on the proceedings of the conference, we
will conduct a set of Delphi rounds to determine what are the differences
between public and expert perceptions of the risks of applied nanosciences
(stage 2), paying particular attention to differences based on sources of
information and variables that amplify or attenuate perceptions of risk. Drawing
on the findings of the Delphi rounds, the research team will hold civic
engagement events (stage 3), bringing together non-expert citizens and a variety
of experts. Observation and coding of the events will address the effect of
civic engagement on public and expert perceptions of risk. We will test whether
a relationship exists between modes of deliberative interaction and changes in
perceptions of risk, as influenced by the new media as a source of information
on risk and deliberative interaction. For stage 4, focus groups on the use of
nanoscience in food preparation and packaging) will verify and narrow the key
variables that affect public perception of the risk of applied nanosciences. For
the final stage (5), this project concludes with a workshop to report
conclusions and generate criticisms and future directions for research.

Intellectual Merit. This project will produce an especially timely heuristic for
the projection of public responses to applied nanosciences, given issues of
toxicity, roles of new media, and applies its theoretical findings to a case
instant examining public perception to nanotoxicity issues and agri-food.

Broader Impact. The results will reveal specific variables and combinations of
variables that affect public perceptions of the risks of applied nanosciences
equipping policymakers, researchers, industry, and public participants with a
greater capacity for productive public engagements and discussions about how to
respond to those risks. This work will impact public awareness and provide us
with the essential guidance to better enable future communication on the risks
of nanotechnology and models for effective civic engagement. This project
examines the educational, economic, social, organization, and ethical changes
associated with support for, design of, and results from inventions and
innovations involve active nanostructures and nanosystems.