* 0809450
* STTR Phase I: Wireless Sensing of Body Movement: Detection and Evaluation of Lameness in Horses
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2008,12/31/2009
* Kevin Keegan, Equinosis LLC
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 12/31/2009
* USD 199,524.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I project focuses on lameness
which is one of the most common health problems for horses. Treatment is most
effective in the earliest stages of lameness, however the subjective diagnostic
methods currently used by large animal are imprecise and inaccurate. To improve
the quality of lameness evaluation, the startup company Equinosis is leversaging
research at the University of Missouri to develop a field-ready, portable,
wireless body-sensor-based system that can diagnose the affected limb and
severity of lameness in horses sooner and more effectively than current methods.
This computer-driven technology determines the degree of lameness by measuring
the head and pelvic movements of horses. In the proposed project, Equinosis will
evaluate the patterns of head and pelvic motions of horses with definite
diagnoses of naturally-occurring and experimentally-induced (temporary)
lameness. The objective of this work will be to verify both the technology and
University of Missouri research data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of this research may extend beyond the initial goals of improved
diagnosis and earlier, more effective treatment of lameness in horses. While
Equinosis has identified lameness in horses as its initial commercialization
target, the company believes that this patent-pending technology can be extended
to detect other ailments in other animal species. Further development of the
technology could eventually assist in the diagnosis of medical issues for
humans, especially in those cases where the patient has referred pain or cannot
communicate symptoms clearly to medical professionals.