* 0809608
* Collaborative Research: Determining Triggers for Subduction Accretion and Tectonic Erosion in a Mesozoic Accretionary Complex, Alaska
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2013
* Jeffrey Amato, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 07/31/2013
* USD 188,033.00

Accretionary prisms form as sediments are collected (i.e., accreted) and
complexly deformed at the down-going edge of a subducting oceanic plate.
Accretionary prisms provide evidence of convergence in the geologic record and
are a significant mechanism for the growth of continental crust. Some
accretionary prisms in subduction zones experience long periods of erosion,
rather than accretion, which has led the PIs to propose investigating the
triggers for accretion vs. erosion. The Chugach terrane in Alaska has long been
considered as a type example of an accretionary prism. The PIs will relate rock-
type variations in the accretionary prism to major tectonic events in North
America. Structural geology and detrital zircon ages will be used to determine
if these variations represent distinct accretionary episodes or a continuum of
accretion. They will study the flysch to constrain its accretionary history
using regional geology as a proxy for sediment supply. This project will
elucidate processes of subduction erosion that impact general models of
geochemical cycling in the Earths interior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geologists
have long realized that many of the features of the Earth, as well as the causes
of natural hazards, are related to the processes by which the large tectonic
plates move into the interior of the Earth during subduction. Subduction leads
to volcanism, such as that seen in the Cascades, and subduction caused the
largest earthquakes ever recorded, such as in Alaska in 1964. Studying the
sediment accreted above the subducting plate will help us understand this
subduction process. In addition, accretionary prisms have the potential to host
mineral deposits and could provide a source of methane that would enhance global
warming. This project will also help us to understand the history of Alaska and
provide for the education of undergraduate and graduate students at minority-
serving institutions in the southwest U.S.