* 0809448
* Collaborative Research: Tectonic and Magmatic Implications of a Mid-Crustal, Sheeted Complex in a Tilted Arc Section, California
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Scott Paterson, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 07/31/2011
* USD 173,989.00

A sheeted plutonic complex exposed within a tilted mid-crustal section in the
eastern Transverse Ranges of California, including Joshua Tree National Park
(JTNP), will be examined in detail. The section provides a wonderful opportunity
for analysis of (1) the depth dependent physical changes in, and growth of, a
magma plumbing system; (2) the relative importance of source region
heterogeneity, contamination, and in situ crystal-liquid fractionation in
forming compositional diversity in plutonic systems, and (3) the role of mid-
crustal detachments and/or vertical deformation partitioning in forming orogen-
scale sheeted plutonic complexes. Field mapping and detailed structural analyses
combined with geochronology and geochemistry of intrusive units will allow
testing of a series of hypotheses. One goal is to determine whether upper and
lower crustal plutons and the underlying sheeted complex formed synchronously
and thus reflect an abrupt depth-dependent change in petrogenesis and intrusive
style during continental margin arc construction. They will also test the
hypotheses that the complex represents both a zone of magma transfer, with the
creation of vertical pathways, and a site for hybridization that formed magmas
parental to upper crustal plutons and explosive volcanic rocks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal is to expand our understanding of orogenesis
along plate boundaries in the middle and deeper parts of continental crust. This
study will dramatically affect our knowledge of vertical changes in the physical
and chemical processes operating in magmatic plumbing systems that feed
volcanoes. The research will be concentrated within the boundaries of JTNP and
will have important positive impact on public education through geoscience
outreach and interpretive activities. Over the last five years, the PIs have
developed collaborations with Park Service staff at JTNP and with its
interpretive arm, the Desert Institute. They will work with the Park and the
U.S. Geological Survey to complete a geologic map and improve understanding of
the Park's geology, with a focus on major events in the volcanic and structural
evolution that influenced formation of the Park's landscape. Further outreach
will extend that commitment through development of field trips and lectures, and
will translate the results to assist park staff in enhancing public educational
and curriculum materials. At USC and IUPUI graduate and undergraduate education
in the geosciences will be strengthened through exceptional field, classroom and
laboratory experiences, including excellent opportunities for underrepresented
student groups.