* 0809745
* Magnetic Effects on Electron Transfer Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2011
* Johna Leddy, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 06/30/2011
* USD 480,001.00

In this research supported by the Analytical and Surface Science Chemistry
Program, magnetic effects on electron transfer processes are investigated and
modeled. Electron transfer processes and magnetic fields are ubiquitous and
coupled through the electron spin, but the role of magnetic fields in electron
transfer is poorly understood. From our prior work, magnetic modification of
electrodes substantially enhances currents for academically interesting redox
probes and for technologically important power sources including fuel cells and
batteries. In this project, models for magnetically enhanced reaction kinetics
will be developed by imposing magnetic field and spin terms on extant models of
electron transfer. The models will be tested against existing data and data
newly collected in light of the modeling results. The models will advance
theoretical and experimental science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some broader impacts
of facilitating electron transfer rates by magnetic modification are apparent
from our prior work: fuel cells with higher power density and carbon monoxide
tolerance, platinum catalysts tolerant to carbon monoxide, and alkaline
batteries with higher accessible energy density that are also made rechargeable.
All are potentially transformative technologies. Appreciation of why magnetic
fields facilitate these processes will advance the understanding of electron
transfer reactions as well as lead to markedly more efficient development of
other technologies. The project is highly multidisciplinary and integrates
distinct fields of chemistry, a research matrix that leads to better trained
students.