* 0809013
* Affinity Interactions in Capillary Separations
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Robert Kennedy, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Lin He
* 07/31/2012
* USD 420,000.00

Professor Robert T. Kennedy and his group at the University of Michigan are
supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program in the Division of
Chemistry to conceive and implement new methods of measuring proteins and
protein reactions based on miniaturized forms of electrophoresis. Work includes
development of a high-throughput microfluidic "chip" that can collect aqueous
samples as nanoliter volume droplets in a carrier stream of oil and then
separate the contents of the droplets by electrophoresis at unusually fast rates
of 2-5 per second. As a model system, the group is screening for compounds that
can affect certain protein-protein interactions involved in cell signaling. A
second thrust involves a microscale Western blot by which proteins are separated
by sieving electrophoresis in slabs of gel, transferred to a blotting membrane,
and then detected on the membrane by interaction with an antibody. Potential
utility of the resulting miniaturized, low-cost and highly automated Western
blot method based on microfluidic tools will be demonstrated by measuring
proteins secreted from embryos in order to examine their role in embryo
development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development of this new generation of tools
is expected to have impact in fields as diverse as biotechnology, chemical
genomics, drug discovery, clinical diagnostics and fundamental biochemistry. The
tools will be useful to screen libraries of compounds based on their ability to
perturb biochemical interactions, enabling discovery of chemical probes of
biological networks or novel drugs. The Western blot method developed will
enable high-throughput on microscale samples. If sufficiently low cost, the
method may also have application in low-resource environments. The work provides
interdisciplinary training opportunities for graduate and post-doctoral
students, preparing them to make contributions in a variety of fields, but
especially in the areas of biotechnology and bioanalytical chemistry. It is
anticipated that students working on this project will take positions in
industry or academia thus contributing to national science infrastructure.