* 0809802
* Understanding and Controlling Gas-Surface Reactivity with State-Selected Reagents
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2008,12/31/2011
* Arthur Utz, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 12/31/2011
* USD 575,000.00

In this award funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Division of Chemistry, Prof. Arthur Utz of Tufts University will conduct
detailed studies of the chemical reaction dynamics for gas-surface reactions
using laser preparation to perform quantum-state resolved reactivity
measurements on metal surfaces. These studies will be carried out by combining
laser excitation methods with ultra-high vacuum techniques. &lt;br/&gt;One set
of experiments will investigate methane reactivity at surfaces, while another
group will test the size limit for mode specific effects by using larger gas
reactants for which intramolecular vibrational energy redistribution (IVR) is
observed for the isolated molecule in the gas phase. These experiments are
designed to understand the role of internal energy in gas-surface reactions and
test the limits of bond-selective surface chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
ultimate goal of this work is to develop a better understanding of the important
variables that influence gas-surface reactivity, with an aim towards designing
better theories and improved practical applications. The results of this study
will provide theorists with much useful data to test the latest theories. The
results will also provide important guidance in designing practical catalytic
reaction schemes, which are important to industry. Students and postdoctoral
research associates who participate in this research acquire new knowledge and
skills in preparation for advanced studies or entrance into the
scientific/technological job market.&lt;br/&gt;