* 0809571
* Collaborative Research: Integrating Observations of Low-Velocity Fault Zones with Models of Spontaneous Dynamic Earthquake Ruptures
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Benchun Duan, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2010
* USD 75,000.00

Low-velocity fault zones (LVFZs) around many active faults with a reduction in
seismic wave velocities of several to several tens percent relative to wall
rocks have been detected by fault zone trapped waves and geodetic observations
of the coseismic deformation. These LVFZs are mechanically distinct from the
ambient crustal rock, as evidenced by their responses to nearby coseismic
ruptures. A temporal reversal of the healing process of the 1992 Landers fault
zone due to the nearby coseismic rupture of the 1999 Hector Mine earthquake and
a net decrease in seismic velocities of at least 2.5% within the San Andreas
fault zone due to the coseismic rupture of the 2004 M6 Parkfield earthquake have
been documented. Displacements of several millimeters to several centimeters
across several LVFZs due to nearby coseismic ruptures have also been observed by
geodetic surveys. Earthquake source models used in previous studies to examine
these observations of LVFZs are either dislocation (kinematic slip) models or
point source models, which cannot accurately characterize the near-source
dynamic stress and deformation fields. This project utilizes the most advanced
spontaneous dynamic rupture model to investigate responses of LVFZs to nearby
coseismic ruptures. Spontaneous dynamic rupture models build upon physical
principles such as elasticity, elastoplasticity, and friction laws and provide
physical insights to observations from real earthquakes. A finite element method
(FEM) code for simulating spontaneous dynamic ruptures along geometrically
complex faults and wave propagation in complex velocity structures has been
verified in a community-wide code validation effort and is used in this study.
Recent modifications to the FEM, including addition of elastoplastic off-fault
response to dynamic ruptures, allow the PIs to more accurately calculate dynamic
stress field and to better examine responses of LVFZs to coseismic ruptures.
This project also investigates how a LVFZ surrounding a rupturing fault affects
spontaneous dynamic rupture on the fault and near-field ground motion. With
elastoplastic off-fault response included in spontaneous dynamic rupture models,
the PIs examine interactions of inhomogeneous material distribution, off-fault
damage and spontaneous dynamic rupture and effects on near-field ground motion.
&lt;br/&gt;This project integrates observations of LVFZs with models of
spontaneous dynamic ruptures. Compared with kinematic or point source models,
spontaneous dynamic rupture models provide more accurate quantification of how
LVFZs respond to earthquake coseismic ruptures, which has significant
implications for improving our understanding of fault zone mechanics and stress
and strain transfer in fault systems. Observations of LVFZs provide constraints
to parameters in dynamic rupture models, including velocity structure of LVFZs
and material strength (i.e., cohesion and internal friction). These observation-
constrained model parameters can be used to support studies of other significant
questions, such as prediction of strong ground motion at critical facility sites
and in earthquake-prone areas. Results from this study are expected to promote
the integration of observation and theory in earthquake sciences, and to impact
both observation-oriented and theory-oriented communities of earthquake
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;