* 0809205
* Collaborative Research: Evolution of dissolved organic nitrogen (DON) from the headwaters to the catchment outlet: sources, variation with scale, and differences with DOC
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2013
* Delphis Levia, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 09/30/2013
* USD 331,920.00

This proposal seeks to advance our understanding of the transport and fate of
dissolved organic nitrogen (DON) in watersheds. We address three novel questions
which have not been studied previously: (a) what is the relative influence of
terrestrial versus aquatic (in-stream) sources/sinks on DON and bioavailable
(BDON) dynamics at various points along the drainage path? (b) how do DON and
BDON exports vary with catchment scale? and (c) how do DON dynamics differ from
DOC and what mechanisms are responsible for these differences? We address these
questions across varying temporal scales from baseflow to storm events and
across seasons. Contributions of DON from various catchment sources are expected
to change dramatically between baseflow and storm-event conditions while
seasonal changes can especially influence BDON. Catchment sources investigated
include ? precipitation, throughfall, stemflow, forest floor, hillslope soil
water, wetland soil and ground water, groundwater seeps, hyporheic zone, and
streamflow. We will not only investigate how the amounts of DON in various
catchment sources influence DON export, but also investigate how the mobility
(adsorption-desorption kinetics) and lability of various dissolved organic
matter (DOM) constituents (e.g., hydrophobic and hydrophilic fractions) regulate
DON export. Special attention is given to differences in DON and DOC responses
in light of hydrologic flow paths, storm event magnitude and seasonal timing,
antecedent catchment wetness, and redox conditions. We address these questions
across zero- to third-order forested catchments of the Big Elk Creek in NE
Maryland, which are representative of Piedmont catchments in the mid-Atlantic
region. The catchments have already been intensively instrumented, and
preliminary data from the site is available since March 2007. We will implement
end member mixing analysis (EMMA) at multiple points in the catchments to
characterize the spatial pattern of runoff sources and DON contributions.
Innovative, new, spectrofluorometric tools such as specific UV absorbance (SUVA)
and excitation-emission matrices (EEMs) are used to characterize DOM composition
including an in-situ logging fluorometer. A strong interdisciplinary team of
scientists with diverse strengths but complimentary interests will evaluate the
questions. We anticipate that this study will result in the first conceptual
model of DON that characterizes the relative influences of terrestrial and
instream processes across various catchment scales.&lt;br/&gt;Results from this
study will have direct practical implications for: (a) drinking water research
since DON contributes to the formation of toxic disinfection by-products; and
(b) nutrient enrichment of coastal estuaries (e.g., Chesapeake bay) since DON is
bioavailable. An on-line data archive will be created to disseminate the data
and results from this study. This data archive will be linked through the web
site of the Center for Critical Zone (CCZ) at the University of Delaware and the
Delaware Water Resources Center (DWRC). Dissemination of fact sheets to
practitioners in regional offices of the US Natural Resources Conservation
Service, US Forest Service, US EPA, and Maryland?s Forest Service should broaden
the impact of the proposed research. The instrumented watershed will be (is
being) used as a ?demonstration? and educational watershed laboratory. This will
enable us to develop new interdisciplinary partnerships with other scientists
and students within and outside UD. This project will provide valuable
interdisciplinary research experiences for undergraduate and graduate students
from the Bioresources Engineering, Geology, Plant and Soil Sciences, and
Geography Departments. Under-represented groups will be actively recruited by
the PI and Co-PI?s with the intention of filling two or more undergraduate and
graduate assistantships. A female graduate student will be the PhD student on
this project. The final outreach component of this project will involve the Fair
Hill Nature Center and its experienced staff of environmental and experiential
education teachers. The Fair Hill Nature Center is a non-profit entity,
educating k-8 students about responsible environmental stewardship. The Fair
Hill Nature Center educates over 8,000 school children annually. PIs on this
project will be actively involved with the teachers and staff of the Fair Hill
Nature Center staff to provide educational seminars on watersheds, soils, and
forests and will participate in student field trips to the instrumented
watershed.