* 0809036
* I/UCRC: WICAT@VT
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Tamal Bose, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence A. Hornak
* 08/31/2013
* USD 797,107.00

This award establishes Virginia Polytechnic (VT) as a research site of the
Industry/University Collaborative Research Center (IUCRC) for the Wireless
Internet Center for Advanced Technology (WICAT). Other sites of this
collaborative research center include the New York Polytechnic (lead), Auburn
University, Columbia University and the University of Virginia. The mission of
this center is to focus on emerging technologies for wireless internet. Virginia
Polytechnic will be a strong partner of WICAT and will perform research
activities that will be complementary and synergistic with those of the other
WICAT sites. The theme at the Virginia Polytechnic site will be cognitive radio
based wireless networks, with the following thrust areas: Software Defined
Radios, Cognitive Radios, Cognitive Network Test Bed Implementation, Theoretical
Foundations of Wireless Communications, and Wireless Systems Modeling and
Simulation. The test bed will enable researchers from WICAT and others to
implement and test algorithms, protocols, applications and hardware technologies
within a realistic environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Virginia
Polytechnic will make significant contributions to the mission of WICAT. The
effort at Virginia Tech will be a subset of the already existing collaborations
with wireless industry. The quality and quantity of research conducted will
expand the impact of WICAT in technical, educational and outreach activities.
WICAT at VT will include faculty and students from the Northern Virginia Campus
and the Middle Eastern and Northern Africa (VT-MENA) campuses. This will add to
the diversity of faculty and students, and WICAT at VT research site will
emphasize diversity in all selections of faculty, students, and staff. The
affiliation of a large number of industries with the WICAT at VT research site
will provide students with significant opportunities and permanent engineering
positions.&lt;br/&gt;