* 0809821
* Electroless metallization onto polymeric surfaces: synthesis, analysis, and modeling for achieving controlled nanoscale morphologies
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Stephen Kuebler, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 06/30/2012
* USD 469,999.00

This research supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program will
yield new fundamental understanding of the surface chemistry of electroless
metallization onto polymeric surfaces (EMPS). Despite widespread industrial use,
the surface chemistry of EMPS remains poorly understood, so its application is
largely confined to bulk-part fabrication. In particular, it is not known how
chemical and physical parameters affect and may be used to control the nano-
scale morphologies and properties of electrolessly plated metal. The
investigation will enable EMPS to be developed beyond its current status of
"dark art" into a precise enabling process for emerging micro and nano-scale
technologies with quantitative predictability and control. In addition to these
intellectual merits, the project is focuses on a single EMPS system the
deposition of silver onto the cross-linked epoxide "SU8" and involves an
integrated program of preparative chemistry, nano-scale surface analysis, and
simulation. This approach will allow the team to generate deep fundamental
understanding of silver EMPS, yet the understanding gained will apply broadly to
other electroless metallization systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The project will
broadly impact science, engineering, and education by contributing significantly
to our quantitative understanding of fundamental surface chemical and dynamical
processes. This knowledge will elevate EMPS to a widely applied, enabling
process for myriad emerging and high-impact technologies, including micro and
nano-scale device fabrication, heterogeneous catalysis, sensing, and even
diagnostic and clinical medicine. The project provides an outstanding context
for interdisciplinary research training, teaching, and outreach. Young
scientists will develop a unique set of skills, ready to increase the
competitiveness of the United States in chemistry, surface science, materials
science, and nanotechnology. The program directly supports the growth of a new
chemistry PhD program at UCF. The PIs have built diverse groups that actively
involve graduates and undergraduates from varied backgrounds, including
historically underrepresented groups. These students will bring their excitement
for science directly to Central Florida schools through a newly established
peer-to-peer outreach program that will help attract middle school and community
college students to science and engineering careers.&lt;br/&gt;