* 0809440
* RUI: Innovative Determination of Phase Diagrams of Green Surfactants in Water and Ionic Liquids
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2013
* Gerald Van Hecke, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2013
* USD 270,000.00

This project supported by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program employs a
new approach to more quickly and accurately determine the behavior of an
important class of "green" surfactants in various solvents. The surfactants
known as alkyl glucosides are considered "green" as they are derived from
naturally occurring and renewable resources and are largely environmentally and
physiologically benign. Depending on the temperature and the surfactant
concentration in solution, alkyl glucosides assemble into a variety of
aggregates such as spherical micelles and lamellar bilayers. Our approach
monitors the fluorescence signal of a dye that is incorporated in the solvent-
surfactant mixtures at very low concentrations. The dye is sensitive to its
chemical environment and yields a unique signal that reflects the nature of the
aggregate(s) present. One important advantage of this technique is that the
fluorescence signals of the dye in different surfactant aggregates are
independent of each other, and thus the signals from coexisting aggregates can
be detected simultaneously. The fact that the signals can uniquely identify the
aggregates present gives this technique its novelty and power. Phase diagrams
will be prepared to illustrate the aggregates present as a function of
concentration and temperature. As all of the practical and commercial
applications of glucoside surfactants depend critically on knowledge of
surfactant phase diagrams, this project will provide accurate and complete
information to enable preparation of specific aggregates. A particularly
intriguing aspect of this project is to construct and then compare the phase
diagrams of the surfactants in water with the phase diagrams of the same
surfactants in ionic liquids. As the study of surfactant behavior in ionic
liquids is a relatively unexplored area, our investigations of the glucosides in
ionic liquids will make a significant contribution to the available literature
on surfactants in these green solvent systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since the
availability of accurate phase diagrams is important to many disciplines from
materials to biochemistry, this project has the potential for broad
interdisciplinary impact. Furthermore, an important objective of these
investigations is the training of talented undergraduate students in the methods
of research for productive careers in graduate studies or industry. The project
will continue to demonstrate and enhance the feasibility of effective
collaborative student-faculty research in the co-principal investigators'
laboratories at a primarily undergraduate institution leading to publications in
peer-reviewed journals and presentations at scientific venues.