* 0809653
* Collaborative Research:  A Field and Numerical Study of the Morphology, Flow, Sedimentary Processes, and Stability of Sand-Bed Fluvial Bifurcations
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Rudy Slingerland, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 08/31/2012
* USD 136,381.00

Channel bifurcations, wherein one channel splits into two, are the building
blocks of braided, anastomosed, and distributary channel networks. Recent work
has shown that the most common flow partitioning at bifurcations is asymmetric,
and that this asymmetry seems to promote stability. Why and under what
hydrographic and sedimentologic conditions this should be so, remain a puzzle.
Here we propose an integrated field and theoretical investigation of the
morphology, flow, and sedimentary processes of higher shear-stress, natural
river bifurcations, with the objective of understanding and predicting their
dynamical behavior. The field studies will be conducted to encompass two
bifurcating systems with different sedimentation characteristics: i)
distributary channel bifurcations of the Mossy Delta of the Saskatchewan River,
where we have conducted pilot studies concerning bifurcation morphodynamics, and
ii) bifurcations within the Wax Lake delta system, Louisiana, where active
sedimentation is leading to rapid distributary channel growth. Several
bifurcations at each site will be chosen to span a range of morphologic types.
Bed morphology, water surface topography, flow velocity, and sediment transport
rate will be measured at each bifurcation on a closely spaced grid at several
flow stages. The field data will provide boundary and initial conditions for
numerical experiments designed to define the processes and morphological
conditions that lead to inherently unstable bifurcations, and detail the
controlling boundary conditions for stability. Earlier numerical models will be
improved by using Delft3D-FLOW, a morphodynamic model that accounts for: (1)
three-dimensional turbulent unsteady, nonuniform flow, (2) interaction between
bed topography, flow, and both bedload and suspended load, and (3)
morphodynamically interacting erodible banks and bed. Numerical experiments will
allow us to determine the feedback processes that promote stable bifurcations
and predict which channel configurations are stable in the face of
perturbations. We aim to yield a stability diagram for channel bifurcations and
assess the influence of barform dynamics and downstream channel change in
influencing bifurcation stability.&lt;br/&gt; A better understanding and
predictive capability of channel bifurcation behavior would improve flood
forecasting, planning and development of floodplain and channel structures,
channel designs, and the success of stream restoration efforts. The results of
this study also will advance our knowledge of when and where river avulsions
will take. Insofar as it is transformative, it will resolve the differences
among competing stability theories, and produce a model, constrained by the
best-available field data, which can be used to predict the stability and
behavior of these ubiquitous hydrologic and geomorphic
nodes.&lt;br/&gt;Resulting from This Study: This work constitutes the
dissertation topic and financial support for one Ph. D. candidate and will
support one post-doctoral researcher. Two Native American high school students
from the Cumberland House Cree Nation, Saskatchewan will be trained in its
scientific methods. All students will benefit from exposure to a problem
requiring the integration of geomorphology, sediment transport, hydrodynamics,
and morphodynamic modeling.