* 0809084
* 6th US-Japan Seminar on Nanoscale Transport Phenomena---Science and Engineering
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2009
* Gang Chen, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Theodore L. Bergman
* 05/31/2009
* USD 20,000.00

CBET-0809084, Chen

This award partially supports the 6th Japan-US Joint Seminar on Nanoscale
Transport Phenomena?Science and Engineering, which will be held in Boston,
Massachusetts, on July 13-16, 2008. The purpose of this meeting is to continue
this highly successful series of meetings between US and Japanese researchers in
the field of nanoscale transport processes, with particular emphasis on thermal
transport. These meetings have been held every three years, and alternate
between locations in Japan and in the US.

With respect to the intellectual merit of the conference, the study of nanoscale
transport processes remains at the forefront of thermofluids research. Both the
US and the Japanese sides bring their own particular specialties and depths to
this meeting. Traditionally, the Japanese researchers have been very strong at
molecular dynamics simulations, and the US side has exhibited strength in
experimental measurements at the nanoscale. Partly as a result of previous NSF-
supported workshops, the US side has gained considerable expertise in molecular
dynamics computations. It is likely that, likewise, this sixth meeting will
stimulate further exchanges of information that will lead to more advances in
this field.

The broader impacts of the conference include the opportunity for US
researchers, both junior and senior, to meet their Japanese counterparts and to
hold discussions with them at considerable length. A number of US-based graduate
students, and underrepresented minorities and women, will be supported by the
NSF award. Selected papers presented at this meeting will be published in the
journal Nano/Microscale Thermophysical Engineering, which will allow for broad
dissemination of the workshop.

