* 0809443
* Crustal Strength Profiles Across the Brittle-Ductile Transition
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2012
* John Platt, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 06/30/2012
* USD 270,019.00

At about 20 km depth crustal rocks show a transition from the brittle behavior
characteristic of the upper crust to ductile behavior characteristic of most of
the Earths interior. The stress required to deform the ductile rock immediately
below the brittle-ductile transition (BDT) is likely to approximate the bulk
strength of the brittle crust immediately above the BDT. Rocks that have
deformed by ductile processes can preserve microscale features in their
crystalline structure that record the stress level during deformation. If these
rocks have subsequently been brought to the surface (exhumed), we can use
microstructural measurements to determine the strength of the crust around the
BDT. The goal of this work is to obtain better estimates of the strength of the
upper crust. Our measurements will allow us to reconstruct strength profiles of
the continental crust. These will provide reliable data for assessing the
strength of the tectonic plates in areas of active deformation. In particular,
our results will improve mechanical models of the way continental crust responds
to plate motions, with implications for mountain-building processes, the
formation of sedimentary basins that host economically valuable reserves of
petroleum and mineral resources, and the generation of earthquakes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The upper 20-25 km of the continental crust is the coldest
and strongest part of the tectonic plates, and because cold rock is brittle, it
generates most of the earthquakes. The strength and mechanical properties of the
upper crust are fundamental to understanding the way the plates respond to
forces acting on their boundaries and to forces generated internally by gravity.
The bulk strength of the crust is difficult to measure directly, however;
estimates vary by about a factor of ten, because of uncertainties about the
strength of faults, the effect of fluids within the crust, and the temperature
gradient through the crust. In areas of continental rifting and extension, such
as the Basin &amp; Range Province of the western USA, rocks have been exhumed
from the ductile middle crust, cooling through the BDT as they rise to the
surface. During exhumation and cooling, deformation becomes increasingly
localized into narrow shear zones. As a result, different parts of the rock body
record stress levels from different depths. We plan to make measurements of
microstructural features, mineral chemistry, and isotopic composition, to
determine the stress-temperature-time history of rocks from areas affected by
recent extensional tectonics in SE California and in southern Spain. Electron
backscatter diffraction will be used to determine the grain size, grain
misorientation, and crystallographic preferred orientation of dynamically
recrystallized quartz-bearing rocks for stress measurements. Element exchange
between different minerals will be used to calculate chemical equilibria that
are functions of pressure and temperature. Several different radiogenic isotopic
systems will be used to constrain the temperature during exhumation and cooling.
Earthscope has provided generous support for the geochronology component of the
work.