* 0809058
* Spatiotemporal Dynamics and Collective Behavior in Chemical Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Kenneth Showalter, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 07/31/2012
* USD 440,000.00

Kenneth Showalter of West Virginia University is supported by an award from the
Theoretical and Computational Chemistry program for research into the
spatiotemporal dynamics and collective behavior of chemical systems. Partial co-
funding for this award was provided by the Applied Mathematics program in the
Division of Mathematical Sciences. Three main lines of investigation are being
pursued in this work: (i) the collective behavior of particle-like reaction-
diffusion waves; (ii) the synchronization and dynamical quorum sensing behavior
of large populations of oscillatory beads; and (iii) the behavior of collections
of self-propelled catalytic particles. In the first project, populations of
stabilized waves in a distributed photosensitive Belousov-Zhabotinsky (BZ)
medium are being studied to characterize collective behavior in a controlled
laboratory setting. Waves interact via a Lennard Jones type potential and the
origin of different types of collective behavior, such as processional and
rotational modes, is being characterized. In the second project, large
populations of catalyst-loaded beads are studied in catalyst-free BZ reaction
mixtures. The focus of these studies is to examine synchronization and dynamical
quorum sensing behavior in stirred suspensions and spatiotemporal distributed
systems. The third project involves studies of the interactions of self-
propelled catalytic particles in reactant solutions. Silica spheres are prepared
with various metal or enzyme coatings, such as Pt or horseradish peroxidase,
that catalyze the decomposition of a reactant, such as hydrogen peroxide. The
propagation behavior of these particles is then studied as a function of
particle density to determine correlations in velocity leading to collective
behavior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All three lines of research are expected to
yield new and important information about spatiotemporal dynamics and collective
behavior in chemical systems and offer insights into such behavior in biological
systems. The studies of interacting particle-like waves will advance control of
spatiotemporal systems and will offer insights into collective behavior from
laboratory experiments. A better understanding of synchronization and dynamical
quorum sensing mechanisms will be gained in the studies of large populations of
discrete oscillators, offering insights into related dynamics of microorganisms.
The studies of interacting self-propelled catalytic particles will provide new
examples of collective behavior and new chemical model systems for developing an
understanding of complex interactions. The impact of the work is further
broadened through Showalter's participation in outreach activites involving the
International Center for Theoretical Physics that are bringing hands-on research
experiences to scientists in developing countries such as India, Brazil and
Cameroon.