* 0809575
* Metal-mediated dehalogenation reactions relevant to environmental remediation
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Kristopher McNeill, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 07/31/2012
* USD 373,000.00

This award supports the work of Professor Kristopher McNeill at the University
of Minnesota and research of his group on metal-mediated dechlorination pathways
relevant to environmental remediation. Groundwater pollution by
perchloroethylene, trichloroethylene, and other chlorinated solvents is a
widespread problem that threatens our water supply. Metal-mediated
dechlorination processes are at the center of many of the most promising
remediation methods, but very little is known about their mechanistic details.
This is in large part due to the heterogeneous nature of the reactive metal
sites in environmental applications. The research supported by this award is
focused on filling this gap in our knowledge by studying reactions of
chlorinated ethylenes with well-defined metal complexes that model the systems
of environmental interest. Specifically, iron and palladium phosphine complexes
that act as models for the active sites in permeable reactive barriers loaded
with zero-valent iron particles and noble metal hydrogenation catalysts,
respectively, will be studied. The result of these studies will be a deeper
understanding of fundamental reactions that are likely involved in these real-
world systems. This research advances our knowledge of carbon-chlorine
activation reactions, which are central to a wide range of catalytic
transformations. Additionally, the research features an international
collaboration on the measurement of isotope fractionation factors of these
processes will help bridge the gulf between field measurements of dechlorination
reactions and how they relate to their underlying chemical mechanisms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances the commitment of NSF to
sustainability through its focus on technologies for providing clean drinking
water. The project features a dissemination plan that will transfer knowledge
obtained through this research to the broader community of remediation
practitioners. In addition, through the support of the student researchers
involved, this project furthers the mission NSF to educate and train the next
generation of scientists.