* 0809209
* Comprehensive First Principles Approach to Understanding the Electrochemical Interface and Applications to Energy Problems
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2013
* Alfred Anderson, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 06/30/2013
* USD 419,997.00

In this research supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program,
catalytic reaction mechanisms on electrode surfaces will be predicted and
analyzed using a new theory developed in the Anderson lab for studying
electrochemical interfaces. In the two-dimensional version of the new band
theory program, the surface potential is adjusted by adding charge to the
electrode and counter charge in the double layer. The double layer charge
distribution is modeled by a modified Poisson-Boltzmann theory within a
dielectric continuum model. The whole interfacial system is varied to charge
self-consistency, yielding predictions of the Gibbs free energies as functions
of structure and electrode potential. The theory, already found useful for
predicting reversible potentials for forming reaction intermediates adsorbed on
electrode surfaces as functions of potential, will be extended to characterizing
transition state structures and activation energies during electron transfer
reactions on electrode surfaces. Efficient energy conversion and energy storage
will in the future depend more and more on making the best use of the Gibbs
energy of chemical reactions in the form of electrical work and less and less on
the enthalpy of chemical reactions in the form of heat and pressure-volume work.
Catalysis is required to generate electrical work directly from fuels, whether
by enzymes in biological systems or catalytic electrodes in fuel cells. It is
critical to develop an understanding of electrocatalysis at the level of
molecular structures and reaction mechanisms. Work toward this goal using the
theory developed in the Anderson lab has begun and the research supported by the
program will yield significant advancements. Two major thrusts are (i) gaining
fundamental understanding of the factors that so far limit the efficiency and
stability of platinum electrocatalysts in fuel cells, (ii) applying the insight
gained to proposing new electrocatalysts, possibly not including platinum, that
are as yet undiscovered. The results will be helpful to a broad scientific
community and should speed the development of efficient portable electric power
sources for transportation and mobile electronic device applications.