* 0809445
* Collaborative Research: Coseismic slip, afterslip, and viscous relaxation in response to great 2006-2007 Kuril earthquakes: Evidence from the regional GPS network
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2010
* Jeffrey Freymueller, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2010
* USD 27,617.00

In 2006-2007, two great earthquakes ruptured a 600-km-long Kuril arc segment,
one of the most conspicuous gaps in subduction-zone seismic activity. The
earthquakes, the 15 November 2006 event with the thrust-faulting mechanism and
the 13 January 2007 event with the extensional mechanism, had magnitudes 8.3 and
8.1, respectively. They make one of the largest earthquake doublets to occur in
the era of space geodesy. The region of the central Kurils had not experienced a
single great earthquake since 1915 despite a rapid plate convergence rate. In
contrast, the segments to the north (Kamchatka) and south (the southern Kurils
and Hokkaido) each had several great earthquakes within the last century. The
Kuril subduction zone was never studied using space geodesy before 2006, when
the research team of this project installed continuous GPS stations over the
whole Kuril arc, several months before both great earthquakes in the central
Kurils. In 2007, additional GPS stations were installed on the Kuril Islands
accessible only by ship. In total, there are now seven functioning continuous
stations and several sites measured by campaign surveys. The Kuril GPS network
allowed the scientists to capture static coseismic offsets and rapid postseismic
deformation at many sites, and to develop a preliminary model of coseismic slip
distribution in earthquake ruptures. The current phase of the project enables a
detailed study of the postseismic process following the 2006-2007 earthquakes.
The focus of this phase is on acquiring and investigating irreplaceable data on
the early postseismic transient signal. The project has the following goals: (1)
develop improved coseismic slip models for the 2006-2007 events consistent with
all available geodetic and seismic information; (2) develop a consistent model
of postseismic deformation including both afterslip and viscoelastic relaxation,
and compare to other events. The fundamental problems addressed here are: How
long-lived is the postseismic deformation following great 2006-2007 Kuril
earthquakes, and how does it compare with events at other subduction zones? Are
postseismic models for the Kuril earthquake doublet consistent with the apparent
lack of any long-lived postseismic deformation from the 1952 southern Kamchatka
earthquake with a magnitude &gt;9? The answers to these questions will help to
make a step forward in understanding of the seismic cycle at subduction zones.
The scientific results will directly contribute to earthquake hazard assessments
by improving the accuracy of earthquake scenarios and probabilities for the
Kuril subduction zone. This project continues and strengthens collaborative ties
between US universities and the Russian Academy of Sciences