* 0809201
* Heteroditopic Fluoroionophores for Zinc Ion - Coordination Chemistry, Photophysics, and Sensing Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Lei Zhu, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 07/31/2012
* USD 330,000.00

Specific Objectives: Based on preliminary studies on the ditopic trans-
phenylvinyl-bipy framework, the group will seek to (1) incorporate highly
sensitive and selective zinc-coordination motifs into the trans-phenylvinyl-bipy
framework to afford zinc-selective ditopic fluorescent probes with both
sensitivity and effective concentration range suitable for physiological
imaging; (2) establish general principles for achieving highly efficient
intramolecular photoinduced electron transfer (PET) of trans-arylvinylbipy-based
ditopic ligands in the absence of zinc, which is critical in creating large
fluorescence contrast between free and zinc-bound forms of the probe molecules;
(3) further develop triazolyl-containing tetradetate ligands with high
sensitivity and selectivity to zinc that are amenable to ditopic ligand design;
(4) develop zinc probes with both high sensitivity and large effective
concentration ranges with long excitation and emission wavelengths deep in the
visible region to prevent autofluorescence and photodamage of live biological
samples. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Intellectual Merit: (1) The heteroditopic
fluoroionophoric system provides a solution to a highly challenging scientific
problem, which is the development of fluorescent probes for zinc ion that are
effective over its entire 6 orders of magnitude physiological concentration
range. The success of the proposed project will provide fluorescent probes for
zinc ion capable of quantitative profiling of zinc flux in biochemical processes
over large concentration ranges. Such information is indispensable to the
elucidation of the physiological roles of zinc, and, in turn, will help in the
diagnosis and cure of diseases including Alzheimer's where disruption of zinc
homeostasis is evident. (2) The designed molecules provide an excellent platform
for studying the impact of metal ion coordination on the excited states of
organic molecules, which is important on a fundamental level. In summary, the
success of this application will not only fill the gap in the development of
live cell imaging technologies targeting the physiologically important zinc
whose concentrations may vary over enormous ranges during cellular events, but
also advance understanding of zinc coordination chemistry and coordination-
driven photophysical processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Broader Impact: (1) The
long-term objective of the PI's research program is the development of sensing
technologies targeting substances of large physiological concentration ranges in
signal transduction and metabolic pathways based upon fundamental understanding
of coordination-driven photophysical processes. The principle of extending the
analytical concentration range proposed herein for zinc ion can be applied to
neutral and anionic species. (2) The coordination chemistry and photophysical
processes studied in this application are expected to impact the development of
technologies in other areas such as molecular logics and molecular electronics.
(3) The diverse range of students participating in this project will receive
interdisciplinary training encompassing synthetic, coordination, and analytical
chemistry.