* 0809335
* Synthetic Integration of Inorganic-Organic Functionality in Hybrid Semiconductors Based on Chalcogenide Clusters
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Pingyun Feng, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 06/30/2012
* USD 390,000.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program
supports research by Professor Pingyun Feng at the University of California at
Riverside to develop solid-state materials based on chalcogenide tetrahedral
clusters and various functional organic species. The proposed research seeks to
explore structural and functional diversity of organic molecules to control the
crystallization process and structures of chalcogenide clusters and frameworks
and to modify and enhance optical and electrooptical properties of resulting
chalcogenide clusters and composite materials (integrating both clusters and
functional organic components). Three unique types of composite materials will
be targeted in which chalcogenide clusters are integrated (1) with optically
active metal-complex or organic dye molecules into the dye-sensitized system,
(2) with organic electron acceptors into the charge-transfer system or stable
radicals, and (3) with ligands with extended systems into covalently organized
multi-dimensional systems. With new composite materials developed, this project
will investigate their electronic, optical, and photoelectrochemical properties
for potential use in applications such as solar energy conversion into fuels or
electricity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New materials developed in this project could
lead to new applications in solar energy conversion, chemical sensors, and
biosensors. UC Riverside has a high African-American and Hispanic enrollment and
strongly encourages undergraduate research. The proposed work will provide
training for students in synthesis, structural characterization, and property
measurements and prepare them for careers in science. &lt;br/&gt;