* 0809428
* Collaborative Research: Testing Mechanical Models of Himalayan Orogenesis in NW India
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Matthew Kohn, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 07/31/2012
* USD 274,969.00

The Himalaya and Tibet stand as the type example of a continent-continent
collision, thus the Indo-Asian orogen serves as a paradigm for collisional
orogenesis and a testing ground for tectonic models. One overriding tectonic
issue is what controls the structural evolution of an orogen. Classic models of
thrust development (the critical taper model) do not preclude weak portions of
the crust but suggest that these do not work in concert to induce flow; in
contrast recent thermal-mechanical models (channel flow models) treat the middle
and lower crust as profoundly weak and in concert with erosion dominate
metamorphic and structural development. This project, carried out by researchers
from the University of Alabama and Boise State University in collaboration with
scientists at the Wadia Institute of Himalayan Geology, aims to discriminate
between these two opposing views by exploiting the radically different pressure-
temperature-time kinematic histories predicted by these models. Specifically,
the team will carry out integrated structural, petrologic, stratigraphic, and
geochronologic investigations in the Himachal-Uttaranchal in northwestern India
to address three basic questions regarding Himalayan thrust transport and
tectonic evolution: (1) How do stratigraphic and structural packages correlate
along strike from Nepal? Field mapping and structural analysis will permit
stratigraphic correlations from Nepal to India and define thrust geometries and
shortening amounts via balanced cross sections. Thin section, Nd isotope, and
detrital zircon analysis will help define major lithotectonic units, which is
critical to accurate placement of different thrust sheets. (2) What was the
pressure-temperature-time evolution of the major Himalayan thrusts? Petrologic
and chronologic characterization of monazite grains via electron and ion
microprobes will be related to the temperature-time evolution of each rock,
yielding timing of thrust movement and rates of heating and cooling. New more
accurate and precise trace element thermometers are use to determine peak
pressure-temperature conditions and distributions and paths. (3) How does the
kinematic history in Himachal-Uttaranchal compare with Nepal?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main purpose of this research is to address a
fundamental and controversial question in modern tectonics: Is the overall
behavior of the crust during mountain building better explained by the critical
taper model or the more recent channel flow model. The critical taper theory
argues that a wedge-shaped mass of deformed rocks develops in front of a rigid
backstop resulting in forward propagating thrust faults. The channel flow model
argues that focused erosion at the mountain range front forces deformation in a
weak channel in the mid- to lower crust and partially molten rocks tunnel toward
the mountain front. This project also support the research education of graduate
and undergraduate students, fosters improved scientific collaborations among
institutions both within the United States and in India, and supports an
underrepresented group among the geosciences professoriate.