* 0809789
* Search for Physics Beyond Standard Model at LHC
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2013
* Qaisar Shafi, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Marc Sher
* 08/31/2013
* USD 20,000.00

The standard model of particle physics has been very successful in predicting
how weak, electromagnetic and strong interactions behave up to energies so far
accessible at present accelerators (1 TeV at the Tevatron at Fermilab in
Chicago). However many fundamental questions are not addressed in the standard
model and the standard model does not incorporate the fact that the neutrino,
the lightest particle of spin 1/2, has a small mass. Two candidates for
explaining some of the puzzles that exist are extending the standard model by
doubling the number of particles via using a Supersymmetric extension of the
Standard Model, which adds a particle of integer spin to every particle of 1/2
integer spin. Thus associated with the electron, which has spin 1/2, would be a
scalar particle (0 spin) called the selectron. (This particle has not yet been
found). Another approach is to assume our world is a lower dimensional surface
(or membrane) in a higher dimensional space. This proposal by two groups, one at
the Bartol Research Institute led by Qaisir Shafi and one at the Center for
Theoretical Physics at the British University in Cairo, Dr. S. Khalil is to
enable four Scientists from each institution to visit the other institution each
year in order to foster their collaborative research on Large Hadron Collider
related physics. As further "glue" for the collaboration the proposal is for a
Post-doc to be hired at the Center for Theoretical Physics to work full time on
the proposed project. The two teams will investigate both types of extensions of
the standard model. This investigation is very important because next year at
CERN in Geneva Switzerland, the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) will start operation
and will hopefully find new phenomena that will suggest what the extensions of
the Standard Model should be. Other ways of accessing the highest energies come
from astrophysical observation of the cosmic background radiation, and by
understanding the cosmological implications of extensions of the standard model.
More specifically, this group of scientists intends to investigate
supersymmetric extensions of the SM and their potential signatures at colliders,
in Astrophysical observations and cosmological implications. In particular they
intend to study the question of whether Supersymmetry can significantly modify
the CP asymmetry in B-decays compared to the SM picture. They also plan to
perform a complete analysis for the minimal extension of the SM gauge symmetry
that can accommodate the phenomenon of neutrino flavor oscillations, which has
been confirmed by many experiments. The broader implications of this are many.
The exchange of students will be an excellent cross-cultural experience for the
students. Scientists trained in different cultures often have different ways of
approaching solving a problem. The training of a young post-doc in Egypt who
will interact strongly with the American scientists involved will enhance the
training of this person and strengthen High Energy Physics research in Egypt.
The partnership between the Physicists at Bartol and the Center for theoretical
physics has been very fruitful in the past and its continuation would be very
fruitful for advances in the field. This project is being supported by the U.S.
Egypt Joint Board for Science and Technology which is funding both the U.S. and
Egyptian sides of the collaboration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;