* 0809988
* Using Powerful, Low-Frequency Radio Waves from Lightning to Diagnose the D-region Ionosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Robert Holzworth, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Anja Stromme
* 07/31/2012
* USD 229,609.00

This project will study the D-region electron density, at altitudes less than 95
km, using 3-300 kHz lightning radio emissions as a probe. In particular, new
techniques will be applied to analysis of lightning radio emissions known as
Narrow Bipolar Events in order to provide ionosonde-like retrievals of electron
density profiles as well as information on the vertical and horizontal structure
of D-region perturbations due to solar flares, particle precipitation, and
thunderstorms. The primary research tasks are to develop an improved full wave
propagation model which will provide more detailed ionospheric parameter
extraction; to apply this technique to archived events to establish baseline D
region ionospheric variability under a variety of conditions; and to apply to
the results to open questions regarding radiation belt dynamics and lightning-
ionosphere interactions. The theoretical electromagnetic model will be tested
against observations of the propagation of lightning-generated radio waves
detected simultaneously by multiple wide-band receivers at varying locations.
Application of the model will enable inference of the D-region's horizontally-
localized, instantaneous electron density profile in the vertical direction.
This will be studied under a variety of geophysical conditions as well as the
time variations caused by external influences such as magnetospheric and
interplanetary disturbances, solar flares, and lightning itself. The tasks to be
performed include: 1) Development of improved ionospheric radio-sounding
technique using 3-300 kHz radiation from "Narrow Bipolar Event" lightning
discharges; 2) Study of the vertical structure of D-region electron density
profile in quiet, undisturbed conditions, using the improved sounding technique;
3) Study of vertical and horizontal structure of D-region perturbations due to
solar flare activity, magnetospheric energetic particle precipitation and
electron heating by the electrostatic fields of nearby thunderstorms and by
electron heating by the radiated electromagnetic pulse of lightning strokes. The
databases to be used includes the World Wide Lightning Location Network (WWLLN)
and the Los Alamos Sferic Array. A graduate student will participate in the
project.