* 0809221
* Support for 11th Symposium on Study of Earth's Deep Interior (SEDI) Meeting to be held in Kunming, China from July 27-31, 2008
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2008,05/31/2010
* Bruce Buffett, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 05/31/2010
* USD 22,500.00

We request funds to partially cover participant costs for the 11th Symposium on
Study of Earth?s Deep Interior (SEDI). The meeting will be held in Kunming,
China from July 27-31, 2008. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;SEDI is an
international scientific organization dedicated to the &lt;br/&gt;Study of the
Earth?s Deep Interior. The ultimate goal of SEDI is an enhanced
&lt;br/&gt;understanding of the past evolution and current thermal, chemical and
dynamical state of the Earth?s deep interior and of the effect of that the
interior has on structures and processes observed at the surface of the Earth.
The ?deep interior? is generally considered to be the core and lower mantle, but
interest often extends to the surface, for example, in &lt;br/&gt;the study of
mantle plumes or dynamics of descending lithospheric slabs. The scientific
questions and problems of interest to SEDI include the geomagnetic dynamo and
secular variation, paleomagnetism and the evolution of the Earth?s deep
interior, material properties at extreme conditions, structure and dynamics of
the core and mantle, core-mantle interactions, and the nature and location of
deep geochemical reservoirs, etc. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will
contribute to interdisciplinary education of US &lt;br/&gt;graduate students and
young researchers by fostering dialog with researchers at all levels at a
relatively small workshop-style meeting. The international format complements
efforts by US national groups such as CIDER and will be useful to those funded
under or seeking funding from the NSF CSEDI program. The structure of SEDI is
intrinsically interdisciplinary, providing many opportunities for intra- and
international collaborations on a broad range of topics that contribute to our
understanding of the deep earth and other planetary interiors.