* 0809489
* First-Principles Molecular Dynamics Simulations of Silicate Liquids: Structure, Diffusion and Viscosity at Mantle Conditions
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Bijaya Karki, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2012
* USD 283,726.00

Silicate liquids are known to play an important role in planetary evolution and
magma oceans. Magmatic processes are responsible for the origin and ongoing
formation of the oceanic and continental crust, and for bringing to the surface
one of our primary clues to the composition of the Earth's interior in the form
of xenoliths. Because of the contrast in density, chemical diffusivity,
viscosity, and bulk composition between silicate liquids and their source
regions, the generation and transport of magma is one of the most efficient
geological means of mass and heat transport. Silicate liquids may have played an
even more important role in the Earth?s earlier history. Models of the Earth's
thermal history and petrological studies of ancient samples suggest that melting
may have been more widespread and may have extended to greater depths. Because
of their strong influence on geochemical and geodynamical processes, a better
understanding of planetary evolution requires major advances in our knowledge of
relevant melt properties at mantle conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
project, it is proposed to apply a combination of first-principles computational
and visualization techniques to investigate structure, diffusion and viscosity
of silicate melts over a broad range of pressure, temperature and composition.
This type of approach, being parameter free in the nature, is expected to
provide the ideal complement to the experimental approach and provide important
insight into the fundamental origins of physical properties and behavior in
structure and bonding. One of the goals of the study will be to expand the range
of compositions to include a model basalt system (diopside-anorthite).
Theoretical results on the density, enthalpy, and structure as a function of
pressure and temperature are expected to enhance our understanding of buoyancy,
bonding, polymorphism, and thermodynamics of mixing in silicate liquids. In
addition, it is planned to investigate transport properties of silicate melts
through ab initio predictions of the self-diffusion coefficients and
viscosities. Atomistic visualization of the position-time series data will be
exploited to gain insight into the microscopic mechanisms of transport and
compression, and into dependence of diffusion on temperature, pressure and
composition. Studies of the structure and compression mechanisms of silicate
glasses are a valuable approach to gain additional insights into the energetics
underlying liquid structure, and to enrich contact with the extensive
experimental literature on geologically relevant compositions in the vitreous
state. A unifying theme of the proposal is thus the first-principles computer
simulations of large systems that are necessary to explore realistic melt
compositions, to accurately compute dynamical properties and to successfully
capture the essence of glass structures. The project will have impact on a
number of fields including geochemistry, petrology, geophysics, computational
materials physics, and scientific visualization, and it will train new
scientists to have a multidisciplinary expertise. &lt;br/&gt;