* 0809831
* RUI: The Evolution of Sperm Ducts and Accessory Sex Glands in Squamate Reptiles: An Empirical Study of Cellular Complexity
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* David Sever, Southeastern Louisiana University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Ranker
* 08/31/2012
* USD 230,000.00

This project is the first comparative analysis of the anatomy and evolution of
the reproductive ducts and sexual glands of lizards and snakes. The study will
reveal the diversity of structural similarities and differences among
reproductive organs of lizards and snakes, and relate these findings to what is
known in mammals and other vertebrate groups. A wide variety of lizards and
snakes will be analyzed at the tissue and cellular levels using light and
electron microscopy. Such a comprehensive survey of the cellular complexity of
reproductive characters is unprecedented at this level in evolutionary studies
on animals. &lt;br/&gt; The relationship of reproductive cytology to the
diversification of lizards and snakes, and the consistency of cellular evolution
of reproductive characters to results based upon other characters, will greatly
interest those who study comparative biology. The findings may challenge some
long-standing hypotheses about reproductive evolution and encourage the broader
use of cellular reproductive characters in analyses of relationships among
animals. The research will positively impact the infrastructure for research at
an institution where 35% of college students are first generation college
attendees and most students work throughout their college years. Funds will aid
in the recruitment of quality students and broaden the participation of under-
represented groups in biological research.