* 0809791
* Organic Molecular Magnetic Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Paul Lahti, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 08/31/2013
* USD 398,750.00

Intellectural Merits. Magnetic materials are worth billions in existing
technologies. Chemical structure-based designs of new materials have much
promise for new, useful types of electronic behavior. The PI proposes to make
molecules with attached functional groups, which give specific magnetic and/or
conductive properties. Stable organic radicals will be synthesized that are
expected to self-assemble, for example, by using strongly directional hydrogen
bonds. These organic pure solids, mixed solids, and hybrid systems (polymers
containing radicals) will be tested for magnetic behavior and some for
conductivity of electrical current as well. The most important scientific goals
are: (1) to find good synthetic and purification methods to give materials that
are stable and have potentially useful magneto-electronic properties; and (2) to
discover new relationships linking molecular structure and crystal packing to
magnetic and/or conductive properties.

Broader Impacts. Graduate students in this project will benefit from
international exchange of expertise and collaborative ties, in particular with
scientists from Brazil and Japan. Training will be highly interdisciplinary,
including ways to make molecules, to determine how they assemble into solid
packing patterns, and to correlate the patterns with magnetic or conductive
behavior. Interdisciplinary training is vital in the modern techno-scientific
marketplace, where projects have short timelines and workers must be adaptable
and multi-talented. Communication skills will be emphasized by frequent group
presentations, as well as presentations at national, regional, and/or local
meetings. The group has in recent years had more women than men, a reversal of
the situation from 20 years ago. This made the group a "magnet" for other women
to feel comfortable in joining a group that does much organic synthesis and
math-oriented physical chemistry. For example, four of five Ph.D. degrees
completed during 2006 in the Lahti group went to women. Interest in the work by
female potential graduate students in recent entering classes has remained
strong. The proposed work will also be linked to efforts to attract students
from the UMass-Amherst-led Northeast Alliance for Graduate Education and the
Professoriate (NEAGEP), an NSF-supported program that funds under-represented
minority groups to pursue graduate scientific careers on our campus
(http://www.neagep.org). Dr. Lahti and his group have been part of on-campus
hospitability and recruiting of visiting students who are considering NEAGEP.
This program will be an important resource for recruiting graduate student
candidates from under-represented minority backgrounds into the field of
materials science.