* 0809053
* Microwave Measurements of Structures and Electronic Properties of Transition Metal Complexes and Radicals
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Stephen Kukolich, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2012
* USD 376,423.00

With this award from the Experimental Physical Chemistry program, the P.I.,
Professor Stephen Kukolich of the University of Arizona will modify and use a
pulsed-beam, Fourier-transform microwave spectrometer to measure rotational
transition frequencies for transition metal complexes, radicals, and other
molecules in the 5 to 18 GHz region of the microwave spectrum. A new laser-
photodissociation beam source will be constructed for measurements on
organometallic radicals and their reaction products. This will allow more
efficient and selective production of these radicals and reaction products, than
most previous systems. The overall objectives of this work include measurements
of the three-dimensional gas-phase structures, magnetic interaction parameters
and quadrupole coupling strengths. These measurements are proposed for: a)
transition metal radicals and reaction products involving these radicals, b)
transition metal dihydrogen and dihydride complexes, and c) weakly-bound
complexes with transition metal compounds. The magnetic interaction parameters
and quadrupole coupling strengths directly characterize the electronic charge
distributions. Quantum mechanical (Density Functional Theory) calculations will
be carried out for all of the complexes studied. The coordination of
experimental work with the theoretical calculations helps to make the
measurements more efficient, improves our understanding of the electronic
structure of molecules and provides guidelines and experimental examples for
improvements in ab initio, quantum chemistry calculations. &lt;br/&gt;Transition
metal complexes are very important in the chemical industry, in biological
systems and as an area of study in inorganic chemistry. Millions of tons of
chemical products are produced each year using reactions which involve
transition metal catalysts. The active sites of many enzymes and transport
proteins in living systems contain transition metal complexes. A large fraction
of the research and study in inorganic chemistry is focused on transition metal
complexes, and the proposed work will provide new contributions to the
structural database that is used in research, industry and education. The
proposed work will often involve smaller, ?model? complexes, but will provide
results relevant to the larger, more complex systems. The accurate, three-
dimensional structures for transition metal complexes, are helpful in
understanding reaction mechanisms. Successful modeling of reaction mechanisms in
chemistry and biology often depends on the accurate and reliable experimental
structural information. Improving calculation methods and basis sets through
correlation with new experimental data is useful because the calculations are
presently the only source of detailed information on short-lived radicals or
high-energy reaction intermediates. Studies of metal dihydrogen complexes may
provide information which will be useful for improving hydrogen storage
technology. Graduate and undergraduate research students will learn fundamentals
of chemistry, quantum mechanics and methods and techniques involved in computer
work, microwave electronics and making physical measurements through direct
involvement in the proposed projects. Participation in the research by
underrepresented minorities and a secondary school teacher, or non-Ph.D. college
student will be actively sought for the proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;