* 0809258
* Anions of Molecules and Molecular Clusters: Photoelectron Spectroscopic Studies
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Kit Bowen, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 08/31/2011
* USD 601,650.00

In this award, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Kit H. Bowen of the Johns Hopkins University,
together with his undergraduate, graduate and high school student researchers,
will investigate a broad range of chemical topics using gas-phase photoelectron
spectroscopy. Some of the systems and topics to be studied include biomolecule
anions and clusters, electron-induced proton transfer, diffuse (Rydberg)
electron systems, and circular dichroism effects in chiral anions. These are
wide-ranging experiments that probe fundamental questions in chemistry. Data
from these studies will be of interest to theorists as well as other
experimentalists.

Studies conducted in the Bowen laboratory are aimed primarily at understanding
the ways in which electrons interact with molecules. By studying these
interactions in well-controlled gas-phase systems, experimentalists like Bowen
provide useful data to understand the chemistry and physics of more complex
systems. The acid-base studies that are one of the key components of the present
work will shed new light on this simple and ubiquitous form of chemical
reaction. In addition to the broad scientific impact of the work in the Bowen
laboratory, this project will enable a broad range of young scientists -- from
high-school to graduate student researchers -- to pursue cutting-edge physical
chemistry research. In addition, Prof. Bowen has a long record of outreach to
underrepresented groups and this work will continue.