* 0809174
* US-EGYPT Cooperative Research:   Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbon Degradation by Nanostructured TiO2 Thin Films
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* S. Ismat Shah, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/2011
* USD 29,898.00

0809174&lt;br/&gt;Shah&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project supports
collaborative research by Dr. S. Ismat Shah, Department of Materials Science and
Engineering, University of Delaware-Newark. The Egyptian collaborator is Dr.
Ahmed Aboul Gheit of the Egyptian Petroleum Research Institute, Cairo, Egypt.
They plan to study Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons (PAHs) degradation. The
project includes a systematic study of the synthesis process, characterization
of the modified materials, and the degradation mechanism. PAHs are a group of
more than 100 chemicals that are emitted when fossil fuels are used under
conditions that lead to incomplete burning. Some PAHs are manufactured. They are
colorless, white, or pale yellow-green solids. PAHs affect body immune system
(effect confirmed only in animals) and are know carcinogens. In addition to
their presence in air, they also make their way into the water systems either
indirectly from the atmosphere or directly through the industrial waste. This
proposal describes a methodology through which a tried and tested material,
titanium dioxide (titania), will be used in a unique form (nanostructured thin
film) which will allow the known properties of titanium dioxide to be exploited
more efficiently for the degradation of PAHs in water. Bulk titania works only
with the ultra-violet (UV) light. If natural degradation is desired, titania has
to be modified so that the larger portion of the sunlight, the visible light,
could be made useful. The heart of the project is to modify titania such that a
structure could be formed that is sensitive to visible light.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This proposal describes a detailed
study of photodegradation of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons (PAHs) in water in
the presence of a photocatalyst composed of semiconductor metal oxides. PAHs are
carcinogens and are present in air and in water. They emanate primarily from
incomplete combustion of fossil fuels. The photocatalyst (TiO2) will be in the
form of thin films that are fabricated such that there is strong adhesion with
the substrates, e.g., glass, etc. The thin film processes to be used include
sol-gel, metalorganic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD), and pulsed laser
deposition (PLD). The photodegradation intermediates will be traced using high
performance liquid chromatography analysis and degradation reaction path will be
studied for samples irradiated at different periods with different irradiation
strengths using UV and visible light. Extensive catalysts characterization will
be carried out using various techniques including diffraction, microscopy and
spectroscopy methods. Furthermore, the composition of the catalyst will be
optimized for the phases present (anatase/rutile) or with the addition of
dopant, particularly nitrogen, to the principle TiO2 catalyst to enhance its
photocatalytic activity. The presence of the nanostructure in the TiO2 thin film
form is the unique aspect of this study. Experiments will exploit the additional
advantages the nanomaterials provide over bulk material, namely higher surface
area, presence of more active metastable phases, and modified band structure
better suitable for photocatalysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
project addresses a problem of significant environmental and health impact. The
collaboration between Egyptian and US scientists and engineers will be
beneficial to both sides. Several U.S. and Egyptian undergraduate and graduate
students will be involved in the proposed work. The PI has successfully worked
with his Egyptian counterparts, including publishing several joint publications.
This project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program.