* 0809638
* Collaborative Research: What is the Strength of Low-Angle Normal Faults?
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2008,05/31/2014
* Gary Axen, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 05/31/2014
* USD 237,297.00

Low-angle normal faults have been a puzzle since they were first discovered
because they appear to slip while at a high angle to the maximum compressive
stress, which should be an unfavorable orientation. Some strike-slip faults,
such as the San Andreas, share this enigmatic trait. Several hypotheses have
been proposed to explain the apparent mechanical weakness of these unfavorably
oriented faults: (1) the stress field rotates as low-angle normal faults are
approached; (2) low-angle normal faults are weak because inherently weak
materials or well-developed flow fabrics exist in the fault core; (3) low-angle
normal faults are weak due to lowering of the effective normal stress by high
pore fluid pressure. This project is testing these hypotheses through a
combination of structural, petrographic, and fluid inclusion studies of fault
rocks formed around the Whipple and west Salton low-angle normal faults in
southern California. Structural studies combine outcrop-scale data on shear and
tensile fractures with microscopic data on tensile microcracks and fluid-
inclusion arrays to define the orientation of the paleostress field, and its
temporal and spatial variations. Microthermometry of oriented fluid inclusion
arrays constrain the pressure and temperature conditions of fluid entrapment
during brecciation and subsequent fracturing. Possible fluid sources are
evaluated using exploratory whole-rock and stable-isotope data. Both faults have
quartzofeldspathic footwalls, display evidence of paleoseismicity, and have
well-constrained slip and footwall-cooling histories. This project focuses on
the upper footwalls where macroscale structural rotations relative to the low-
angle normal faults are known to be minor. The two faults are complementary
because they allow study of slip gradients (finite displacements ranging from
5-50 km) and allow comparison of fault-zone rocks and structure developed at
different crustal levels, from the base of the seismogenic zone for the Whipple
detachment to in and above the upper seismogenic zone for the west Salton
detachment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Low-angle normal faults (i.e., extensional
faults that slip at angles of less than 30 degrees to the earth?s surface) have
economic and societal relevance because (a) they host ore deposits and control
regions in which petroleum accumulates, and (b) they pose a potential seismic
risk to communities like Salt Lake City, Utah, and Mexicali, Baja California.
Because of their apparently anomalous orientation with respect to major stresses
in the earth, the mechanical conditions under which they slip are not well
understood. As a result, their seismic hazards are also not well understood.
Major strike-slip faults, such as the San Andreas fault, pose a clear seismic
threat to many large population centers and are the targets of several efforts
(e.g., San Andreas drilling project) to characterize the nature of the fault
zone rocks, fluids within/near the fault zones, and nearby stress orientations.
This study will provide a complementary data set from another class of faults
that can ultimately be combined with data from the San Andreas and other faults
to (1) document fault rock features and histories that are unique to different
types of major faults, and (2) gain clearer understanding of earthquake
mechanics in different settings in the crust.&lt;br/&gt;