* 0809736
* Architectural Design of Supramolecular Hosts from Simple Amide/Amine Building Blocks
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Kristin Bowman-James, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 06/30/2012
* USD 450,000.00

Award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program
supports Professor Kristin Bowman-James to explore: anion binding, to evaluate
the role of lone protons in chemical processes, and the binding and manipulation
of neutral triatomic gases. A systematic approach is used by linking a series of
similar amide/amine-based hydrogen-bond donor building blocks to give hosts with
increasing complexity and dimensionality, and differing degrees of rigidity. The
five specific goals are: 1) Simple amide/amine containing hosts will be
strategically modified to probe the addition of more hydrogen bonding sites as
well as redox switches, the latter using pendant sulfhydryl groups. 2)
Structural data on binding of linear and V-shaped anions will be used to expand
the project to neutral gases, specifically CO2, N2O, and SO2. Both traditional
hydrogen bonding strategies will be used as well as dynamic covalent chemistry
(DCC), the formation of covalent bonds that can be readily broken. 3) Complex
cyclophane-capped multicycles will be explored as hosts for larger polyanionic
guests, including metallates, polyphosphates, nucleotides, and carboxylates.
These hosts will provide more rigid architectures than earlier ligands. 4) The
prototype phenyl host caps will be replaced by triazine, pyrazine and
naphthalene to examine a) the influence of heteroatoms in the preorganization of
the side chains and stacking distances, and b) the use of naphthalene to
circumvent an acid decomposition of the host with four linkers (tetrad) as well
as undesirable intramolecular NHC hydrogen bonds. 5) Structural data indicating
that a lone proton could play a role in shaping the conformations of molecules
will be pursued to assess the generality of this phenomenon.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this work is to design more complex hosts that
will show high affinity for larger and more challenging guests with two targets
being neutral gases and single protons. The broader impacts are the educational
component that spans students from undergraduate to postdoctoral status, and
outreach that includes women and underrepresented minorities. The societal
impacts are in understanding not only the complex chemistry involved in anion
recognition but also the more elusive targets of neutral gas recognition and the
role that lone protons could play in supramolecular and biological
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;