* 0809849
* Liquid Sodium Geodynamo Models
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2008,12/31/2011
* Daniel Lathrop, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2011
* USD 426,000.00

This research seeks to understand the Earth's magnetic field by using unique
rotating liquid sodium experiments as models of the Earth's core. The Earth's
magnetic field acts as a shield to radiation from the sun. It is dynamic and has
been in decline for the past several hundred years. Since we do not understand
how a turbulent flow in the core can generate magnetic fields, we presently
cannot predict the future of the Earth's field. Experiments give a unique window
by being laboratory models of the Earth's core.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These
experiments match as many of the conditions as possible in the laboratory,
including the importance of rotation, liquid metal induction, and significant
magnetic forces. The experiments explore the flow dynamics and conditions by
probing the motion and induced magnetic fields of the experiments. Broader
impacts for this research include the key role that young researchers play in
the ongoing projects. The mentoring of student researchers is a very important
part of this project. As well, we have played, and hope to continue to play, an
active role in science documentaries addressing changes in the geomagnetic
field. The scientific results of this research have implications in geophysics,
astrophysics, plasma physics, nonlinear dynamics, and fluid dynamics -- the
research is inherently cross-disciplinary.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;