* 0809387
* RUI: Structural Characterization of Ionic and Radical Complexes by High Resolution Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Rebecca Peebles, Eastern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 07/31/2012
* USD 257,151.00

In this award, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Division of Chemistry, Professors Sean and Rebecca Peebles of Eastern Illinois
University, together with their graduate and undergraduate student researchers,
will investigate the structure and interactions in gas-phase complexes
exhibiting C-H hydrogen bonds. These species will be studied with infrared and
microwave spectroscopic methods, coupled with computational chemistry work. The
goal of these studies is to determine the strengths of interaction in C-H
hydrogen bonding systems -- an interaction that has importance in biochemistry,
but remains poorly-understood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interactions between
molecules are of fundamental importance in understanding the way condensed phase
matter behaves -- from the interactions which govern the way molecules in a
liquid or solid attract one another and give rise to physical properties to the
ways in which proteins interact to produce molecular machines. Research like
that of the Peebles aims to tease out what these interactions are, and what
there strengths are. The graduate and undergraduate students working on these
projects will acquire hands-on experience in building sophisticated
spectroscopic apparatus, acquiring, analyzing and interpreting data, which they
will present at national and regional conferences.&lt;br/&gt;