* 0809095
* Stable Metal:Amorphous Carbon Substrates for Combined SPR and MS Analysis of Bioaffinity Interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Lloyd Smith, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 06/30/2011
* USD 450,000.00

The Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program in the Division of Chemistry, with
co-funding from the Biomolecular Systems Cluster in the Division of Molecular
and Cellular Biosciences, is supporting Profs. Lloyd Smith and collaborators
Helen Blackwell and Michael Shortreed at the University of Wisconsin to study
the nature and significance of interactions between molecules in biological
systems. Specifically, they are examining the "language" that bacteria use for
communication involving diffusible small molecules (or "autoinducers") perceived
by cognate protein receptors. Bacteria use this chemical language to assess
local population densities in a process known as "quorum sensing" which enables
regulation of critical processes both harmful and beneficial to their plant
host. Methods to control bacterial quorum sensing in plant-associated bacteria
would have a major impact on agricultural science, because >50% of crop disease
worldwide is caused by quorum sensing-regulated behaviors in bacteria. Further,
molecules that inhibit bacterial quorum sensing represent an entirely new class
of anti-infectives that could have immediate impact on human health. The work
aims to develop new technologies for the elucidation of this complex
communication network - a fundamental scientific advance. The focus is to create
a more general platform for the multiplex analysis of bioaffinity interactions
and to develop and apply this platform in the context of bacterial quorum
sensing. The platform combines three powerful capabilities: (1) label-free
measurements of bioaffinity interactions; (2) a novel substrate, which permits
versatile and stable biomolecule attachment; and (3) mass spectrometric (MS)
analysis capability to identify unknown ligands binding to the surface. This
combination of three powerful and synergistic capabilities in a single system
will provide a tool of unprecedented utility for the analysis of bioaffinity
interactions.

The research groups involved are interdisciplinary, training researchers at many
different stages of their education. Current collaborations involve over 20
different groups on campuses worldwide, plus two companies, and span the
biological and physical sciences. In conjunction with the research, the PIs
engage in interdisciplinary undergraduate research training; graduate student
professional development through the Delta program (the UW implementation of the
NSF Center for the Integration of Research, Teaching and Learning program);
professional development for junior and senior high-school instructors through
regular lectures by UW faculty; and a day-long hands-on science experience for
high-school AP-chemistry students.