* 0809457
* Theoretical Studies of the Hydrated Electron, Excess Electrons Interacting with Water and Methanol Clusters, and of Biomolecule Energy Landscapes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2008,10/31/2011
* Kenneth Jordan, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 10/31/2011
* USD 445,000.00

Kenneth Jordan of the University of Pittsburgh is supported by an award from the
Theoretical and Computational Chemistry program for research to develop
theoretical methods for understanding hydrated electrons and flexible
biomolecules. The work is producing an enhanced understanding of the behavior of
excess electrons in hydrogen-bonding solvents and of the role of weak
interactions on the properties of biomolecules and of water on graphitic
surfaces. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many important chemical and biological
processes, including electrochemical processes and electron transfer in
photosynthesis, are driven by excess electrons in the presence of water. Despite
the large number of experimental and theoretical studies of the hydrated
electron and of the excess electron attached to water clusters, a comprehensive
understanding of the structures and dynamics of these species is lacking. The
theoretical studies being carried out by the Jordan group employ state-of-the-
art electron-water and water-water potentials to simulate negatively-charged
water clusters of a larger size than has been possible in the past. The work
also includes two projects that advance knowledge in the area of weak
interactions. The first of these involves characterizing the conformational
potential energy landscape of beta dipeptides and tripeptides, while the second
involves the development of accurate potentials describing the interaction
between a water monomer and the graphite surface. The ultimate goal of this
project is to perform simulations of water on graphite surfaces and confined in
carbon nanotubes using the newly developed, accurate force fields. The work is
having a broader impact on many fields of science and its impact is further
broadened through the PI's extensive educational and outreach activities with
the Telluride Center.