* 0809255
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:  Chemistry-Climate Feedbacks on Egypt and the Nile River Basin
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2008,05/31/2012
* Allison Steiner, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 05/31/2012
* USD 90,000.00

In this project, a gas and aqueous chemical mechanism and a detailed aerosol
mechanism will be coupled to a regional climate model (RegCM3). RegCM3 includes
the formation and transport of several aerosol species, but lacks the chemistry
needed for a fully coupled online model that simultaneously treats regional
climate and atmospheric chemistry. The coupled model will be used to simulate
present and future climate over Egypt, with a specific focus on the Nile Basin,
in order to evaluate the role of atmospheric aerosols on Egypt's climate. The
Greater Cairo region is the largest city in Africa and the Middle East, with
large amounts of gas and particulate air pollutants that affect the region at
large. Because of the large emissions of both biogenic and anthropogenic
species, a fully coupled chemistry-climate simulation is needed to evaluate
these feedbacks and their impacts. The simulations will consider the direct and
indirect impacts of aerosols and assess their potential effects on the climate
and water resources of the Nile River Basin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The chemical
composition of the troposphere plays a key role in understanding present day and
future climate. This project will integrate U.S. and Egyptian atmospheric
scientists with scientists from the Egyptian Meteorological Authority (EMA) and
the Egyptian Environmental Affairs Agency (EEAA). Broader impacts of the project
also include the training of graduate students or junior scientists from Egypt
and the U.S. Funding for this project is being provided by the NSF Office of
International Science and Engineering (OISE).