* 0809306
* Condensed-Phase Dynamics Resolved by Multidimensional Population Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2008,12/31/2011
* Mark Berg, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 12/31/2011
* USD 432,400.00

In this project funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division, Berg will undertake research in condensed matter chemistry,
namely fast time-scale dynamics in supercooled and high viscosity liquids. Berg
and his group will continue to develop multidimensional spectroscopic methods to
analyze condensed-phase dynamics in complex systems. In the Multiple Population
Period Transient Spectrocopies (MUPPETS) technique developed in the PI's
laboratory, experiments using multiple kinetic decay periods can disentangle
heterogeneous from homogeneous origins of nonexponential kinetics. The technique
will be applied to several problems, including studies of DNA charge transfer;
conjugated polymer aggregates; local viscosity in microstructured systems such
as micelles, bilayers, and vesicles; and supercooled
liquids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project deals with important issues in the
behavior of fluids, such as the relationship between the dynamics of single
molecules and that of the collective behavior of fluids. Existing theories have
been partially successful in accounting for the dynamical properties of fluids,
and the present work addresses fundamental issues that have in the past been
treated only slightly. New experimental techniques together with the associated
theory will be developed. The results from this project are likely to impact
understanding in many areas of condensed phase dynamics. This research will be
conducted with the aid of graduate and undergraduate students and postdoctoral
research associates, who will gain valuable experience through their involvement
in contemporary forefront research in physical chemistry. These experiences will
of great advantage in their further studies or employment in industry,
government laboratories, or academia.