* 0809466
* Kinetic and Thermodynamic Studies Relevant to Biological Iron Transport
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2012
* Alvin Crumbliss, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 06/30/2012
* USD 465,000.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program
and the Molecular and Cell Biology Biochemistry program supports research by
Provessor Alvin Crumbliss at Duke University to investigate mechanisms for
biological Fe transport mediated by siderophores and two periplasmic proteins,
ferric binding protein (FbpA) from Neisseria and periplasmic binding protein
(PBP) from Pseudomonas. Specific aims are to: explore a redox switch hypothesis
for Fe transport whereby Fe/ligand exchange is initiated by Fe3+ reduction,
investigate the role of the outer membrane receptor TbpA/B in removing Fe from
Fe2hTf , investigate the role of the TbpA plug domain in inserting Fe into FbpA,
investigate the role of the synergistic anion (X) in inserting Fe into FbpA and
in modulating the biophysical properties of FeFbpA-X, use an ex vivo method to
determine the in vivo synergistic anion changes in FeFbpA-X with variations in
cell growth environment, investigate Ga3+ sequestration by FbpA to probe the
mechanism of periplasm-to-cytosol Fe transport, investigate the molecular
interactions between the FpvAI-plug domain, pyoverdine, and a periplasmic
binding protein that are relevant to Fe transport in Pseudomonas, investigate
the relationship between Fe and Zn sequestration by brasilibactin A and the
biological activity and signaling functions of this siderophore, investigate the
coordination and redox chemistry of a siderophore conjugate designed to initiate
intracellular Fenton chemistry, and directly correlate in vitro results with in
vivo studies performed in biological collaborators laboratories. In vitro and ex
vivo biophysical methods will be used to achieve the objectives. SUPREX analysis
of MALDI-TOF mass spectra will be used to characterize metal-protein, protein-
protein, protein-siderophore, and protein-anion interactions, and their
influence on Fe/ligand exchange. Recombinant WT and mutant proteins, including
plug domains from membrane receptors, will be used to explore individual steps
in the transport process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project enables mentoring
minority students through Project SEED, high school teacher workshops, and four-
year college seminars. Research results on Fe transport are used to illustrate
principles taught in General Chemistry. This research program involves extensive
collaboration with five US and international biological laboratories, which will
enhance the interdisciplinary and global research experience of students in the
PI's and collaborators' laboratories, thereby broadening contributions to
education and scientific infrastructure.