* 0809463
* CAREER:  A Hybrid High Strain Rate Forming Process - Laser Dynamic Forming for Micro- and Meso- Scale 3D Shapes
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/27/2007,01/31/2012
* Gary Cheng, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 01/31/2012
* USD 335,774.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant provides funding to develop
a unique forming process laser dynamic forming, to form meso- and micro-scale 3D
structures. This process combines the advantages of metal forming and laser
shock peening to generate 3D shaping in various materials, especially brittle
and hard to form materials. The project will discover the fundamental process
mechanism of laser dynamic forming, and control the process accurately.
Experiments will be designed to study size effects, formability, temperature
effects, wrinkling and springback of the forming process. A multiscale
simulation approach will be used to simulate the forming process. Analytical
models will be built to predict fatigue life and fracture toughness after
forming, and validated via experiments. An inverse multiobjective optimization
will be developed to design the forming process desired geometry change, and
mechanical properties. The education goal of the project is to integrate
research activities with educational efforts, such as development of a Laser
Processing Education Lab; incorporation of nontraditional manufacturing
education into manufacturing courses; and outreach activities for high school
students and under-represented minorities through new teaching modules and
summer programs with research projects.

The successful completion of this work will make a revolutionary improvement to
the process of micro- and meso- three-dimensional structures, and have a major
impact on manufacturing industry. This work will fundamentally advance the state
of knowledge of laser processing through a novel hybrid forming process with
improved mechanical properties of product. This project will increase the
presence of non-traditional manufacturing techniques in education by
establishing a strong research integrated education activities. Native American
high school students will be inspired to pursue science and engineering careers.
Ethnic minorities, women, and person of disability will be encouraged to
participate in this project to pique their interests in science and engineering.