* 0809082
* SGER: Dam removal and the response of gravel-bed rivers to sediment pulses
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2008,03/31/2010
* Andrew Wilcox, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 03/31/2010
* USD 29,923.00

This study will investigate sediment transport and channel evolution in gravel-
bed rivers&lt;br/&gt;in response to sediment pulses, taking advantage of the
field-scale experiment that will be&lt;br/&gt;created by the removal of Milltown
Dam on the Clark Fork of the Columbia River, MT. Through&lt;br/&gt;data
collection on pre- and post-dam removal channel conditions and on bedload and
suspended&lt;br/&gt;load transport out of Milltown reservoir during high flow
periods, this research will address&lt;br/&gt;fundamental questions about
fluvial processes, sediment transport and deposition, and dam&lt;br/&gt;removal.
Several hypotheses will be investigated about how pulses of fine sediment
infiltrate&lt;br/&gt;into and affect the mobility of armored river beds, about
spatial and temporal patterns of&lt;br/&gt;sediment transport and deposition,
and about effective discharges for transporting sediment&lt;br/&gt;pulses. This
research will provide an excellent opportunity to evaluate how previous
flume&lt;br/&gt;research or field studies of small channels, upon which much of
what is known about sediment&lt;br/&gt;transport and related aspects of fluvial
processes is based, scale up to larger rivers. The&lt;br/&gt;data collected here
will also be evaluated in the context of the implications of
geomorphic&lt;br/&gt;responses and sediment geochemistry for habitat and
biological processes.&lt;br/&gt;Removal of Milltown Dam, which will begin in
spring 2008 and continue the following winter,&lt;br/&gt;is especially notable
because (1) it is the largest dam removal to date in the United
States&lt;br/&gt;in terms of the volume of reservoir sediment potentially
available for downstream transport&lt;br/&gt;(approximately 3 million m3;
another 2 million m3 are being mechanically removed); (2) the&lt;br/&gt;dam is
the downstream end of the largest Superfund site in the United States, the Clark
Fork&lt;br/&gt;Complex, and reservoir sediments are composed largely of
contaminated mine tailings; (3) it&lt;br/&gt;is occurring on a regionally
important river that includes designated Critical Habitat for&lt;br/&gt;bull
trout, a federally threatened species. Systematic study of this dam removal will
therefore&lt;br/&gt;have broader impacts on multiple levels, including for
understanding the sediment and metals&lt;br/&gt;transport associated with a
significant dam removal, for the insights it lends to upcoming&lt;br/&gt;planned
removals of large dams, and for its broader contribution to understanding how
gravel-bed&lt;br/&gt;rivers respond to increased sediment fluxes. Broader
impacts will also derive from the project?s&lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary nature,
whereby analyses of geomorphic processes, geochemistry, hydrology,&lt;br/&gt;and
fish response will be combined to understand downstream effects of dam
removal.&lt;br/&gt;This project will help a new faculty member build a research
program in fluvial geomorphic&lt;br/&gt;processes and will directly support one
graduate and one undergraduate student. The project&lt;br/&gt;will also foster
ongoing collaboration efforts between University of Montana and Salish-
Kootenai&lt;br/&gt;College, a tribal college in Pablo, MT, whose students will
assist field data collection and&lt;br/&gt;analysis under the guidance of the
PI. Further, data collection and analysis related to Milltown&lt;br/&gt;Dam
removal will be incorporated into graduate and undergraduate geomorphology and
geochemistry&lt;br/&gt;courses, an integration of teaching and research that
will be facilitated by the project?s&lt;br/&gt;close proximity to the University
of Montana.