* 0809409
* Management, Operations, and Associated Projects for the National Optical Astronomy Observatory
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2019
* Lori Allen, Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Chris J. Davis
* 09/30/2019
* USD 0.00

Under terms of this Cooperative Agreement, the Association of Universities for
Research in Astronomy (AURA), Inc. will manage and operate the National Optical
Astronomy Observatory (NOAO) and associated projects on behalf of the National
Science Foundation and the national community of ground-based, optical/infrared
astronomy researchers. AURA will provide a national observatory that offers U.S.
astronomers access to a complete and balanced suite of ground-based, optical and
infrared observing facilities. In addition AURA will establish priorities and
processes to create a superior national observing system and to enable new,
cutting-edge facilities, aided by inventive, public-private
partnerships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NOAO will provide forefront facilities and
scientific instruments for researchers at Kitt Peak National Observatory and
Cerro Tololo Interamerican Observatory based on the principle of scientific
merit, as well as expert in-house support and data analysis tools. At these
observatories NOAO provides a range of assets that include four telescopes of
4-meter class. NOAO also serves as the U. S. national gateway to the twin
8-meter telescopes of the Gemini Observatory and to many non-federal US
observatories through the Telescope System Instrumentation Program. Scientists
and engineers at NOAO are partnering with public-private consortia in the design
and development of the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope and two Giant Segmented
Mirror Telescope projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the highest level NOAO will
enable a research portfolio designed to provide quantifiable tests of the
grandest emerging astronomical theories, from the processes that govern
planetary formation and stellar output to the accelerating Universe, cosmic
inflation, and the nature of dark energy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts
of this program include providing access to astronomical research facilities to
the entire community on the basis of intellectual merit, archiving and
distribution of data to enable future investigations, and developing next
generation astronomical instruments and facilities. NOAO leads a broad program
in education for public visitors to its facilities, undergraduates interested in
astronomy, graduate students conducting dissertation research in astronomy, and
postdoctoral researchers desiring access to its facilities. Under terms of this
Cooperative Agreement NOAO will vigorously promote the advancement of under-
represented minorities and persons with disabilities in astronomy and related
sciences.