* 0809973
* Probing Unusual Kinetic Isotope Effects in Ozone Formation through Crossed Beam and Bulk Photochemistry Experiments
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Kristie Boering, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 08/31/2012
* USD 390,000.00

In this award, co-funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Division of Chemistry and the Atmospheric Chemistry Program of the Atmospheric
Sciences Division (Geosciences Directorate), Professor Kristie A. Boering of the
University of California - Berkeley, together with her graduate student
researchers, will investigate the chemistry of oxygen in order to determine the
root-cause for the unusual isotopic fractionation observed in atmospheric ozone.
The Boering group will carry out bulk photochemical investigations in their
laboratory in Berkeley and will travel to Taiwan to carry out a number of
crossed-beam investigations of the atomic + molecular oxygen exchange reaction
in the laboratories of the Institute of Atomic and Molecular Sciences of
Academica Sinica. In addition, these experimental studies will be supplemented
with theoretical investigations by Prof. Dmitri Babikov of Marquette University
and Prof. Hua Guo of the University of New Mexico, as well as Prof Gy√∂rgy
Lendvay of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences.

Isotopic patterns in atmospheric gases can be used to glean clues into the
complicated workings of the earth's atmosphere. The ozone isotope anomaly is
still mysterious, and is not completely explicable with standard chemical
models. The ozone isotope anomaly is transferred to other important trace gases,
including carbon dioxide and nitrous oxide. Developing a firm understanding of
the trace isotope fractionation in these gases will allow scientists to develop
robust models of the atmosphere -- which are important in climate change
research. Besides the broad scientific impact of this work, Prof. Boering's
students are experiencing the kind of globe-spanning research effort that is
becoming more of the norm in modern science -- thus training them to be the kind
of globally-engaged scientists that our society will need in the future.