* 0809574
* Upgrade to the continuous GPS network on Sierra Negra volcano, Galapagos
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2008,05/31/2010
* William Chadwick, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 05/31/2010
* USD 28,626.00

The main objective of this project is to add two additional continuous Global
Positioning System (CGPS) stations to the existing 8-station CGPS network at
Sierra Negra volcano, on the Galapagos island of Isabela. This network,
originally installed in June 2002, successfully captured the extraordinary
deformation leading up to and during the October 2005 eruption at the Sierra
Negra. The eruption was preceded by multiple ?trapdoor faulting? events in the
caldera floor, and accelerating inflation that amounted to 2.2 m of uplift in 30
months (?trapdoor faults? are curved faults that bound an uplifted block with a
hinge zone on one side, like a trapdoor). More trapdoor faulting, dike
intrusion, and subsidence of over 5 m in the caldera were associated with the
eruption itself. The two additional CGPS stations will allow the investigators
to fill a critical gap in the deformation monitoring, will eliminate ambiguity
in satellite radar interferometry (InSAR) scenes that are discontinuous across
the fault system, and will help better detection and modeling of the on-going
deformation at the volcano. This work is timely because Sierra Negra began to
re-inflate as soon as the October 2005 eruption was over and the center of the
caldera has already been uplifted by over 2 m. At this rate of inflation, more
trapdoor faulting events or eruptions are likely within the next few years. This
project will ensure that researchers learn as much as possible from future
events at this very active volcano, which is one of the best places on Earth to
study the shallow intrusion of magma in space and time.