* 0809040
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:   Study of Nutrient Fluxes via Submarine Groundwater Discharge into the Coastal Zone Around Alexandria, Egypt
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* William Burnett, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2011
* USD 23,712.00

0809040&lt;br/&gt;Burnett&lt;br/&gt;This project supports collaborative research
by Dr. William Burnett, Florida State University, Tallahassee and Dr. Ayman El-
Gamal, Coastal Research Institute, Alexandria, Egypt. They plan a study on
?Study of Nutrient Fluxes Submarine Groundwater Discharge into the Coastal Zone
Around Alexandria? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Merit: Submarine groundwater
discharge (SGD) represents an important, yet largely unquantified pathway for
nutrients and other dissolved constituents from land to the coastal ocean.
Coastal oceanographers and hydrologists have shown that slow yet persistent
seepage of fresh groundwater through sediments occurs wherever an aquifer with a
positive head is hydraulically connected to a surface water body. It is now
recognized that a considerable amount of seawater is also recirculated through
coastal aquifer systems. Both fresh and saline water inputs contribute nutrients
and other dissolved solids to coastal waters. This project has three distinct
objectives: (1) investigate the role of SGD in the delivery of nutrients to the
coastal zone around Alexandria, Egypt; (2) estimate groundwater fluxes using
natural radioisotopes; and (3) contribute to the dissemination of knowledge
concerning SGD, measurement techniques, and its potential coastal management
implications in Egypt. The selected site is located near Alexandria around the
outlet of West El-Nobareya Drain (about 21 km west of the center of Alexandria).
Groundwater is found at shallow depths in the vicinity of Alexandria. In
addition, the groundwater quality is deteriorating as a consequence of the
infiltration of contaminated surface water into the aquifers. The PIs will use
automated radon monitors for continuous measurements of SGD flow over various
time periods. They plan to construct a detailed nutrient budget for the site.
Potential sources of nutrients to this area include surface water inflow,
atmospheric deposition, diffusion across the sediment water interface, and SGD,
that is currently unknown. This would likely be the first groundwater discharge
study in North African coastal waters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:
Human resource development will be an important aspect of this project via
capacity building in a developing country and meaningful graduate student
participation in the field studies and other aspects of the research. A graduate
student at Florida State University will have the opportunity to add to his
Ph.D. research during this project. The project also involves important coastal
zone management issues as the urban coastal system being studied has suffered
from over consumption of groundwater, subsidence relating to this over pumping,
and increased contamination from fertilizer, sewage, and other pollution
sources. Nutrient inputs from contaminated groundwaters have been implicated in
the eutrophication of near-shore waters and the increasing occurrence of harmful
algal blooms offshore. This project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint
Fund Program.