* 0809756
* Affinity-based CE Studies to Facilitate Bioprobe Design and Microbe Detection.
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Christa Colyer, Wake Forest University
* Continuing Grant
* Lin He
* 06/30/2012
* USD 386,000.00

The Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program in the Division of Chemistry
supports Prof. Christa Colyer and her group at Wake Forest University to develop
rapid and sensitive assays based on capillary electrophoresis (CE) methodologies
and employing rationally designed bioprobes for protein targets. Applications
include quantitative assessment of the noncovalent binding properties of novel
squarylium and triazolylcoumarin dyes towards proteins based on CE affinity, and
comparison with solid phase microextraction methods (in collaboration with Dr.
Hiroyuki Nakazumi of Osaka Prefecture University in Japan; David Silcott of S3I,
LLC; and Dr. Janusz Pawliszyn of the University of Waterloo, Canada).
Application of affinity CE to ligand-receptor interactions essential to the
function of the B7 family of proteins involved in the regulation of immune
responses is also being assessed (in collaboration with Dr. Lieping Chen of
Johns Hopkins University). CE-based assays employing designed boronic acid-based
bioprobes are being developed (in collaboration with Dr. Qian Wang and Dr. Karen
Fox of the University of South Carolina) to identify carbohydrate-based residues
unique to the surfaces of viral and bacterial agents of importance to human
health and security, such as the influenza virus and Bacillus anthracis
(anthrax) spores. Improved bacterial analysis will support differentiation and
quantitation of various intact cyanobacteria species, their constituent
phycobiliproteins, and their tetrapyrrole bilin pigments. This unique three-
pronged CE methodology should enhance understanding of the role of cyanobacteria
in the global carbon cycle.

In conjunction with this research, Dr. Colyer is engaged in various community
and academic outreach ventures, such as a summer research program for
undergraduate students at High Point University and the creation of a workshop
entitled "Electrophoresis Working Weekend" for the academic enrichment of
faculty and students from regional colleges and universities. An international
student exchange between Wake Forest University and Osaka Prefecture University
in Japan will better prepare students for the increasingly interdisciplinary and
globalized nature of scientific research. Additionally, a series of case studies
based on research results will be developed to provide college-level instructors
with the resources necessary to teach modern separation science and biosensing
methods. This series of case studies, to be called "Separation Shorts," will be
submitted for publication in the peer-reviewed collection of the NSF-funded
National Center for Case Study Teaching in Science.