* 0809045
* Ultrafast Nonlinear Microscopy in Nanorods and Nanostructured Networks
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2012
* John Papanikolas, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2012
* USD 507,700.00

In this project, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division, Prof. John M. Papanikolas of the University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill will combine pump-probe methodologies with nonlinear
microscopy to investigate the charge carrier dynamics in one-dimensional
nanostructures, networks and nanodevices on ultrafast time scales. The goal of
the project is to elucidate the relation between the carrier dynamics and the
local shape of the object, an issue that is fundamentally important and critical
to understanding many problems in nanoscience and nanotechnology. Variation in
behavior from structure-to-structure, and even between different spatial
locations within the same structure, is a hallmark of complexity and its
presence poses a major challenge to those wishing to exploit nanoscale materials
in a variety of device applications. The project will develop a new microscopy
technique that will excite a nanostructure in one spatial location and probe the
dynamics in another, on time scales ranging from femtoseconds to nanoseconds.
Professor Papanikolas and his students will use this spatially-separated pump-
probe microscope to visualize charge carrier migration through individual
nanorods and networks. This project will contribute to our understanding of
complex nanosystems while promoting teaching, training, and learning in the
context of a research program. Graduate, undergraduate and high school students
will participate in this research. They will develop the technologically
sophisticated instrumentation, apply those methods to the study of single
nanostructures, take part in the communication of their results, and participate
in the development of activities for middle school students that highlight their
research.&lt;br/&gt;