* 0809494
* Chemical Synthesis of Single-Chirality, Structurally Uniform Carbon Nanotubes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2008,12/31/2011
* Lawrence Scott, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 12/31/2011
* USD 633,166.00

This project will continue work on the development of methods for the chemical
synthesis of single-chirality, structurally uniform carbon nanotubes. Despite
intense scrutiny by scientists and engineers worldwide for nearly two decades,
carbon nanotubes are still being made today by poorly understood, empirical,
high temperature methods based on the transition metal-mediated capture of
atomic, diatomic, and polyatomic carbon species from the gas phase. It is the
goal of this project to develop synthetic organic chemical methods that will
make possible the rational chemical synthesis of all-carbon single walled
nanotubes that are closed at one end and open at the other, with predefined,
uniform diameter, chirality, end cap structure, and rim structure. The project
builds on and extends methods previously developed in the laboratory of the P.I.
for the chemical synthesis of numerous geodesic polyarenes, including
fullerene-C60. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Organic and
Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Professor
Lawrence T. Scott of the Department of Chemistry at Boston College. Professor
Scott's research efforts revolve around the development of methods for the
synthesis of nonplanar networks of trigonal carbon atoms. Such chemistry could
provide access to ultra thin, super strong, and light weight nanowires with
metal-like electrical conducting properties. Successful development of the
methodology will create new opportunities for advances in nanotechnology, from
materials science and bioengineering to molecular scale circuitry and electronic
devices.