* 0809420
* Controlled Polymerization of Amino Acid N-Carboxyanhydrides
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2008,11/30/2011
* Jianjun Cheng, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 11/30/2011
* USD 390,000.00

This project aims at the development of new methods for the synthesis of
polypeptides with well defined structures. Polypeptides are a class of
biomaterials with numerous applications. The most economical process for
synthesizing high molecular-weight polypeptides in large-scale is through the
polymerization of alpha-amino acid N-carboxyanhydrides with amines as the
initiators. Although polypeptides can be readily synthesized using this process,
the resulting polypeptides have uncontrolled molecular weights, broad molecular
weight distributions, and poorly defined end groups. This project will study the
in situ silylation of amine initiators for the controlled polymerization of
alpha-amino acid N-carboxyanhydrides.

With this grant, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting
the research of Professor Jianjun Cheng of the Department of Materials Science
and Engineering at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Professor
Cheng's research efforts involve the development of initiators for the
controlled polymerization of alpha-amino acid N-carboxyanhydrides. Such
chemistry will allow control over the end groups as well as the polypeptide
molecular weight distribution. Successful development of this methodology has
significant impact on both the pharmaceutical and biomaterials industries.