* 0809895
* CAREER:  Coding Theoretic Problems in Genetic Data Acquisition, Modeling and Analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2007,01/31/2014
* Olgica Milenkovic, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 01/31/2014
* USD 366,518.00

The investigator studies three new coding-theoretic paradigms arising during the
processes of genetic data acquisition, analysis, and modeling. The biological
principles governing the systems for which coding solutions are sought are DNA
and RNA sequence hybridization and self-hybridization. The bio-chemical property
supporting hybridization is the affinity of bases in single DNA and RNA strands
to form hydrogen bonds with their complementary bases, defined in terms of the
Watson- Crick rule. By forming such bonds, paired bases generate planar or
spatial structures that are comprised of two complementary strands or one single
strand. Bonded structures have increased stability, but they also serve an
important role in regulating various cellular functions, including pre-mRNA
editing or post-transcriptional gene silencing. In certain cases, specific self-
hybridization patterns in DNA sequences represent precursors to sequence
breakage and are closely associated with genetic diseases such as cancer.

Besides its chemical and physical properties, the process of sequence
hybridization has distinctly combinatorial features. These combinatorial
features are used by the investigator to establish a rigorous mathematical
framework in which to analyze technological and biological systems operating on
the principle of sequence hybridization. Several classical coding schemes are
analyzed in new biological settings, including superimposed designs, balanced
codes, and run-length constrained codes. Such schemes are generalized, combined,
and optimized for a given application. Furthermore, some new coding-theoretic
and algorithmic problems are introduced that lead to challenging and interesting
new research directions in algebraic coding theory. The outlined
interdisciplinary research efforts are expected to have significant impact on
the development of cDNA and aptamer microarrays and are also expected to lead to
the creation of a new educational program at the University of Colorado,
Boulder.

