* 0809413
* Self-Replicating Nucleic Acids
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Jack Szostak, Massachusetts General Hospital
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2012
* USD 540,000.00

This project will continue work on the chemical synthesis of polymers that can
both carry information in their sequence and replicate that information
chemically without using enzymes. These experiments are inspired by the desire
to understand the emergence of information carrying molecules such as RNA during
the origin of life on earth. Basic chemical principles are used to design simple
variants of RNA and DNA that may be capable of chemical replication, such as a
family of nucleic acids in which the hydroxyl nucleophile is replaced with an
amino group, which is a stronger nucleophile. This change, coupled with the use
of more active leaving groups as well as nucleobases that enhance duplex
stability, should lead to faster chemical copying of template sequences. The
project will also explore ways in which replication may be accelerated through
the use of simple catalysts, or through localization to mineral surfaces or
membrane vesicles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Organic and
Macromolecular Chemistry Program and the Genes and Genome Systems Cluster
program are supporting the research of Professor Jack W. Szostak of the
Department of Molecular Biology at Massachusetts General Hospital. Professor
Szostak's research is aimed at understanding the origin of life on the early
earth, a topic that has always attracted great public interest. Because this
work explores the connection between chemistry and biology at a very fundamental
level, it is also of great interest to students, and will help to attract young
people to the chemical sciences.