* 0809901
* Green Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2013
* L. Keith Woo, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 06/30/2013
* USD 360,000.00

This award by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program
supports Professor L. Keith Woo at Iowa State University for the development of
environmentally-friendly, sustainable approaches to catalytic processes and
technologies. Biological systems provide the inspiration and insight into the
"green" catalyst design employed by the Woo research group. The first project is
based on the central role of iron porphyrins (heme) as the active sites in a
variety of vital enzymes such as cytochrome P-450 and peroxidases. A diverse
group of postdoctoral, graduate, and undergraduate students will investigate new
catalytic applications of these versatile compounds. The second project will
accelerate the development, optimization, and production of effective catalysts
using molecular iterations. This strategy provides a large random library of
single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) oligomers which can act as water-soluble catalysts
for organic reactions. By involving a massive collection of different DNA
molecules in an inherently selective and high-throughput process, maximal
structural and compositional diversity can be rapidly screened. Such screening
can dramatically reduce the time for catalyst identification and development.
Combinatorial approaches such as these have made great impacts on drug design,
but its use in transition metal catalyst design is in its infancy. These
research projects foster teamwork and cooperation among Professor Woo's students
at Iowa State University and exemplifies interdisciplinary collaboration with
chemists, biochemists, biologists, and engineers.