* 0809002
* Development of Generalized-Ensemble Algorithms and their Application in Protein Studies
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2008,03/31/2012
* Ulrich Hansmann, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 03/31/2012
* USD 420,000.00

Ulrich Hansmann of Michigan Technological University is supported by an award
from the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry program for work to further
develop generalized-ensemble algorithms for use in protein folding simulations.
Partial funding for this award has been provided by the Molecular Biophysics
program within the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biology.

After the successful deciphering of whole genomes a new challenge has emerged:
for most of the newly found sequences we do not know the function of the
corresponding proteins. Reliable computational tools that allow one to study the
emergence of structure and function of proteins from their sequence of amino
acids would therefore lead to deeper insight in the molecular foundation of the
fundamental processes in cells. Exploring this relationship in computer
simulations is extremely difficult for detailed protein models, and the
computational effort to calculate accurately physical quantities increases
exponentially with the number of residues in simple room-temperature
simulations. In order to overcome this difficulty, the PI has pioneered the
generalized ensemble approach and demonstrated its feasibility for simulation of
peptides and proteins of up to 40-50 amino acids. By further advancing this
approach and implementing it in his highly scalable software package SMMP the PI
aims at deriving models that will describe folding and interaction of stable
domains in proteins (usually consisting of 50-200 amino acids). Connecting
optimization of algorithms to fundamental ideas of statistical mechanics the PI
is probing folding and assembly of the 75-residue apo calbindin D9K and the
84-residue tetramer BBTA2; and binding of copper ions to the 37-residue
truncated form of yeast copper thionein. His goal is to understand these
processes solely from the physical interactions between the atoms within a
protein, and between the protein and the surrounding environment. The work is,
thus, having a broad impact on the field of biology as well as through the
involvement of students, including some American Indian students, in this
research.