* 0809062
* Data-driven stochastic analysis of flow in random heterogeneous media
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Nicholas Zabaras, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2012
* USD 252,000.00

This proposal concerns the analysis of transport phenomena in heterogeneous
random media with emphasis on the multi-length scale variations in properties
that these phenomena exhibit, and the inherently limited information available
to quantify these property variations that necessitates posing these phenomena
as stochastic processes. The non-intrusive stochastic multiscale framework being
developed has three key components: (a) A computational framework that encodes
the limited information available about the variability of the (multiscale)
material properties (permeability) into a reduced-order stochastic input model,
(b) An adaptive sparse grid collocation framework for solving the stochastic
PDEs involved and (c) A mathematically consistent strategy to exchange
information across length scales for the solution of stochastic multiscale
problems. The key concept explored in the data-driven reduced-order stochastic
input model construction is the low-dimensional parametrization of manifolds
embedded in high-dimensional spaces. The sparse grid collocation approach
constructs the stochastic solution solely based on function calls to the
corresponding deterministic physical simulator. The framework is based on
hierarchical basis functions in multiple dimensions. Adaptivity and convergence
are ensured by utilizing a local support while scalability is guaranteed by the
careful choice of appropriate data structures. The information transfer
strategies are based on the decoupled structure of the stochastic and multiscale
algorithms.

The results of this research will impact the understanding of flow processes in
random media. Thermal and hydrodynamic transport in random heterogeneous media
are ubiquitous processes occurring in various scales ranging from the large
scale (e.g. geothermal energy systems, oil recovery, geological heating of the
earth?s crust) to smaller scales (e.g. heat transfer through composites,
polycrystals, flow through pores, inter-dendritic flow in solidification, heat
transfer through fluidized beds). There has been increasing scientific,
technological and economic interests in predictive modeling of the thermal and
hydrodynamic behavior of such media. In addition, this work can be valuable in
understanding other systems that are poorly understood and/or controlled due to
the gappy and inaccurate data available for their description. The problems
addressed provide a unique and valuable training opportunity for students to
learn, develop and apply cutting edge computational mathematics techniques to a
variety of complex systems.