* 0809732
* Next Generation Ligand Architectures: Design, Development, Application and Chiral Variants
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Thedford Hollis, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 08/31/2012
* USD 394,000.00

This research award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
program supports work by Professor T. Keith Hollis at The University of
Mississippi in the design and development of next generation ligand
architectures. This program specifically focuses on seeking breakthroughs with
newly developed systems. Recent developments have led to the demonstration of a
novel class of CCC-N-heterocyclic carbene (CCC-NHC) ligands for transition
metals. The synthetic methods for the development of transition metal complexes
of the ligands will be investigated during the award period. The unique steric
and electronic properties of the ligands have potential for applications in C-H
activation, dintirogen activation, and light harvesting, with appropriate
synthetic methodologies to prepare the needed metal complexes. The early and
late transition metal complexes of the ligands show novel reactivity in C-C,
C-N, C-Si and C-B bond forming reactions. The scope and limitations of these
reactions and others will be investigated during the project. The fundamental
organometallic chemistry developed in this program will be applied to research
problems with societal and economic impact - new methods for pharmaceutical
synthesis and light harvesting for photocatalysis with potential for water
splitting. This research will engage students at the undergraduate, graduate and
postdoctoral level, providing them with training and experience in the synthetic
methods of organic and organometallic chemistry and in catalysis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of new ligand architectures has
implications for pharmaceutical science, catalysis, electroluminescence, and
photocatalysis. To achieve these applications, new ligand designs that demand
new synthetic methods are required. Catalytic tests of the new complexes provide
feedback into the design of improved systems. Innovative new ligands impact
society by making chemical processes economically more viable and by achieving
reactivity patterns that were not previously accessible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;