* 0809051
* Activities of the Board on Atmospheric Sciences and Climate
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2008,12/31/2011
* Chris Elfring, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 12/31/2011
* USD 650,000.00

The mission of the Board on Atmospheric Sciences and Climate (BASC) is to
provide independent assistance to Federal agencies and the Nation on issues in
the atmospheric and climate sciences. The BASC strives to advance understanding
of atmospheric science, meteorology, and climate; foster application of this
knowledge to benefit the public; help ensure that U.S. research programs are
responsive to scientific opportunities and the needs of the Nation; and help
make scientific information more useful in government planning and decision-
making. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BASC has worked extensively to ensure
discussion of climate issues remained visible. For 2008-2011, it will continue
to plan activities where objective, independent discussion and analysis are
needed. Areas include severe weather, scientific understanding of climate change
and impacts (especially at different scales), observation systems, and
additional topics as requested. The BASC will seek opportunities to use its role
as a neutral, independent body to encourage open discussion of
issues.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Using an extensive network of volunteers, the BASC
brings diverse scientific perspectives together in service to national needs.
BASC strives to enhance understanding of atmosphere and climate, provide
independent views on U.S. research efforts, and ensure that experts are involved
in government decision-making. The Board is able to ask the "best and brightest"
to volunteer their time and these volunteers are the intellectual force behind
all the Board's work. Participants are selected to bring a diversity of
expertise and experience; they are broad thinkers who can both react to requests
for assistance and look ahead to anticipate issues. The Board has a reputation
for objectivity, careful analysis, and commitment to our fields of science.
Based on the rigorous processes of the National Academies, the BASC provides
information of value to both the science community and government decision
makers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BASC does not conduct primary research, but
works instead to ensure that the atmospheric and climate sciences have broad
impact on society. Through its work, the BASC increases understanding of issues
at the forefront of national discussion. Understanding of these issues directly
affects the Nation's environmental policies, energy choices, manufacturing
decisions, construction codes, agricultural methods, and even human health. The
BASC activities serve the science community, federal and state decision makers,
educators, and the public and are disseminated widely. Activities involve a
diverse range of people, with thought given to gender, ethnicity, age,
geography, and institutional diversity.