* 0809828
* Dynamics of Large Silicic Magma Reservoirs: Combining Geochemical Data and Physical Models on Voluminous Ignimbrites From the San Juan Volcanic Field, Colorado
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Olivier Bachmann, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 08/31/2012
* USD 304,903.00

Large volcanic eruptions are fascinating displays of our Earth's internal
energy. They involve a series of complex processes from magma generation in the
mantle and deep crust to the catastrophic outpourings of hot ash and gas on the
surface of our planet. The processes by which silicic magma behave in shallow
crustal reservoirs are critical to our understanding of volcanism and crustal
construction. In that respect, large silicic ignimbrites (i.e., pyroclastic flow
deposits) provide an exceptional record of how such magmas evolve in interaction
with their environment. An ideal region in which to study large-volume silicic
magmatism (especially from perspectives of crustal evolution and petrological
processes occurring in large silicic magma reservoirs) is the San Juan volcanic
field (Colorado, USA). Highly productive Tertiary magmatism (at least 17 large-
volume ash-flow sheets erupted between ~29.5 to 26.9 Ma) through continental
crust dominated by Precambrian lithologies allows a number of possible studies,
some of which will be explored in this proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
proposed to use large ignimbrite sheets from the San Juan volcanic field as
natural laboratories for silicic magma evolution processes. The team will
combine results from geochemical micro-analytical techniques (such as electron
microprobe, LA-ICP-MS and microdrilling-TIMS analyses) in conjunction with
numerical simulations of magma dynamics to better understand the mechanisms
leading to compositional zoning in large ash-flow tuffs; the dynamics of crustal
assimilation in upper crustal conditions; and examine all necessary conditions
leading to eruption of large reservoirs. New analytical data in addition to
published geochronological and geochemical data on San Juan magmas will be used
to provide the ideal stepping stone for scrutinizing key rock units and merging
physical and geochemical models of magmatic processes.