* 0809214
* Observations and Modeling of Orographic Cumulus Development Using Data Collected During CuPIDO 2006
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2007,01/31/2011
* Joseph Zehnder, Creighton University
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 01/31/2011
* USD 271,658.00

Under prior NSF support, the PI conducted the field phase of the Cumulus
Photogrammetric, In-situ and Doppler Observations (CuPIDO) and performed
preliminary analysis of the collected data. Observational assets employed during
the project included digital cameras, automated surface mesonet stations, GPS
based balloon sounding systems and the Wyoming King Air research aircraft with
95 GHz airborne Doppler radar. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental hypotheses
around which CuPIDO is based are that the onset of orographic convection results
from the convergence of boundary layer over the mountain and local surface heat
fluxes, leading to local boundary-layer deepening to the level of free
convection and that subsequent development of the convection and thunderstorm
development is governed by mutual interaction of cumulus and the environment. In
particular, it is believed that moistening of the profile and/or that removal of
stable layers though the action of shallow convection provides a favorable
environment for deep convection. The erosion of thermals by dry air may be more
pronounced in the desert southwest, but the conditioning of the environment by
convection as a means of organizing convection may be important in general.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research, the Principal Investigator will refine
and automate segmentation and stereo analysis techniques and utilize these to
analyze data collected during CuPIDO. A description of the surface forcing,
onset of the mesoscale upslope flow, triggering of the convection and subsequent
development of deep convection will be obtained. Detailed development of the
structure of convective cells and the evolution of the surrounding environment
will be provided through the combination of in-situ, Doppler and photogrammetric
data along with simulations from a cloud resolving model.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The goal is to extend understanding of
fundamental aspects of cumulus development by examining the mechanics of cumulus
entrainment/detrainment, timing of the transition from shallow to deep
convection and interaction of cumulus with the environment under varying shear,
stability and moisture profiles. By extracting quantitative information from the
images automatically, the Principal Investigator will be able to process large
numbers of cases and extend and generalize the results of previous work on this
subject. In particular, he will focus on refining classical conceptual models
resulting from laboratory analogs and those emerging from high resolution
numerical simulations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: In addition to
extending understanding of the fundamentals of cumulus convection, this
information will be of use to operational forecasters in the desert southwest.
The evolution of the convective boundary layer over the elevated terrain is
largely unexplored. A compilation of convective development under different
environmental conditions will allow forecasters to relate conditions in the
valley to those in the regions where the storms are triggered. The data
collected during this project will be useful in designing and tuning cloud
parameterizations for numerical weather prediction, meso- and cloud resolving
process model studies and large-scale, general circulation and climate models.
This project also relies on a synergy between disciplines, as computer science
and image processing are essential parts of the analysis. &lt;br/&gt;