* 0809467
* Ultraviolet Absorption of the Lowest-Lying Electronic State in High-Temperature and Supercritical Water
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Timothy Marin, Benedictine University
* Standard Grant
* Tanja Pietraß
* 08/31/2012
* USD 74,599.00

In this award, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Marin of Benedictine University, Lisle, IL will
perform deep-ultraviolet absorption spectroscopy on the lowest-lying electronic
absorption band of water up to and beyond the critical temperature. Above the
critical temperature local clustering of water molecules is thought to occur.
Here, spectra will be obtained as a function of density, providing information
on how the water electronic states are related to the local solvent environment.
The cluster size is theoretically known to have a large effect on the electronic
state energy, so these experiments complement previous work. Experiments are to
be carried out with undergraduate students in conjunction with staff at the
Synchrotron Radiation Center associated with the University of Wisconsin-Madison
and collaborators at the University of Notre Dame Radiation Laboratory. The
impacts of this project reach beyond fundamental science. A better understanding
of water under supercritical conditions could aid in the development of new,
highly-efficient supercritical water-cooled nuclear reactors or in toxic waste
mitigation via supercritical water oxidation facilities. Opportunities to get
involved in investigative research and use of contemporary instrumentation and
techniques at a premier federal research facility may inspire undergraduate
students to pursue advanced degrees and careers in the physical sciences.