* 0809023
* Collaborative Research: PICASSO: Program to Investigate Convective Alboran Sea System Overturn
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2016
* Thorsten Becker, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Leonard E. Johnson
* 09/30/2016
* USD 862,002.00

The Alboran Sea was created in the wake of the young subduction zones that swept
across the Western Mediterranean in the Neogene during the convergence of Africa
and Europe. The Gibraltar Arc and Alboran Sea are the westernmost part of the
system and one of the most confusing. The mixture of westward rollback,
extension, strike-slip, volcanism, uplift and subsidence has defied attempts to
compose a consistent scenario that explains all of the obervations. Partly as a
result of inadequate data, there are many models that have been proposed
involving subduction, slab breakoff, delamination and drips. There is credible
evidence that the lithospheric mantle of the overriding plate of a west-facing
subduction zone has been thinned by both back-arc stretching and some type of
convective removal (e.g. drips, delamination, etc.). The process of convective
thinning is poorly understood but is believed to be important in driving uplift
and subsidence of the Earth?s surface, influencing rates of deformation in
active orogens, and contributing to recycling of continental materials back into
the mantle. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides for a multidisciplinary,
international investigation of the Alboran Sea, Gibraltar arc, Atlas Mountains
and surrounding areas in the western Mediterranean using passive and active
seismology, magnetotellurics, geochemistry, petrology/structural geology, and
geodynamic modeling. The overall goal of the project is to study the processes
responsible for convective thinning in the Gibraltar-Alboran Sea region. The
project, known as PICASSO, has now been funded in Spain and Ireland as a
colloaborative EU-US program, with proposals from a number of other EU nations
submitted or in process. The project was selected as the pilot experiment for
TopoEurope, an EarthScope-like initiative recently approved by the European
Science Foundation. A large part of the field deployments will be done by
European scientists, including a 3D EarthScope-type rolling array (IberArray),
with additional targeted field experiments by US investigators. The IberArray is
already underway with ~60 stations deployed in the PICASSO field
area.&lt;br/&gt;