* 0809000
* The Role of Serpentinites in Subduction Recycling of Sulfur and Organic Carbon
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2008,12/31/2011
* Jeffrey Alt, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* William P. Leeman
* 12/31/2011
* USD 328,247.00

Serpentinized ultramafic rocks comprise ~10-20% of oceanic crust generated at
slow spreading centers, plus additional suboceanic mantle is serpentinized as
the lithosphere flexes at subduction zones, making serpentinites an important
component of oceanic lithosphere. Exposure of these rocks to seawater results in
uptake of H2O and elements such as Cl, B, S, and C. For example, S can be
enriched by qne to two orders of magnitude compared to depleted mantle
peridotites (~0.1- 1 wt% vs. ~0.01 wt%, respectively), and S isotopes are
significantly fractionated from the mantle value d34S = from -43 to +13 permil
vs ~0 permil, respectively). Serpentinites also contain significant amounts of
organic carbon, with TOC (Total Organic Carbon) values up to 2700 ppm, having
d13C values down to -30 permil. The addition of sulfide and TOC to the rocks
results from hydrothermal and microbial processes over a range of
temperatures.&lt;br/&gt;Recycling of serpentinites in subduction zones can
transport water and seawater components to sub-arc depths, where they can
influence arc magmatism and/or return these components to the deep mantle. This
process may also influence S and C isotope compositions of subduction zone
magmas, and contribute to isotopic heterogeneities of S and C in the mantle.
Because these processes are poorly understood, it is proposed to examine the
contents and isotope compositions of S and C in ultramafic rocks of Tethyan
ophiolites that have experienced variable P-T conditions during subduction
metamorphism. Overall goals are to understand: (a) seafloor serpentinization
processes in these rocks; (b) the behavior of these elements during subduction
and high-pressure metamorphism; and (c) the extent to which these elements are
recycled through arc volcanism vs. returned to the deeper mantle. The following
hypotheses will be evaluated: (1a) Microbial reduction of seawater sulfate
during low-temperature serpentinization on the seafloor can result in elevated S
and TOC contents and low (negative) d34S and d13CTOC values for serpentinites.
(1b) Serpentinization associated with local gabbroic intrusions may have
occurred at higher temperatures, leading to elevated sulfide-S contents and d34S
values. (2a) Sulfur losses from serpentinites during high-P dehydration
reactions result in little isotope fractionation. (2b) TOC is retained during
dehydration reactions,.&lt;br/&gt;These hypotheses will be tested through
analyses of whole rock contents and isotope compositions of S and TOC in
variably metamorphosed serpentinites, and through petrographic and chemical
analyses of individual opaque phases (sulfides, oxides, and carbonaceous
material) in the rocks. Samples will be from Tethyan ophiolites in the Northern
Appenines, the Voltri Group in the Ligurian Alps, and the Almirez massif in the
Betic Cordillera.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS. This project will
support a female graduate student. It will also provide ongoing support for a
stable isotope lab under the PI's supervison. These facilities are generally
available for student use and other NSF-supported reseach projects.