* 0809939
* Inner Forearc Deformation Along an Erosive Convergent Margin, Northeastern Japan
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2013
* Eric Kirby, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 06/30/2013
* USD 355,032.00

Subduction zones play an important role in the long-term mass balance of earth?s
crustal materials - they can serve as either sites of continental margin growth
(accretionary margins) or continental margin denudation (erosional margins).
This study will quantify shortening rates, erosion rates, and surface uplift
rates in the forearc of a classical erosive convergent margin in northeastern
Japan. The mass balance across the forearc will be assessed and patterns of
permanent strain accumulation will be compared with elastic strain inferred from
seismic and geodetic data. Erosive margins often exhibit systematically opposed
behavior in the inner and outer portions of the forearc, with 1) an outer
forearc that is mostly submarine, showing evidence for extension, and having an
extensive slope apron that records subsidence of the margin; and 2) an inner
forearc with coastal mountains, uplift, and rocks that show evidence for
shortening and permanent strain. The relative ubiquity of this couplet along
erosive margins worldwide suggests a potential genetic relationship. This
project is testing the hypothesis that outer forearc subsidence due to basal
erosion, or underthrusting, is matched by inner forearc uplift driven by
underplating, or overthrusting. If this hypothesis is correct, global long-term
estimates of continental denudation that are based on outer forearc subsidence
grossly overestimate the amount of continental margin material subducted. The
research team will employ a multi-disciplinary approach that includes structural
mapping and fault-related fold analysis, tephrachronology, low-temperature
thermochronometry (including apatite fission track analysis and (U-Th)/He
dating), analysis of marine terraces, and geodynamic (thermal and deformational)
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It has become increasingly apparent over the last
two decades that many, if not the majority, of the earth?s subduction zones
experience basal erosion, whereby the outer forearc is removed through upward
migration of the plate boundary into the existing margin wedge. What is not
known is how long are basal erosion rates sustained and where does eroded
material go? This study addresses these problems by examining the inner forearc
of an active system. Inner forearc uplift was first noted by Charles Darwin
during the Beagle expedition of 1846 when he observed sea shells atop marine
terraces located a kilometer above sea level and argued for regional uplift of
the western coast of South America. Modern surveys of offshore bathymetry show
that the local regions of uplift described by Darwin lie inboard of areas with
pronounced outer forearc erosion. Inner forearc uplift may balance forearc
subsidence due to basal erosion.