* 0809217
* Manioc at Ceren:  Ancient Maya Garden Plant or Staple Crop?
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2011
* Payson Sheets, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2011
* USD 86,252.00

With the support of the US National Science Foundation, Dr. Payson Sheets
(Anthropology, University of Colorado) and a team of international specialists
and students will conduct an investigation into ancient Maya agriculture in El
Salvador. The team will consist of archaeologists, surveyors, agricultural
technicians, biologists, and an ethnobotanist. The project will investigate
ancient Maya agriculture at distances of 100 to 200 meters south of the Ceren
village, a World Heritage site. That village, and the surrounding agricultural
fields, was buried about 1400 years ago by volcanic ash from the Loma Caldera
volcanic vent. That vent opened up under the Rio Sucio, and the ensuing steam
explosions covered the surrounding terrain with a fine-grained moist volcanic
ash that resulted in extraordinary preservation. Test pits last year encountered
a cornfield with the stalks and ears of corn preserved to the point of
individual corn kernels can be examined and measured. Such preservation is
unprecedented in the Americas, and allows for precise estimates of productivity
per unit area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this ongoing project the most important
discovery last year was a manioc field, encountered in two test pits. The field
had been harvested just hours before the eruption, and had been replanted by
cutting the vertical stalks of the manioc plants and placing them horizontally
in the raised beds. Had the eruption not occurred, the stalks would have
generated new plants above ground, and long carbohydrate-rich tubers below
ground. The project will search for the boundary of the harvested manioc, and
when unharvested areas are encountered they will be studied
intensively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The vertical stalks of manioc bushes should be
preserved as hollow spaces a meter or two above the planting bed, based on
previous experience. When the vertical stalks are encountered, they will be
investigated with fiber optiscopes. Once the condition and volume is known of a
plant, dental plaster will be mixed and used to fill the cavity. Once the
plaster has set, it will be excavated. Then the tubers will be investigated and
cast. When all has been cast and lifted the above-ground and below-ground
elements will be reunited, and for the first time ancient manioc productivity
can be quantified. Controlled experiments in various areas of the world have
shown that manioc outproduces maize by six to fifteen times, in carbohydrates
per unit area. Thus, a major aspect of intellectual merit is finding intensive
manioc production in a Maya village that could be part of the answer of how the
Maya fed the multitudes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A persistent problem for Maya
archaeologists in the Classic period, contemporary with Ceren, is how dense
populations, in the hundreds of people per square kilometer, were fed with seed
crops. Manioc may well be part of the answer. A broader impact is the fact that
the manioc stalks and tubers discovered in 2007 are more robust than those grown
today in the area. This generated considerable interest, and Salvadoran
scientists will assist in exploring the reasons for that, with potential
implications for improving contemporary agriculture.