* 0809497
* SBIR Phase I: A Molecularly Imprinted Conductive Polymer-based Biodetector
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2008,12/31/2008
* Elena Komarova, Smart Polymers Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia A. Znati
* 12/31/2008
* USD 99,999.00

In this Small Business Innovation Research project, Smart Polymers Research
Corporation will focus on the creation and testing of a molecularly imprinted
conductive polymer as an innovative potential electrochemical detector for
ricin, a natural cytotoxin, which is the second highest toxic plant cytotoxin
after abrin, and which can be a potent biological weapon. Molecularly imprinted
polymers (MIPs) are becoming an important analytical tool. Non-covalent
imprinting, in particular, has a great range of applications because of the
theoretical lack of restrictions on size, shape or chemical character of the
imprinted molecule. The possibility of tailor-made, highly selective artificial
receptors at low cost, with good mechanical, thermal and chemical properties
makes MIP materials appear ideal for chemical- or bio-sensing applications.
Despite the large amount of data available to date on formulae for MIPs, the
main applications continue to be in the separation field, whereas the
development of sensors and electrochemical sensors, in particular, is
significantly slower. Electrochemical sensing could offer good limits of
detection, at low cost, with the possibility of easy miniaturization and
automation. Upon feasibility demonstration of our approach, a multispecific
detector will be targeted to address the detection of several biowarfare agents
of viral or bacterial nature. The potential for future miniaturization and
possibility of field application of the proposed assay/sensor will be outlined.

The proposed MIP-based sensor can have a wide range of commercial applications
due to the versatility and adaptability of the underlying technology. The
immediate applications can be broadly defined as targeted toward 1) the
military; 2) first responders, and 3) the civilian sector. Based on mission
requirements and the possibility of battlefield contamination, the military is
expected to remain the largest consumer. Second are civil defense and law
enforcement agencies, or first responders. These end-users are present at state
and local levels and are tasked with protecting civilians in the event of a WMD
attack. The third group of end-users is found in the civilian sector. These are
primarily companies involved in chemical and biological demilitarization work
and government agencies without first responder duties.