* 0809321
* Collaborative Research: Multi-scale Dynamics in Explosive Volcanic Eruptions
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Josef Dufek, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2012
* USD 190,690.00

Explosive volcanic eruptions are some of the most energetic flows on the planet,
the largest of which can have global impact. The more common, smaller, events
are a proximal hazard and still encompass scales of several kilometers. Despite
their large size and long duration, mass and energy transfer in these flows are
fundamentally controlled by processes at much smaller spatial and temporal
scales, where individual particles interact with each other, with gas, or with
the surface over which the flows travel. Our ability to predict large-scale
behavior of volcanic flows can ultimately be limited by our understanding of
very small-scale, or microphysical, processes. This proposal examines a suite of
particle-scale mass and energy transfer mechanisms in the laboratory with the
aim of understanding the physics of these processes and to incorporate them into
large-scale simulations of explosive volcanic eruptions. One of the long term
goals of this effort is to provide a technology for students, scientists and
civil officials to better understand hazards during times of volcanic
unrest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances in computational power and algorithm
design enable detailed studies of the turbulent structures that develop in
explosive volcanic eruptions. However, even with increases in computational
resources, achieving resolution below meter-scale in large-scale three-
dimensional simulations may never be possible. Accounting for subgrid-scale
physical processes requires developing constitutive relationships for volcanic
materials and conditions. Past work on steam explosions has shown that subgrid
models developed from experiments can be readily coupled to multiphase numerical
simulations. More importantly, these subgrid relations are critical for
predicting the dynamics reflected in volcanic deposits; models that neglect
subgrid processes can fail to produce the energy transfer manifest in volcanic
deposits by several orders of magnitude. This work will focus on 1) heat
transfer between particles and gas, 2) comminution and agglomeration in active
flows and the impact of a evolving grain size distribution on the dynamics of
flows, and 3) particle-boundary interactions, and in particular the role of
resuspended particles from the bed. All of the proposed experiments will be
conducted with materials and conditions similar to those in natural flows,
minimizing the potential difficulties with scaling to large-scale multiphase
flows. In the methodology proposed, the numerical models are integrally
connected to the experimental data. The dual approach emphasizes the strength of
both techniques: the strength of numerical models is the ability to solve non-
linear, complexly coupled equations and determine emergent behavior, and the
strength of the experiments is to understand in detail the physical processes
operating at small scales. &lt;br/&gt;