* 0809418
* Mechanisms of Transition Metal Catalyzed Reactions in Hydrocarbons
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Robert Grubbs, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 07/31/2012
* USD 826,518.00

With the support of the Organic Dynamics Program in the Chemistry Division,
Professor Robert Grubbs at The California Institute of Technology will continue
to work on a family of catalysts that have been able to impact a broad range of
applications. The catalysts have displayed high levels of both activity and
selectivity, the understanding of which has resulted from studies of mechanisms
and structure function relationships. During the next granting period, new
methods will be developed and explored for the synthesis of ligands that will
aid in the fundamental understanding of the factors that control the efficiency
of these systems. Out of these studies will come an efficient method for
generating an array of N-heterocyclic carbenes that can be used in many
catalytic processes beyond olefin metathesis. Although active metathesis
catalysts have been prepared from ruthenium, osmium and iridium, to date there
are no reports of even a moderately efficient metathesis catalyst based on iron.
Ligand systems that should support and stabilize iron alkylidenes will be
prepared and investigated to determine if some of the lessons learned from
ruthenium catalysts can be applied to iron-based systems. Another objective of
the proposed research is to explore routes to the synthesis of new forms of
polyethylene (PE) to be used to develop and test models of structure-property
relationships. New routes will be developed to perfect linear and monodispersed
PE, continue the exploration of cyclic PEs, and develop new approaches to the
synthesis of hyper-branched PE. Collaborations have been established for the
full characterization and comparison of the properties of each of these
topologically diverse materials. Additionally, a new strategy to develop
catalysts for the interchange of functional groups (functional group metathesis)
between two olefins, similar to olefin metathesis, which involves the
interchange of fragments between two olefins. This strategy will provide new
routes for the oxidation, aziridination, and hydration of olefins. Special
emphasis will be on the development of a catalyst for the anti Markovnikov
addition of water to olefins. To aid in these investigations, rapid screening
techniques will be used and fundamental mechanistic studies will be carried
out.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal by Professor Grubbs at The California
Institute of Technology will produce new polymeric materials that other groups
both in industry and academia will use to explore structure-property
relationships. The past program produced over 65 publications and 14 issued
patents related to olefin metathesis chemistry. These publications were either
directly funded by NSF or were made possible by catalysts developed using NSF
funding. The academic impact of the NSF funded program is demonstrated by being
ranked in the top two of most cited programs with 90 citations per paper. The
research program has produced a number of students who are now outstanding
researchers in major academic and industrial institutions. It brings
postdoctoral fellows and students from around the world, and supports 2-4
undergraduates for a ten week period, exposing them to academic research.
Professor Grubbs' research is the basis for a number of industrial processes and
is creating new employment opportunities in the US.