* 0809530
* Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Biological Free Radical Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2011
* Matthew Redinbo, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 07/31/2011
* USD 497,000.00

With the support of the Organic Dynamics Program in the Chemistry Division,
Professor Malcolm Forbes of the Chemistry Department at the University of North
Carolina- Chapel Hill will investigate several new areas in macromolecular,
supramolecular, and biological photochemistry. In particular, Professor Forbes
seeks to understand how random and block copolymers degrade in solution, and to
probe the dynamics of novel main chain polymeric free radicals. New linear and
cyclic models for these dynamics, which manifest themselves as alternating line
widths as a function of temperature, will also be synthesized and explored.
Diffusion of free radicals will be probed inside new supramolecular structures
such as polysomes, surfactant-stabilized nanocrystals, and CO2-based reverse
micelles. Advances in the theory of mobile spin correlated radical pairs via the
micro-reactor model, as well as computational studies on radical structures,
will help drive new experiments and syntheses. Finally, two projects in
mechanistic photobiology will begin, (1) investigation of model systems for
proton-coupled electron transfer reactions in Photosystem II, and (2) the
degradation of UV protectant compounds called kynurenines found in the human eye
lens.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Research by Professor Forbes at the University of
North Carolina- Chapel Hill will provide a fundamental understanding of free
radical reactions and photochemistry that is essential to addressing problems
such as energy storage ( photosystem II) and the effects of biological radical
formation and damage. The proposed research closes the loop from the basic
science of these events to solving long term questions of great importance. The
research trains researchers in small molecule and polymer synthesis, structural
analysis, photochemistry and laser spectroscopy, magnetic resonance (including
microwave engineering), molecular and macromolecular dynamics, surface
chemistry, and computational chemistry. There are few laboratories in the U.S.
where all of these activities take place under one umbrella research program and
students at all levels are well prepared with a solid foundation in many aspects
of quantitative physical organic chemistry. Professor Forbes continues to build
on his strong track record for international collaboration, with active projects
in six different areas with researchers from four different countries. Extensive
collaborations both nationally and internationally make his laboratory an
international center for basic radical-related research.