* 0809267
* Understanding the Factors that Govern Invasion (and coexistence), a Case Study with an Anomalous Asian Ant.
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2008,09/30/2010
* Robert Dunn, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Mook
* 09/30/2010
* USD 8,484.00

OISE-0809267 (Dunn, North Carolina State University) "Understanding Factors that
Govern Invasion (and coexistence): A Case Study with an Anomalous Asian Ant"

Abstract

This award supports a planning visit to Okayama, Japan by the PI and two
graduate students to build a collaborative research program with Professor Kenji
Matsuura?s social insect working group. The collaboration focuses on
understanding the factors that facilitate invasion of species and differences in
life history of invasive species in their native and introduced ranges, with
particular focus on Pachycondyla chinensis. P. chinensis was introduced into the
eastern U.S. from East Asia as early as 1903. While long unnoticed, the species
has expanded its range and can now be found from Florida to New York, showing
signs in some areas of dominating local ant assemblages. In contrast to most
invasive ant species, P chinensis does not have tropical origins. Its native and
invaded habitats are similar in species richness and share many genera. Where
invasive, it can inhabit both disturbed and undisturbed habitats. Thus,
pachychondyla chinensis is an interesting exception to ?the rules? for invasive
ants and offers a novel opportunity to understand biological invasions by ants.
During the planning visit, scheduled for summer 2008, the team will visit
potential field locations around Okayama, compare existing results, and design a
series of experiments.