* 0809397
* Effect of Phase Transitions on Bulk Modulus and Bulk Attenuation: Mantle P-T Laboratory Study at Seismic Frequencies
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Li Li, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 07/31/2011
* USD 218,745.00

Our view of the interior of the Earth relies on modeling seismic velocities
using physical properties of the constituent minerals. One can resolve 100
Kelvin temperature gradient or a few percent chemical component (such as Al)
variation in lateral regions at 600 Km depth by combining modern high resolution
seismic tomography and recent mineral data measured at mantle conditions.
Elastic properties, which define how fast seismic wave travels, and phase
equilibrium, which defines the stable minerals at a given depth, are the key
ingredients to simulate seismic velocities. However, the interaction of the
seismic wave with phase transitions has been ignored for over four decades. The
exact mineralogy is often assumed to be unchanging in the velocity models. If
the period of the seismic P wave is comparable to the phase transition rate, and
the P wave, as a compressional force wave, drives a small amount of minerals
though phase transitions, P wave velocities will be reduced based on behavior of
solids. Our pilot experiments suggest this process is important for the Earth.
&lt;br/&gt;Indeed incompatibilities between seismic models and mineral models
persist, particularly in the transition zone. Most regions between 200 and 1000
km depth contain significant amounts of coexisting high- and low-pressure
phases. Furthermore, the effective bulk modulus of thermodynamically
equilibrated materials undergoing a volume reducing phase transformation is
significantly lower than that of the individual phases. If the stress of the P
wave itself induces phase transitions, then the P velocity will be reduced in
these regions as the P waves sample a relaxed and lower modulus. A comparison
between the amount of time required by phase transitions to reach equilibrium
and the sampling period thus becomes crucial in order to define the amount of
softening or attenuation of P waves within a two-phase zone. &lt;br/&gt;This
proposal is to conduct an experimental research program aimed at defining the
effect of phase transformations on the expected P wave velocity in the depth
range of 200 ? 1000 km in the Earth. Using synchrotron and a multi-anvil device,
we have developed the capability of measuring stress-strain-time relations at
mantle P-T and seismic frequencies. Our pilot experiments which include the
kinetics, attenuation, and dispersion during the olivine-spinel phase transition
imply that phase transitions will significantly reduce P velocities measured
seismically. We will focus on volume changing phase transformations as
relaxation processes. Mg-Fe exchange controlled olivine-wadsleyite-ringwoodite-
perovskite transition and Al/Si diffusion controlled pyroxene-garnet-perovskite
transition are to be evaluated within the context of this model in order to
define the effects on seismic velocities and attenuation. &lt;br/&gt;The goals
of this proposal include (1) Establish a working model that is supported by
elastic and anelastic properties of minerals during first-order phase
transitions at the time scale of seismic frequencies; and that can be
extrapolated to the stress amplitudes of a seismic wave. (2) Measure elastic and
anelastic properties of minerals during phase transitions at mantle P-T and
seismic frequencies.&lt;br/&gt;