* 0809459
* RUI: Collaborative Research: Redox Ratios by Fe-XANES
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Melinda Dyar, Mount Holyoke College
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2011
* USD 104,897.00

Of all the common elements in the Earth's crust, iron is the only element that
occurs in multiple valence states; it can be found as a pure Fe(0) metal, as
Fe(II), or as Fe(III). The valence state of iron thus reflects the amount of
oxygen that was present in the environment at the time the mineral crystallized.
The amount of oxygen in turn affects how a magma may crystallize: which minerals
will form, and in what order. For this reason, measuring the oxidation state of
Fe is extremely important in all rock types in which the minerals occur in
equilibrium. The valence state of Fe thus serves as a recorder of the evolution
of oxygen in the Earth's interior and on its surface. It is also useful in
identifying geological formations of economic interest (for example, garnets in
diamond-bearing deposits are usually oxidized). The ability to measure Fe
valence state is also useful in understanding chemical reactions that control
industrial processing of minerals, chemical and metallurgical engineering,
recycling of materials, and even the study of health effects and
mineralogy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Historically, it has been very difficult to
measure the valence state of Fe in minerals quantitatively. Traditional wet
chemistry methods have been used for a half-century, but they require large
masses of sample (&gt;1 g) and these are difficult to prepare from rocks that
may contain intimate mixtures of fine-grained minerals. MÃ¶ssbauer spectroscopy
is another bulk technique that has more recently been used for measurements of
Fe, but it also requires &gt;20 mg of sample. Microfocused X-ray Absorption
Near-Edge Spectroscopy (XANES) presents a promising technology for making
Fe3+/total Fe measurements on small spots (8-30 microns) on mineral grains. This
technique utilizes the observation that the energy of the Fe K absorption edge
and the absorption pre-edge feature found ~15-20 eV below the edge are very
sensitive to the oxidation state of Fe. Past measurements of Fe3+/total Fe by
this technique have been only semi-quantitative, but recent upgrades at the hard
x-ray microprobe beamline x26a at the National Synchrotron Light Source (higher
beam intensity and improved energy resolution available from a Si(311)
monochromator) have remedied these issues. Thus, the ambitious goal of this
proposal is to develop the XANES technique for use as a quantitative microprobe
method for analysis of Fe(II) and Fe(III) in minerals.