* 0809820
* Proof of Concept of a Hydrologic Multiphysics Model
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2011
* Stephen Moysey, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 05/31/2011
* USD 48,167.00

Hydrologic models play a key role in both the advancement of hydrologic science
and the predictive contributions that hydrology makes to society. A variety of
options for improving hydrologic models are being evaluated as part of a series
of workshops and conference sessions coordinated through CUAHSI to investigate
the feasibility of developing of a modeling platform for hydrologic sciences.
The current vision for the modeling platform is that it will support several
major software packages, each with distinct functionality. One package will
cover forward models used to represent hydrologic processes, whereas other
packages include capabilities to do inverse modeling, geostatistics, advanced
graphical rendering, and linkages with data sources such as HIS. One option for
a forward modeling package is to use software with capabilities to simulate a
wide range of processes, and then tailor the software to specific applications
in hydrology. This option is appealing because it offers simulation capabilities
that are much broader than those provided by existing hydrologic models.
Multiphysics software is the most promising of the general modeling packages,
and this type of software has been used for a variety of applications in
hydrology. However, the applications have been limited in scope, so the
viability of hydrologic multiphysics as an important capability on a hydrologic
modeling platform is unclear. The purpose of this exploratory proposal is to
obtain licenses and set up a small modeling platform designed to for a proof-of-
concept evaluation of hydrologic multiphysics. In particular, we intend to use
the software to solve benchmark problems covering a wide range of topics in
hydrology in order to evaluate the value of having this type of software
represented on a hydrologic modeling platform. The objective is to develop these
benchmark problems so the results can be used to evaluate the value of
hydrologic multiphysics at the various workshops planned for the next year. The
project will be conducted by a team of faculty and graduate students with a
range of experience that covers much of the modeling interests in hydrology. We
need to get started with the evaluation soon in order to have results when the
workshops take place, and this is the reason we are submitting an exploratory
proposal. This proposal seeks to begin to evaluate the feasibility of using a
single model to solve problems that are currently addressed by many models
within hydrology. The intellectual merit of this activity is that it may allow
hydrologists to invest more of their intellectual capital in the science of
understanding hydrologic processes and less in task of selecting, developing and
maintaining relevant models. This type of contribution can lead to advances
across the field of hydrology. The broad impact of this project is that it will
provide evaluations that will guide decisions on how a hydrologic modeling
platform is formulated (it may or may not include hydrologic multiphysics,
depending on the outcome of this project). A successful evaluation of hydrologic
multiphysics has the potential to demonstrate modeling capabilities that
integrate a wide range of processes into hydrologic models (from ecology to
economics, or climate forecasting to agricultural and urban planning). This will
have broad impacts within both hydrology and associated disciplines. The
proposed effort will involve approximately 10 graduate students and several
undergraduates, who will learn a new modeling approach, and it will pave the way
for introducing this approach to many additional students in the future.