* 0809165
* RUI: Exhumation History and Potential Mesozoic Fault Reactivation of the St. Lawrence Rift System, Southern Quebec
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/2008,05/31/2011
* Mary Roden-Tice, SUNY College at Plattsburgh
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 05/31/2011
* USD 48,374.00

The Saint Lawrence Rift System in southern Quebec is a currently active seismic
zone along northwest-southwest-trending Late Proterozoic (between 900 ? 570
million years ago) regional normal faults that may have been reactivated during
the Mesozoic (between 248 ? 65 million years ago). This study is using apatite
fission-track analysis to determine the cooling or exhumation history along
these faults as well as related northwest-southwest-trending faults bounding the
Saguenay River fjord in southern Quebec. Apatite fission-track dating allows an
estimation of a rock?s cooling history below 100 degrees Centigrade, which
corresponds to about 3-4 km depth in the Earth's crust. The goals of this
investigation are to: 1) determine the timing, regional extent and magnitude of
the most recent displacement and/or reactivation of these fault systems; and 2)
relate potential Mesozoic fault reactivation to the formation of major regional
faults which bound a series of rift basins in New England that were created in
the Mesozoic during the opening of the Atlantic Ocean.

The fission-track age trends will better delineate the regional extent of the
effects of Mesozoic rifting into the interior of northeastern North America,
which will have major implications for the timing and nature of rifting in the
North Atlantic. The suggested relationship of the passage of the North American
plate over the Great Meteor hotspot in the Cretaceous, widespread regional
exhumation across northern New York state and New England during the same time,
and the current existence of thin lithosphere over low shear wave velocity
mantle from eastern New York across Vermont and into the White Mountain region
of New Hampshire will be better constrained by the results of this study. The
study will relate the current active seismicity in the Charlevoix, Quebec
region, which is the most seismically active zone in eastern North America, to
the Mesozoic regional exhumation and rifting attributed to the passage of
northeastern North American plate over the Great Meteor hotspot. The results can
also be useful in hydrocarbon exploration in southern Quebec. Undergraduate
students will be involved in a substantial manner in all aspects of the project
from field sample collection to actual age determinations. The students
participating in this research effort will greatly enhance their knowledge of
geologic research techniques and will present their results at professional
conferences.