* 0809162
* Self-Assemble and Programmable Nucleus Permeable Polyamides that Target Specific DNA Sequences with Slow Off-rates and High Affinity: Development of a Molecular Tool Kit
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2013
* W. Wilson, Hope College
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 07/31/2013
* USD 409,883.00

With the support of the Organic Dynamics Program in the Chemistry Division,
Professor Moses Lee at Hope College in Holland, Michigan and Professor W. David
Wilson at Georgia State University will develop a class of H-pin polyamides that
possess superb binding affinities and sequence specificity, and develop a new
strategy for improving cell permeability using a new ?in nucleus DNA binding
promoted? strategy. A successful outcome from this project will have a profound
impact in the area of small-molecule-DNA interactions and the ability to control
the gene expression. It will ultimately contribute to the advancement of the
personalized medicine field, as potential medicines and DNA targeted diagnostic
agents. Recent work has led to the design of novel compounds, such as the
polyamide analogs of distamycin, which are capable of recognizing specific DNA
sequences in the promoters of genes. These compounds generally have difficulty
in entering cells and localizing in the nucleus. This biological barrier has
been the major stumbling block in advancing the polyamide field and there is a
major effort among the chemistry and biology communities to overcome this
physical obstacle. This work will develop new strategies and explore fundamental
science that will enable scientists to recognize specific genes in cells and
control their function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal by Professor Lee at
Hope College and Professor W. David Wilson at Georgia State University has a
strong broader impacts component. It fosters an interdisciplinary learning
through research theme in which students will learn various sub-disciplines of
chemistry, biochemistry, molecular and cell biology. This will better educate
students for the future and help to ensure America?s competitive edge. In
addition, special emphasis will be placed on the training of woman and students
from groups underrepresented in the sciences. Professors Lee and Wilson have a
long and successful record of engaging these students in their research
programs. Students will be recruited from two-year community colleges either
through Hope College?s NSF funded S-STEM program or through participation in the
NSF Undergraduate Research Collaboratives (URC) program of the Chicago Community
Colleges Consortium. High school students will also have an opportunity to
participate in this project through the Hope College program called Research
Across Cultures at Hope (REACH).&lt;br/&gt;