* 0809431
* Phase Behaviors and Nucleation Kinetics of Protein Solutions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Xueyu Song, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 08/31/2012
* USD 390,000.00

Xueyu Song of Iowa State University is supported by an award from the
Theoretical and Computational Chemistry program to develop a realistic model of
protein-protein interactions at the residue level. A key feature of the model is
that it is parameterized using generic properties of twenty amino acids in
nature and experimentally accessible properties of water and crystallization
agents, and is therefore portable to all of the protein-protein interactions in
aqueous solutions. A major effort in the research is the development of reliable
methods to calculate the interactions which occur when the protein molecules are
close together. In this situation, the molecular nature of the solution becomes
important. Song and his group are studying the crystallization of lysozyme,
which is well characterized experimentally. In these studies they are striving
to understand the reasons lysozyme crystallization occurs under certain
conditions in a lysozyme-ammonium-sulfate-water system. Studies on the
crystallization of crystallins and their various mutants are also being
performed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From these studies new insights into the
mechanism of protein crystallization, will be gained. It may also be possible to
more fully understand the formation of cataracts which involves a protein
crystallization process. The work is, thus, having a broad impact on the field
of biology but is also having a broad impact through the training of students in
an interdisciplinary area of study. Song is also including undergraduate
students from the REU center he directs in his research, further broadening its
impact.