* 0809376
* Computational Investigation of the Chemical Modification of Polymers and Organic Thin Films by Particle Deposition
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2013
* Susan Sinnott, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 07/31/2013
* USD 419,354.00

Susan Sinnott of the University of Florida is supported by an award from the
Theoretical and Computational Chemistry program for the development of
computational methods for the simulation of particle-surface reactions in
polymers and organic thin films. The work is identifying the atomic-level
processes involved in the chemical modification of polymers by polyatomic ions
and radicals and is investigating the selective modification of oligomers with
optoelectronic properties through the deposition of ions and radicals at
hyperthermal incident energies.

Particle-surface deposition occurs over a wide range of incident energies and is
used for a variety of industrially vital applications, including thin-film
growth, doping, sputtering, etching, chemical modification and creation of new
interfacial stuctures. The work is having a broader impact through the
development of computational tools that will be freely disseminated through the
PI's website and via the nanoHUB (www.nanohub.org), an NSF-supported
cyberinfrastructure. It is having a further broader impact through the training
and mentoring of students, including several undergraduates, some of whom are
members of under-represented minority groups. Some of the students involved are
working with Nedialka Iordanova through a subaward to Georgia Southwestern State
University.