* 0809658
* Collaborative Research: Combined Seismological and Geodetic Constraints on 3-D Mantle Structure
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2012
* Miaki Ishii, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 06/30/2012
* USD 247,563.00

Determining the structure of the Earth's mantle is a fundamental problem of
geophysical research. This information, especially the variation in density,
provides important insight into the composition and dynamics of the Earth's deep
interior. Seismological data have been used to construct models of the mantle,
but the data conventionally used for such purpose (body and surface waves) are
not sensitive to density variation. A global density model is typically obtained
by making a strong assumption that seismic wave speed variations are linearly
related to density variation. This assumption loosely translates to three-
dimensional variations arising from a purely thermal origin. Results from recent
studies, however, suggest that the density heterogeneity within the mantle is
poorly correlated with shear-wave speed anomalies, especially in the lower
mantle. In this project, we combine multidisciplinary data types to better-
constrain properties of the Earth's mantle with a focus on density.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The modern, dense, global GPS sites will be used for the
determination of Earth-tide amplitudes across the spectrum of tidal frequencies
to yield site-dependent corrections to the (three-dimensional) Love numbers.
Previous studies using other ground-based space geodetic systems indicate that
the GPS network has great sensitivity to the Love numbers, in part due to the
unique temporal spectrum of the tides. These Love numbers are usually calculated
using a spherically symmetric Earth model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research would explore an approach for combining global geodetic and seismic
data to yield a new model for the mechanical structure of the Earth.
Seismological data (normal mode splitting information) from previous studies,
three-dimensional solid-Earth tidal amplitudes from a new geodetic solution
using a global network of Global Positioning System (GPS) sites,
and&lt;br/&gt;the Earth's gravity field from satellite geodesy will be jointly
inverted to obtain a three-dimensional model for the elastic parameters and
density of the mantle. Each of these data types has different sensitivities and
inherent resolution, and the combination will lead to a model with superior
accuracy and resolution relative to the individual techniques.