* 0809669
* Picosecond Isomerization in Photochromic Ruthenium and Osmium complexes:  Mechanism, New Complexes and Molecular Devices
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Jeffrey Rack, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 07/31/2012
* USD 351,000.00

This research award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
program at NSF supports work by Professor Jeffrey Rack at Ohio University to
investigate a new class of transition metal complexes that change structure and
color when exposed to solar radiation (light). The emphasis of the study is the
synthesis and complete characterization of photochromic ruthenium and osmium
complexes, whose mode of action is associated with sulfur-to-oxygen and oxygen-
to-sulfur isomerization of sulfoxide ligands bound to the metal in these
chromophoric complexes. These studies will focus on discovering the kinetic and
thermodynamic parameters for the action of this unique family of chromophores
that utilize light to break and make bonds on a very fast timescale. Members of
this new class of transition metal complexes will be employed in the fabrication
of solar-driven nanoscale devices for information storage applications. Thus,
both fundamental and applied aspects of this chemistry will be explored.
Students associated with this project will be involved in a variety of outreach
programs that engage male and female students from local area schools in
chronically economically depressed Appalachia (Athens, OH). &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The development of light-activated compounds and materials is
important for both laboratory and industrial settings. The transduction of light
energy to other forms of energy is of intrinsic interest and relevance in
biology, chemistry, physics, and engineering. These molecules and these studies
will reveal new strategies for the conversion of light energy into other forms
of energy.