* 0810996
* Design Squad Season 3
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2011
* Kate Taylor, WGBH Educational Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Cheville
* 06/30/2011
* USD 2,659,907.00

WGBH will produce a third season of Design Squad, PBS reality competition
series-with an accompanying outreach campaign and Web site
(pbskidsgo.org/designsquad)-designed to inspire a new generation of engineers.
Through the show, teenagers learn to think smart, build fast, and contend with a
wild array of engineering challenges-all for real-life clients. Targeted to 9-
to 12-year-olds, and fun for people of all ages, this fast-paced TV series is
the fuel behind a national, multimedia initiative designed to attract kids to
engineering. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The plan is to continue to build on the
excitement and momentum have created during Seasons I and II, while also
creating many innovations in project deliverables. More specifically, the four
overarching goals are to (1) expand the project's reach into the middle school
classroom with materials that will enable teachers to integrate engineering into
their curriculum; (2) broaden participation with the TV show by casting
contestants nationwide and producing three challenges at locations around the
country (the Nevada desert, New Orleans, and Alaska); (3) create the first
online community where kids can share their real-world engineering projects and
provide a richer video viewing experience with embedded "pop-up" commentary; and
(4) support existing partnerships especially with engineering professional
societies, while forming new ones.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Design Squad and its
"Middle School Classroom" initiative will have maximum impact: (1) addressing a
critical need in engineering education and children?s television; (2) increasing
students, knowledge of engineering and the design process; and (3) showcasing
engineering as creative, rewarding, and socially relevant, especially to girls
and minorities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Formative and summative will inform both
future seasons of Design Squad and the informal and formal science education
community at large, which is lacking research on how teachers can integrate
engineering into the middle school science curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is co-funded by Directorate for Education and Human Resources and the
Directorate for Engineering.