* 0810186
* Dispersion in Heterogeneous Porous Media Through Advection
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Allen Hunt, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 07/31/2011
* USD 57,343.00

We propose a theoretical framework to calculate from first principles the
distribution of arrival times, W(t), of non-sorbing solute due to advection in
two- and three-dimensional heterogeneous porous media and then compare these
theoretical predictions with experimental values. Using the related spatial
concentration distribution at a given time, the PIs will then predict the time
dependence of the longitudinal dispersion coefficient, Dl(t). The theory, based
partly on critical path analysis (using cluster statistics of percolation) and
partly on percolation scaling of tortuosity, links existing work of one of the
PIs in calculating a distribution of rate-limiting conductances with published
work of the Eugene Stanley group at Boston University regarding the scaling of
the typical travel time with length. We compare our predictions with particle
tracking simulations of flow performed by other researchers on a two-dimensional
percolation structure, for which the Navier-Stokes equations were solved
numerically. Our results compare very favorably with the numerical simulations.
Using parameters appropriate for a very narrow pore size distribution
(rmin/rmax=0.7), we are able to fit their data at an early time and, using no
new parameters, predict W(t) in a system five times larger. The theoretical
results are compatible with experiment as well. We propose to test the
theoretical work rigorously on experiments and give hypotheses to guide the
tests. The experimental results that we address have been the subject of decades
of concentrated study without resolution. Moreover, the results of the
simulations have not yet been addressed by anyone. Since traditional modeling of
dispersion in porous media yields Gaussian spreading in the direction of
transport, and since our method is compatible with the much more commonly
observed power-law spreading (Margolin and Berkowitz, 2000), it has the
potential to transform the way dispersion is modeled. Understanding dispersion
is relevant for modeling radioactive tracers to determine groundwater ages or
histories of migrating crustal fluids (and thus constraining models), spreading
of contaminant plumes, and for agricultural purposes. Our treatment, which
excludes molecular diffusion, is not relevant for flows with very small Peclet
numbers, meaning that including effects of diffusion is probably the most
important extension we can envision. By carrying out this project we will be
providing research opportunities for undergraduate students in the earth and
environmental sciences department, acquainting them with the most current status
of research in hydrogeology. We will also introduce the students to modern
quantitative methods in probability theory