* 0810171
* DUSEL R&amp;D:  Benchmarking Hadronic Showers Underground: Correlating Cosmogenic Neutron Production with High Multiplicity Shower Events
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Priscilla Cushman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 06/30/2009
* USD 53,917.00

Experiments which search for dark matter particles are one of the critical
science drivers for deep underground science. However, nuclear recoils from fast
neutrons in underground laboratories are one of the most challenging backgrounds
to possible dark matter detection and the rate of this background is poorly
quantified. Dark matter experiments rely on numerical Monte Carlo simulations to
predict the background rate due to these neutrons, yet the simulation of these
processes is uncertain because of the lack of appropriate data for direct
comparison.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will enable the PI to measure the
neutron content and multiplicity of the showers produced by high energy cosmic
rays by joining forces with the Case/UCSB Multiplicity Meter for Benchmarking
Cosmogenic Neutron Backgrounds. By locating the Case/UCSB Gd-loaded scintillator
detector under the muon shield, this group can cross-correlate hadronic showers
sampled by the large area coverage of the muon system with the smaller, but more
detailed, neutron-sensitive information from the Multiplicity Meter. The data on
neutron multiplicity would allow the underlying neutron production processes to
be measured, also providing information about the parent high-energy neutron
spectrum. Together, the rate, multiplicity and energy measurements will help to
normalize the simulation codes and provide insight into deficiencies in modeling
the underlying processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this work
extend to the many other underground experiments that rely on knowing the
neutron background environment. Being able to predict this background with
greater reliability will serve the community well, and provide improved
extrapolations for experiments aiming to operate in deeper sites at a future
DUSEL. The technology used for the muon shield provides a training ground for a
new generation of physicists with hands-on, short term projects.&lt;br/&gt;