* 0810927
* ADVANCE Institutional Transformation Award:  Excellence in Science and Engineering (EXCELinSE) at WSU
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2015
* Gretalyn Leibnitz, Washington State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jessie Dearo
* 08/31/2015
* USD 3,935,781.00

&lt;br/&gt;Washington State University is deeply committed to fostering an
environment that pro-motes diversity. Despite this commitment, challenges remain
in achieving gender equity among the faculty and leadership in sciences,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines. The premise of the
Excellence in Sciences and Engineering (EXCELinSE) at WSU&lt;br/&gt;project is
that women are lost from the academy at critical transition points: after the
PhD; pre- tenure; post-tenure; and at personal milestones (e.g., childbirth).
Our project goals are to: (1) increase representation of women in STEM
disciplines by providing institutional support at these critical points; (2)
develop/disseminate innovative strategies for other research-intensive, rural,
land grant universities; and (3) create an infrastructure that provides the
highest institutional support, and insures transformation beyond the lifetime of
the grant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our four major initiatives are: (1) Preparing
and Recruiting a Diverse Faculty, designed to encourage new women STEM PhD
graduates to consider academic careers; (2) Work/Life Initiative, to address
institutional and individual barriers to retention and advancement for all
university faculty members; (3) Leadership Training Initiative, which addresses
climate and leadership barriers to recruitment, retention and advancement; and
(4) Institutionalizing Transformation Initiative, which is aimed at organizing,
monitoring and assessing institutional progress, and disseminating best
practices to the broader academic community. These initiatives will be
implemented through the Center for EXCELinSE at WSU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These
initiatives include innovations that address our unique situation and have the
potential to impact our peer institutions, including: (1) The EXCELinSE Summer
Doctoral Fellows program, where women STEM PhD candidates from other research
institutions spend the summer on the WSU-Pullman campus, attending workshops on
research and academic careers, receiving mentoring from faculty members in STEM
disciplines, and working on completing their dissertations; (2) The Dual-Career
Partnership with University of Idaho, to provide reciprocal partner
accommodation resources at both universities; (3) The Infant Care Placeholder
program; and (4) The External Mentoring program, in which STEM faculty women are
linked with successful women faculty at other universities for
mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The research component of
this project will provide insights into diffusion of new practices through
academic organizations and the impact on departmental cultures and leadership.
By identifying the departmental-level factors that enhance or inhibit the
institutionalization of initiatives, this research will benefit other
institutions seeking transformation. We will both import successful ADVANCE
initiatives from other institutions and demonstrate our own innovative
initiatives that are unique to our situation (e.g., the Dual Career Partnership
with the University of Idaho), that will benefit both WSU and the broader
research university community (e.g., the EXCLEinSE Summer Doctoral Fellows
Program), that are applicable to research-intensive, rural, land-grant
institutions (e.g., Infant Care Placeholder program), or that are applicable to
the general academy (e.g., the External Mentoring
program).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. Addressing the special
challenges associated with women faculty in STEM disciplines at small, rural
communities has implications for other similar institutions. For example, the
Summer Doctoral Fellows program will benefit not only WSU but other research
institutions that hire the fellows after they complete the program. This project
will advance our understanding of the impact of preparing future faculty for the
professoriate, creating a work/life responsive workplace, and leadership
initiatives on attracting, recruiting, and advancing women in academic STEM
disciplines. Improving the climate for all faculty will result in the retention
and advancement of a diverse faculty which provides more role models for
students. This will ultimately lead to increases in students pursuing careers in
STEM, thus addressing a national need.&lt;br/&gt;