* 0810150
* Study on Nano-phases and Microstructures in Rutile and Pyroxene From Ultrahigh-pressure Metamorphic Rocks: TEM Investigation and Computer Modeling
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2011
* Huifang Xu, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* William P. Leeman
* 06/30/2011
* USD 132,378.00

Nano-phases and nano-precipitates are very common in rock-forming minerals
formed at high temperature and/or high pressure. The stability fields for the
nano-phases differ from those of the same macroscopic phases, because as
crystals get smaller, contributions to their stabilities from interface energies
become tremendous. We will combine TEM observations from well characterized
ultrahigh-pressure (UHP = coesite and/or diamond-bearing) metamorphic rocks and
computer modeling using Density Functional Theory to correlate the relationship
between sizes of ultrahigh-pressure nano-precipitates and changes in their
stability fields with respect to the macroscopic phases. UHP rocks (eclogite)
from the Dabie-Sulu UHP metamorphic terrane in eastern China and mantle-derived
UHP garnet pyroxenite and eclogite from the Moldanubian Nappe of the Bohemian
Massif will be used for the proposed studies.

Intellectual merits. Microstructures of nano-precipitates and nano-phases in
pyroxene and rutile will be investigated using high-resolution transmission
electron microscopy (HRTEM) and associated techniques of X-ray EDS, electron
energy-loss spectroscopy (EELS), and Z-contrast imaging under scanning
transmission electron microscopy (STEM) mode. Features to be investigated
include: (1) rod-like silica-rich precipitates, clinoenstatite lamellae, and
anti-phase domain boundaries in the pyroxene minerals, and (2) needlelike
precipitates, and lamellae of a high-pressure TiO2 phase with _-PbO2 type
structure in rutile. Using Density Functional Theory, calculations will be
carried out on the effects of size on nano-phase stabilities. It is hypothesized
that the stabilities of nano-phase lamellae of clinoenstatite and _-PbO2 type
TiO2 within their host minerals will be greatly different from the stabilities
of their bulk phases. The structure and chemistry of the micro-phases and their
relationships can provide P-T history of the host minerals during subduction and
exhumation of a continental plate.

The University of Wisconsin - Madison has just purchased a state-of-the-art
aberration-corrected field emission-gun (FEG) TEM / STEM (Scanning Transmission
Electron Microscope) imaging system with X-ray EDS and EELS capabilities that is
supported by the NSF MRI program. This system is capable of getting spatially-
resolved EELS spectra at 1µ resolution. Z-contrast imaging using STEM mode can
provide chemical images at the atomic scale. These systems will be used in the
proposed study and are expected to provide a wealth of new and significant
knowledge about nano-phases, interface structures, and defects in the minerals,
and how they record their formation condition and history of their host rocks.

Broader impact Results of this work will be incorporated into courses taught by
the PI and invarious outreach activities through the UW-Madison Geology Museum,
which provides guided tours to about 13,000 K-12 students each year and attracts
more than 40,000 visitors every year. The project will also support graduate
student research.