* 0810201
* Collaborative Research: Testing Hypotheses for the Laramide Orogeny
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* Craig Jones, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 08/31/2014
* USD 330,000.00

The Laramide orogeny in the Southern Rocky Mountains has been ascribed to
exceptionally low-angle subduction of oceanic plates beneath most of the western
U.S., and a considerable literature has been developed upon that assumption. But
there are difficulties with the geometry, physics, and timing of low angle
subduction as currently envisioned. This project tests this current framework
against an alternative that proposes that the Laramide orogeny was the result of
interaction of a shallowing slab with thick lithosphere under Wyoming. The
research focuses on three aspects of the problem: the timing and cause of the
thick accumulation of sediments prior to uplift of the Southern Rockies, the
timing and origin of igneous activity, and the possible connections of changes
in slab geometry to tectonism in the western U.S. The resolution of the temporal
development of the Late Cretaceous basin of central and eastern Wyoming and
Colorado will be improved through stratigraphic and sedimentological studies.
Forces acting on the lithosphere through simple plate flexure calculations will
be determined. New, high resolution ages of critical igneous rocks in the region
will be acquired in order to better determine the timing of intrusive activity
relative to changes at the plate margin and examination of the geochemistry of
these rocks to will determine the relative role of hydration (arc-style
magmatism) vs. decompression melting (back-arc style magmatism). Numerical
experiments will allow quantification of the forces acting on the lithosphere
for different kinds of slab geometries and also explore the possible
relationship of secondary convection systems on continental deformation and
magmatism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the period from about 75 to 45 million
year ago a former inland sea was transformed into the Rocky Mountains over an
area extending from New Mexico to Montana. Among the effects of this mountain
building event (the Laramide Orogeny) are the creation of most of the major
mineral deposits in Colorado, creation of the large oil-shale deposits in
western Colorado, northeastern Utah, and southwestern Wyoming, development of
many of the natural gas fields now being exploited in the region, and creation
of conditions that continue to deform the region, leading to earthquake hazards
in central Colorado and geothermal resources in much of the western U.S. It is
one of the finest and most cryptic examples of mountain building far from a
tectonic plate boundary. Geologic understanding of the Rocky Mountain region
thus depends upon improved knowledge of the nature and origin of this mountain
building event. This study focuses on the most unexplained aspects of the event
to best constrain its past history and present behavior. Successful conclusion
of this work should greatly improve the understanding of similar events
worldwide, some of which might have also produced resources that remain
undiscovered owing to the unusual nature of such events.