* 0810012
* SBIR Phase I: Novel Spatial Speech Separation Techniques to Improve Speaker Identification and Speech Recognition
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2008,12/31/2008
* Chiman Kwan, Signal Processing, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ian M. Bennett
* 12/31/2008
* USD 99,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I research project focuses
on a novel approach that uses multiple microphones to spatially separate speech
and hence enhance speaker identification and speech recognition accuracy. The
first component of the project will apply feature-driven adaptive beam forming
to improve speech recognition accuracy in noisy and reverberant environments.
Unlike conventional beam forming methods, this proposed method performs weight
adaptation based on feedback from the feature extraction and recognition
modules. The arrays can eliminate directional interferences and reduce
reverberant effects. For the second component of the proposed project, a new
continuously-variable mask estimation method will be used to estimate which
parts of the separated speech contain speech with good signal-to noise ratio
(SNR), applying speech reconstruction to repair these regions. The repaired
speech will then be fed into the speech recognition/speaker identification
engine. Thirdly, the project will apply ideas motivated by human binaural
perception.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential market for robust speaker
identification and speech recognition is projected to be large, ranging from
voice dictation in noisy offices, voiceprint verification for financial
transactions, biometrics, speech recognition in automated voice response
systems, voice-based search for mobile devices, and several others. Additionally
there are many military applications in military command, control, and
communications segments, where it is important to convey the correct commands to
the other recipients.