* 0810357
* STTR Phase I:  Multilevel Magnetic Recording for Areal Densities Above 10 Terabit-per-square-inch
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Mihai Preda, MultiMag3D Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2009
* USD 146,304.00

The Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I will study the feasibility
of the technology of multilevel magnetic recording. This technology is
potentially suitable for densities beyond 10 terabit/in2 and data rates faster
than 1 gigabit/s. This project will include the study of the industry standard
spinstand for a device prototype capable of achieving more than 16 signal levels
to store information with effective aerial densities above 1 terabit/in2 and
demonstrate a potential to extend the technology beyond 10 terabit/in2. The
proof of concept system will consist of a high-field transducer built via
focused ion beam trimming of regular magnetic recording heads and three-
dimensional (3D) media. To prove the feasibility of multilevel recording, the
innovative multilevel encoding channel will be integrated into a state-of-the
art spinstand Guzik V2002. Spinstand testing with the new channel will be used
to combine 3D recording media and transducers into a viable multilevel recording
system.

If successful the outcome of the feasibility study for this cost-effective and
long-term solution may have great impact on the multibillion data storage
industry. With the introduction of multilevel signal processing this proposed
solution has potential to leapfrog the existing information related
technologies. Not only data storage related but also other electronics
applications could benefit from the introduction of multilevel signal format.

