* 0810418
* The Multi-Modal Dimensions of Risk Communication in Difficult Cross-Cultural Contexts
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2007,03/31/2010
* Beverly Sauer, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Kelly A. Joyce
* 03/31/2010
* USD 26,347.00

Risk communicators recognize the importance of non-verbal communication in the
elicitation of what stakeholders know and in the construction of risk messages,
but they have not investigated how viewpoint and gesture function in cross-
cultural institutional contexts of risk. Analysis of gesture in real-time
workplace interactions shows that individuals employ gesture to represent
spatial and temporal properties of experience not possible in speech alone (cf.
McNeill &amp; Duncan, 2000). Viewpoint is a critical feature of gestural
representations in the workplace. The ability to move flexibly between analytic
and local perspectives is necessary if individuals are to move into positions of
authority (Sauer, 2003; cf. McNeill, 1992). Gestures may contribute to
confusion, however, if the semantic content of speech and gesture conflicts or
if the gestural viewpoint cannot be reconciled with workers' embodied experience
(cf. Alibali &amp; Goldin-Meadow 1993) and cultural background. The problem is
particularly acute in South African mines where linguistic facility (in English
or Afrikans) often provides the sole measure of workplace competence.
Differences in gestural viewpoint and unscripted communication practices create
conflicting and inaccurate risk messages that confuse workers during safety
training and increase the potential for disaster (Sauer, forthcoming). These
findings raise questions about the cultural and institutional dimensions of
gesture in cross-cultural risk communication: What factors determine viewpoint
and how do differences encoded in language and gesture impact on comprehension?
What do these differences reveal, more generally, about the cultural dimensions
of spatial and temporal understanding in cross- cultural communication in the
context of risk? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has five objectives: (1)
identify gestural forms and their relation to speech in previously collected
data from SA coal mine safety training programs; (2) determine how viewpoint is
related to speaker's prescribed and assumed roles in the interaction; (3)
determine whether differences in gestural form, meaning, and viewpoint affect
levels of understanding; (4) determine the extent to which different levels of
understanding reflect differences in language, culture, education, institutional
experience, and/or other paralinguistic and contextual factors of safety
training; (5) draw conclusions about the role of gestural viewpoint and gesture
as a communicative feature of specialized technical (risk) discourses and its
implications for risk communication and related disciplines in multi- cultural
environments. Using participant-centered methods, experts in gestural analysis,
rhetoric, mining, and South African languages will (1) work with local
informants to describe, analyze, and compare gestural meaning and viewpoint in
video taped communicative interactions of mine safety programs across cultural
and institutional dimensions (trainers, translators, and miners) and (2) elicit
communicative representations of sites of communicative difficulty in cohorts of
ten across each of the hypothesized parameters of difference: education v.
uneducated, Afrikaans v. Zulu, and institutionally experienced v.
inexperienced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will help improve cross-cultural
risk communication in conditions of profound technical uncertainty where
language barriers prevent social and economic transformation and create the
potential for disaster. The research also has more general implications for
engineering and science education where individuals do not share similar
languages or culture&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;