* 0810566
* SBIR Phase I:  High Throughput Flowcell for Biosensor Platforms
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2008,12/31/2008
* Bruce Gale, Wasatch Microfluidics, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia A. Znati
* 12/31/2008
* USD 99,963.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop and
demonstrate a high throughput flow cell array for use with a variety of label-
free biosensing platforms, but primarily SPR systems. Flow cell technology is
currently the limiting factor in the development of high throughput label-free
sensing technologies. Modification of Wasatch Microfluidics Continuous Flow
MicrospotterTM into a highly parallel flow cell should begin to eliminate this
bottleneck and provide a template for even more highly parallel systems. The
research performed in this project will specifically help us understand the
differences between different pumping technologies and their ability to be
integrated with the flow cell. Preliminary work suggests that a flow cell array
can convert mediocre SPR imaging instruments into highly-competitive protein
analysis instruments comparable to state-of-the-art SPR instruments with meager
throughput. We will also develop an understanding of how the flow cell
technology will impact the sensing capabilities of a surface plasmon resonance
(SPR) instrument, and an optimized baseline protocol will be developed. The end
result will be a 48 channel flow cell, which will be scalable to much higher
throughputs (192, 1536). This flow cell will be generic such that it will be
easily integrated with a variety of label-free sensing technologies. The end
result of this research and development effort will be a flow cell array with
more than double the capacity of the best current systems and will lay the
ground work for much higher density systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of this technology include the commercial opportunities of the
microfluidic flow cell array (MFCA). The MFCA will be developed for integration
with the biosensing platforms of a number of other companies. Specifically we
will target labelfree technologies used to measure kinetic and affinity
constants for binding of molecules to one another. This is currently a
$100M/year market. From our discussions with pharmaceutical companies, higher
throughput label-free systems will lead much larger implementation of these
technologies and a significant commercial potential, including a significantly
larger market. Even the most basic implementation of our flow cell will have a
substantial impact. Currently, it takes the flagship Biacore instrument 28 hrs
to process 384 samples. These same 384 samples would only take 1 hr with our new
flowcell. These same instruments will then lead to substantially faster and more
effective drug discovery processes, and eventually better health for the US
population.