* 0810609
* SBIR Phase I:  Solution Processed p-i-n type Multilayer White Emission OLED with High Power Efficiency and Long Lifetime
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2008,12/31/2008
* King Wang, Agiltron Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2008
* USD 99,972.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses a
method to achieve low-cost, high performance multiple-layer organic light
emitting devices (OLEDs) by solution process. OLED is emerging as a next-
generation display and lighting technology, they have a number of intrinsic
advantages over liquid crystal displays including brighter and clearer displays,
large viewing angles, simpler construction, low cost, and fast response times.
They also hold a promise to provide more energy-efficient solid state lighting
sources featuring long lifetime, excellent color quality, novel designs, and
significant energy and environmental savings. The simplicity of OLED device
structures and the associated solution based, non-vacuum fabrication processing
will lead to low fabrication costs. However, currently the efficiency of
solution processed OLEDs is still too low for lighting applications. The PI and
his team will use their expertise in this area to enhance the efficiency of
OLEDs.

If successful the commercial potential of the proposed technology is two-fold:
solid state lighting and flat panel displays, including flexible displays. OLED
based displays are encroaching on the currently liquid crystal dominated flat
panel display market valued at tens of billions of dollars in 2007 with
unprecedented attributes such as flexibility and transparency, unattainable from
other display technologies. For solid state lighting (SSL), OLED intrinsically
achieves higher lighting efficiency than conventional incandescent lamps and
fluorescent tubes from the energy conversion standpoint, leading to significant
energy and environmental savings. OLED based lighting also offers long lifetime,
high color quality, and novel design features not available with current light
sources. OLED based lighting is estimated to provide cumulative financial
savings of $115 billion in the US alone by 2020. OLED lighting also promises to
replace conventional light sources, with impressive environmental savings. SSL
also serves US national interests. With rapid development and commercialization
of high performance OLEDs, the US leadership in SSL will be assured. A new
lighting industry will be created along with many new high quality jobs.