* 0810614
* STTR Phase I:  Portable Ultrasound Devices for Noninvasively Monitoring Intracranial Pressure
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Hongzhi Zhao, Boston Applied Technologies, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 06/30/2009
* USD 149,959.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project develops a
portable ultrasound device for non-invasively monitoring intracranial pressure
(ICP). The key issues for developing such a kind of device are sensitivity,
accuracy, repeatability, and portability. Boston Applied Technologies,
Incorporated (BATi)and the University of Florida (UF) will develop such an
instrument with a novel ultrasound measurement technique. With the improved
measurement approach, better sensitivity can be achieved comparing to those
measuring of acoustic velocity only, and higher accuracy will be expected than
the time-of-flight method. This unique method is also independent to any changes
in the pulser voltage, instrument self-calibration is thus inherently feasible.
Together with the design and implementation of an efficient electronic driving
circuit for ultrasound transducers, the developed non-invasive ICP measurement
instrument will be sensitive, accurate, reliable, and portable.

The broader impacts of this research are to greatly benefit victims of trauma to
the head by improved means of measurement ICP. The potential for this apparatus
in commercial clinical practice is enormous. Early non-invasive measurements of
ICP can help reduce both the mortality and morbidity associated with head
trauma. A severe blow to the head, as may result from a car or motorcycle
accident, may cause swelling of the brain and increased intracranial pressure.
The device can also be used in civilian and military emergency
departments/forward surgical team/combat support hospitals, and with military
and civilian medical first responders.