* 0810939
* Development of high-order numerical methods for the dynamics of suspended lipid membranes with internal structure
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2008,09/30/2013
* Gregory Miller, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 09/30/2013
* USD 203,232.00

The shape and rigidity of cell membranes are dynamic features related to cell
function. An idealized model of the cell membrane that includes these features
is a lipid bilayer vesicle, comprised of two or more chemical components capable
of phase separation and endowed with different inherent rigidities. Examples
include several lipid-cholesterol systems. In general, compositional fluxes and
elastic moduli may be derived from a common energy potential, resulting in a
tightly coupled system. These vesicles have characteristic thicknesses that are
much less than characteristic diameters, suggesting their treatment as co-
dimension 1 surfaces. This proposal links three research topics to develop a
continuum model of such vesicles in fluid media. First is the high-order
interface tracking. Embedded boundary methods will be developed to couple the
motion of a membrane suspended in, and containing, viscous fluid. Second is the
dynamics -- chemical and mechanical -- of a membrane with time dependent shape.
An approach to this problem is to employ cartesian grid finite volume methods
with a phase field approach to compute dynamics (Cahn-Hilliard for chemistry,
and solid mechanics for motion) in an annulus, with the desired behavior
obtained in the limit of zero thickness. The problems of front tracking and
interface dynamics must be tightly coupled, e.g., through predictor-corrector
and relaxation strategies. The third problem concerns constitutive modeling -
the development of energy potentials, constrained by experimental phase
diagrams, elasticity measurements, and the symmetry requirements of frame
invariance, to couple the effects of chemistry with shape.

This proposed work will advance the understanding of numerical partial
differential equations of mixed hyperbolic-elliptic type on time-dependent
domains. A numerical model of vesicle dynamics, linking the dynamics of shape
and chemistry, will be developed for the purpose of better understanding
experiments on heterogeneous vesicles, both natural and biomimetic, and
ultimately to aid in understanding the connections between cell membrane
chemistry, shape, and function.