* 0810311
* DUSEL R&amp;D towards a tonne scale Ge neutrinoless double-beta decay experiment
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2010
* John Wilkerson, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 06/30/2010
* USD 250,000.00

With the realization that neutrinos are massive, there is an increased interest
in investigating their intrinsic properties. Understanding the neutrino mass
generation mechanism, the absolute neutrino mass scale and the neutrino mass
spectrum are some of the main focuses of future neutrino experiments.
Experimental evidence of neutrinoless double-beta decay (NDBD) would
definitively establish the Majorana nature of neutrinos while also providing
information about the absolute neutrino mass. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
will enable the Majorana Collaboration to carry out R&amp;D activities related
to the development of the proposed Majorana Demonstrator, a prototype Ge
detector array that aims to prove the feasibility of building a future 1-tonne
Ge NDBD experiment. The research would be conducted by the collaboration in two
distinct areas: Ge detector development and the production and assay of ultra-
low background materials. Building a NDBD experiment with the ability to probe
neutrino mass in the inverted hierarchy region requires the combination of a
large detector mass sensitive to NDBD, on the order of 1-tonne, and
unprecedented background levels, on the order of or less than 1 count per year
in the NDBD signal region. They plan to deploy and evaluate two different Ge
detector technologies, one based on P-type material and the other on N-type.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many of the initial suite of experiments being considered
for DUSEL will directly benefit from the availability of ultra-clean materials
with extremely small amounts of U and Th. Verifying the purity of materials
requires sensitivities at the sub microBq/kg level. The development of enhanced
sensitivity inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry will benefit a broad
set of applications and future experiments. The Ge detector development will
benefit applications that require very low energy thresholds while also
providing reduced backgrounds from associated detector components.&lt;br/&gt;