* 0810495
* DUSEL R&amp;D: Detection of impurities in cryogenic liquids with extreme sensitivity
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2012
* Carter Hall, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 06/30/2012
* USD 314,179.00

Recent years have seen a proliferation of experiments based on the liquid noble
gas detector technology. Noble gases are an attractive medium for particle
detectors due to their low ionization potential, high scintillation efficiency,
long electron lifetime and low cost. These detectors are currently employed to
address a wide variety of fundamental physics questions, including neutrinoless
double beta decay, neutrino oscillations, rare muon decays, dark matter searches
and solar neutrinos. Many of these questions are central to the scientific
mission of an underground lab and similar detectors have been proposed for the
initial suite of experiments at DUSEL. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most liquid
detectors to date are of relatively modest size, with target masses ranging from
a few kilograms to a few hundred kilograms. However, next-generation experiments
are poised to push the boundaries far beyond the current state of the art. For
an experiment to succeed in this new regime, it will be necessary to purify the
cryogenic liquids far beyond what current technologies have achieved. For
existing TPC-style detectors, the concentration of electronegative impurities
must be less than about 100 ppt oxygen equivalent to avoid attenuation of the
charge signal as it drifts through the detector volume. Therefore, the next set
of experiments will require impurity concentrations from one to ten ppt, or free
electron lifetimes from tens to hundreds of milliseconds.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will enable the group to develop a new method
for detecting extremely low concentrations of impurities, with the potential to
extend current sensitivities by several orders of magnitude.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of the Broader Impacts of this work, this impurity
detector would find wide application for many of the fundamental physics
experiments which are likely to be hosted by DUSEL. In addition, this work will
also have significantly broader impact by serving to further the education of
graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;