* 0810116
* Shock Wave Studies of Mineral and Melt Physics at Deep Mantle Pressures
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Thomas Ahrens, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2011
* USD 900,000.00

Study of the deep interior of the Earth is essential to understanding the long-
term evolution of our planet, including the habitability and natural hazards of
the surface where we live. We are particularly interested in the melting of the
deep interior, and its consequences for the chemical evolution of the mantle.
The extreme conditions that characterize great depth, particularly high pressure
and temperature, and the limits of direct observations at such depths, however,
require the application of specialized experimental techniques. One family of
techniques uses large stationary guns to collide mineral and metal targets
together at high speed and so generate very high pressures for a short time, a
method referred to as shock wave research. The measurements that we can make
with these experiments are unique, but also complementary to results obtained by
other experimental and theoretical techniques. We will dedicate the Caltech
shock wave laboratory over the next three years to the study of melting and the
thermodynamic properties of minerals and melts under lower mantle conditions.
The ultimate goal is development of accurate models of phase equilibria and
physical properties of simplified mantle compositions that can be compared to
geophysical observables or inserted into dynamic models of processes that may
occur in the deep mantle today, such as formation of mantle plumes, or that may
have occurred early in Earth history, such as magma ocean crystallization. With
constraints on the plausible temperature, composition, and relative buoyancy of
partially molten regions that might constitute the ultra-low velocity zones
seismically observed at the base of the mantle, we will place limits on the
dynamical and chemical consequences of the existence of such zones. Likewise,
knowledge of the liquidus mineralogy and the relative buoyancy of liquids and
solids helps to define how an early terrestrial whole-mantle magma ocean might
have evolved by crystallization-differentiation and so the initial state of
solid mantle evolution.&lt;br/&gt;Our experimental approach will be simultaneous
determination of shock velocity, sound speed, and shock temperature in
transparent materials, principally MgO and MgSiO3 shocked into lower mantle
phase assemblages. Determination of all these quantities together provides
optimal constraints on melting curves and thermal equation of state parameters
of solids and liquids. We focus this effort on materials of geophysical interest
where these quantities remain most uncertain due to limitations of existing data
and experimental capabilities. We have demonstrated through sound-speed
measurements on porous MgO that we are able to shock melt this material and
define the location of its highly uncertain melting curve. We will continue this
program using different porosities and pre-heated single crystals both to obtain
more constraints on the melting curve and to define the unknown thermophysical
properties of MgO liquid. To our existing database of shock results in the
MgSiO3 system, we propose to add a series of shock velocity, sound speed, and
shock temperature measurements on single crystal enstatite and on preheated
MgSiO3 liquid in order to remove parameter trade-offs in the thermodynamic
description of this liquid composition.&lt;br/&gt;