* 0810909
* Collaborative Research: A Software System for Algebraic Geometry Research
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2010
* Michael Stillman, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2010
* USD 142,000.00

Macaulay2 is a free computer algebra system dedicated to the qualitative
investigation of systems of polynomial equations in many variables. It was
developed by Daniel Grayson and Michael Stillman with NSF funding. Grayson and
Stillman will continue the development of Macaulay2. They will upgrade existing
algorithms, develop and publish new algorithms, and implement new algorithms. In
particular, they will develop the interaction of the symbolic computations that
are Macaulay2's strength with the new floating point algorithms in algebraic
geometry that are now being developed by Andrew Sommese, Jan Verschelde, Anton
Leykin, Frank Schreyer and others. It is anticipated that these will make a
whole new class of problems accessible to experimentation and, in many cases,
solution. Eisenbud will organize contacts for the extended integration with
other systems and will engage other mathematicians in the development work that
needs to be done. Central to the project are the continued expansion of the
collaborations that have been the hallmark of Macaulay2 development. For this
purpose two Macaulay2 Workgroup Meetings will be held in the course of the two-
year grant. One particular research problem to be attacked is: the use of
computational systems to (probabilistically) disprove, or suggest a proof of,
the Jacobian Conjecture on polynomial automorphisms of affine spaces (this will
require the use the new floating point algorithms). Other areas where new
algorithms can make an impact include the study of numerical systems, fractions
with specified types of denominators, ideal factorization, systems where the
multiplication of the variables doesn't satisfy the commutative law, geometric
optimization, the analysis of observations of gene expression levels over time,
and bioinformatics.

Macaulay2 is part of the infrastructure that supports mathematical research
involving systems of polynomial equations in many variables. The study of such
systems of polynomial equations is central in pure and applied mathematics and
in physics, with recent new impacts in such fields as cryptography, robotics and
string theory. Increasing computer power and the availability of programs like
Macaulay2 are making a new level of experimentation possible. The experimental
results found with Macaulay2 are helping in the formulation and development of
tractable conjectures in mathematics as well as in physics. A measure of
Macaulay2's impact is that at least 270 research papers have cited Macaulay2,
several mathematicians have contributed code, and books and course materials are
now using it. The PI's will develop the software further and will recruit
developers from the research community. They will introduce graduate students
and mathematicians to the use of computers in research mathematics and the
requisite skills in programming and development of algorithms, through
workgroups at Berkeley and through the appointments of graduate students as
graduate assistants.