* 0810905
* III-CXT-Small: Algorithmic strategies for genotype-phenotype correlations
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Vineet Bafna, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2012
* USD 450,000.00

In the wake of new sequencing and genotyping technologies, &lt;br/&gt;whole
genome studies are now being undertaken to understand &lt;br/&gt;the genetic
basis of phenotypes. Many of the principles underlying &lt;br/&gt;the
measurement of genotype-phenotype relationships, &lt;br/&gt;as well as computing
related population genetic parameters, &lt;br/&gt;are relatively well
understood. However, the upcoming technologies &lt;br/&gt;dramatically change
the scale and scope of these studies, &lt;br/&gt;which already encompass tens of
thousands of individuals &lt;br/&gt;over a genome-wide region. The analysis of
this data requires novel &lt;br/&gt;algorithmic and statistical techniques.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses&lt;br/&gt;on a subset of the problems
that could arise in a typical &lt;br/&gt;whole-genome based association study.
These include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(a) Phasing of genotypes into haplotypes
using overlapping sequence data, &lt;br/&gt;and the application of this
algorithm to phasing individual human sequences; &lt;br/&gt;the availability of
high coverage long sequence data will make this approach &lt;br/&gt;the method
of choice for phasing in the near future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(b) Fast
filtering for pairs of loci that interactively influence a &lt;br/&gt;phenotype
and its application to multiple-locus testing of common &lt;br/&gt;disease
phenotypes. The proposed work reduces the computational &lt;br/&gt;bottleneck in
multiple locus testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(c) Detection of regions under
balancing selection. Available tests &lt;br/&gt;are focused on detection of
regions under positive selection. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research looks for
evidence of balancing selection in &lt;br/&gt;the genome, with specific
attention on genes associated with bipolar disorder.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(d)
Reconstruction of regulatory pathways using associations between genetic
&lt;br/&gt;variation and gene-expression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All software from
this research is freely available as source-code, &lt;br/&gt;or as web-tools for
academic, research and non-commercial purposes &lt;br/&gt;in accordance with
University policy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Further information on the project may
be found at the project web site:
&lt;br/&gt;http://bix.ucsd.edu/algen&lt;br/&gt;