* 0810958
* Numerical Algorithms for the Detection and Simulation of Surface Water Waves
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* David Nicholls, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2012
* USD 155,140.00

The generation, propagation, and energetic transport of ocean
waves&lt;br/&gt;play a crucial role in many technologies including near-
shore&lt;br/&gt;watercraft navigation, the design of deep-sea oil-drilling rigs,
and&lt;br/&gt;the generation and propagation of tsunamis. However, the
fundamental&lt;br/&gt;technologies for the remote detection and measurement of
these&lt;br/&gt;nonlinear waves are based upon the scattering of linear acoustic
or&lt;br/&gt;electromagnetic radiation from the surface or bulk of the fluid.
Not&lt;br/&gt;surprisingly, the state-of-the-art in theory, approximation,
and&lt;br/&gt;numerical simulation of these two disparate wave phenomena is
quite&lt;br/&gt;different. In this proposal the Principal Investigator (PI)
advocates&lt;br/&gt;the development of a unified computational approach to these
two&lt;br/&gt;problems with the goal of producing a set of highly accurate,
stable,&lt;br/&gt;and error-controllable numerical algorithms for the
detection,&lt;br/&gt;simulation, and evaluation of waves on the surface of large
bodies of&lt;br/&gt;water. Over the past ten years the PI has developed a set of
stable,&lt;br/&gt;high-accuracy Boundary Perturbation (BP) algorithms for the
study of&lt;br/&gt;both traveling ocean waves and scattering returns from
irregularly&lt;br/&gt;shaped obstacles. These BP algorithms each involve an
independent&lt;br/&gt;perturbation parameter and the PI proposes to investigate
a strategy&lt;br/&gt;of coupling these two disparate algorithms by linking
these&lt;br/&gt;parameters, thus realizing huge computational savings.
Additionally,&lt;br/&gt;the PI proposes to significantly extend and improve
existing BP&lt;br/&gt;algorithms for the simulation of linear waves in the high-
frequency&lt;br/&gt;regime. In short, the Geometric Optics solution points the
way to a&lt;br/&gt;solution Ansatz which can be represented with a frequency-
independent&lt;br/&gt;number of unknowns. The PI, in collaboration with F.
Reitich, has&lt;br/&gt;demonstrated how this Ansatz coupled to classical BP
methods can be&lt;br/&gt;used to compute high-frequency scattering returns from
shallow&lt;br/&gt;surfaces with enormous computational savings. In this proposal
the PI&lt;br/&gt;advocates the further development of these algorithms to
incorporate&lt;br/&gt;the scenario of multiple
reflections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The generation and propagation properties of
ocean waves are crucial&lt;br/&gt;in many technologies including watercraft
navigation, design of&lt;br/&gt;deep-sea oil-drilling rigs, and the study of
tsunamis. However, the&lt;br/&gt;methods for the measurement of these nonlinear
ocean waves are based&lt;br/&gt;upon the scattering of linear acoustic or
electromagnetic radiation.&lt;br/&gt;The state-of-the-art in both the theory and
practice of these two&lt;br/&gt;disparate wave phenomena is quite different. In
this proposal the&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator (PI) advocates the
development of a unified&lt;br/&gt;approach to the computation of these two
problems with the goal of&lt;br/&gt;producing a set of reliable and accurate
numerical algorithms for the&lt;br/&gt;detection and simulation of ocean waves.
This will involve the PI&lt;br/&gt;bringing together two separate threads of his
research program to&lt;br/&gt;implement this unified approach. Additionally, he
will need to expand&lt;br/&gt;the capabilities of his algorithms to account for
the highly&lt;br/&gt;oscillatory character of the linear waves which arise in
these&lt;br/&gt;applications. The latter task will be particularly challenging
and is&lt;br/&gt;the current focus of a great deal of research by both civilian
and&lt;br/&gt;military agencies.&lt;br/&gt;