* 0810969
* Subduction and Exhumation of Ultrahigh-Pressure Rocks: Field and Drilling Studies in Eastern China
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2008,12/31/2009
* Juhn Liou, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard E. Johnson
* 12/31/2009
* USD 153,476.00

The ICDP Chinese Continental Scientific Drilling project, completed in 2005,
&lt;br/&gt;targeted an ultrahigh pressure (UHP) metamorphic terrane in eastern
China. The UHP terrane resulted from subduction of the northern edge of the
Yangtze craton to &gt; 150 km depth beneath the Sino-Korean craton. Several
drill holes including the main hole (MH) (5158 m depth), pre-pilot holes PP1
(432 m), PP2 (1028 m) and PP3 (705 m) in Donghai, and 3 shallow holes (183-350
m) in ultramafic bodies in Rongcheng and Rizhao were completed. Core recovery
was more than 85% of drilling depth including unweathered samples of gneisses,
eclogites, garnet peridotites, dunite, and garnet clinopyroxenite. Encountering
peridotites was expected based on occurrences in surface outcrops but no one
predicted the bonanza that was found by drilling. The new drill core samples,
now available for study, offer an unprecedented opportunity to advance
understanding of the mantle and subduction processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Continental Dynamics program funded a multi-institutional, multidisciplinary
investigation of ICDP-CCSD drill core samples led by JG Liou at Stanford
University and has included colleagues from the Chinese Academy of Geological
Sciences, Beijing, Carnegie Institution of Washington, Academia Sinica (Taiwan),
Tokyo Institute of Technology and Waseda University. The PIs have worked closely
with more than 30 Chinese scientists, and published 107 papers. The published
work on CCSD cores is valued by the research community as recognized by the
ranking of J.G. Liou as the tenth most cited geoscience author and R.Y. Zhang as
within the top 50 during 1996-2007 according to Thomson?s ISI Web of Science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides one additional year of support as an
Accomplishment Based Renewal (ABR) to complete geochemical studies of core
samples of garnet peridotite. Newly recognized sulfide minerals in garnet
peridotites will be analyzed for Re-Os and Sulfur isotopes. Zircons, a rare but
immensely informative mineral found in peridotites, will be analyzed for Lu-Hf
isotopes. Analysis of peridotite silicate minerals for oxygen isotopes will be
used to test for mantle vs. crustal origin. These new studies, combined with
U-Pb ion microprobe analyses of zircon, will provide a detailed chronology of
the formation of sub-continental mantle lithosphere and give new insights as to
the role of subduction in contaminating the mantle with crustal material.