* 0810684
* STTR Phase I:  Designing and Engineering Thermoplastic Starch BioFoam Materials for Protective Packaging Applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Daniel Graiver, KTM Industries
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2009
* USD 150,000.00

Intellectual Merit KTM Industries in cooperation with Michigan State University
plans to design and engineer biodegradable starch based biofoam materials for
the protective packaging market. These new, biobased foam materials are expected
to displace petro-based polyethylene, polystyrene, and polyurethane materials
used currently in these applications. KTM Industries, working with National
Starch, Specialized Packaging Group LP, and its customers, namely Toyota, Volvo,
have test marketed and commercialized several starch foam materials for limited
applications. However, its extreme moisture sensitivity, poor surface
properties, and strength have precluded its use in broader applications. KTM/MSU
with its industrial collaborators will design, manufacture and test new
chemically modified plastic starch biofoams with superior moisture resistance,
strength, surface uniformity, and ease of fabrication than is currently
achieved. This has the major benefit for gaining market acceptance of bio-based
foam cushioning technology across a wider range of applications. Broader Impact
KTM's Green Cell product is the only commercially available bio-foam in North
America. It is completely biodegradable, greenhouse gas neutral, and competes
well in selected polyethylene packaging applications. Market feedback, however,
has shown that broader acceptance of starch biofoams requires KTM to overcome
current moisture sensitivity, brittleness, strength, and surface property issues
as well as manufacturability challenges. By developing a thermoplastic starch
biofoam that has the enhanced moisture resistance, flexibility, good strength,
surface uniformity, and manufacturability characteristics that industry needs,
KTM believes starch biofoams can finally penetrate and capture a large portion
of the $2.6 billion foam packaging market. Achieving performance parity with
synthetic, petroleum-based resins, being manufactured from domestically grown
corn, and being biodegradable will greatly accelerate the acceptance of
packaging biofoams for many industries and customer groups. Indeed, KTM believes
the research could ultimately result in displacement of as much as 10% of the
market. This would create jobs, and position companies to better serve a growing
customer base that demands companies reduce their negative environmental impacts
and reduce their carbon footprint. Furthermore, the technical advancements
implied in this research will significantly accelerate the development of a
broader range of commercially successful bio-plastic products.