* 0810309
* Development of a Statistical Physics Approach to Multi-Scale Complexity in Earthquake Rupture Dynamics
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2008,09/30/2010
* Jerrold Marsden, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 09/30/2010
* USD 170,831.00

One of the most fundamental features of Earthquake ruptures is that they exhibit
spatial-temporal complexity. Yet understanding the evolution and implications of
the chaotic dynamics in systems with spontaneous rupture is far from being
complete. Since the full multi-scale numerical simulation of 3-D media is
numerically intractable with current computational capabilities, the goal of
this project is to investigate the possibility of constructing ?reduced models?
that retain the essential physics of this complex dynamical system. The reduced
models will be used to generate approximate, numerically efficient solutions
that predict fault slip caused by spontaneous dynamic frictional sliding events
in the presence of heterogeneous pre-stress (earthquakes). The researchers will
investigate both deterministic and stochastic model reduction techniques. The
reduction philosophy hinges on the selection of a group of variables called
?coarse variables? that average (in an appropriate sense) the fine scale
dynamics and capture the macroscopic features of the studied dynamical system.
Slip can then be calculated as a function of these coarse variables without
resorting to detailed simulations. A diverse set of simulation tools will be
used, combining methods from statistical mechanics, nonlinear dynamical systems,
stochastic modeling and geophysics. Particular attention will be given to
techniques being developed in the DARPA-Dynarum program that involves, as a key
ingredient, the Markov learning methods, whereby the coarse variable learn their
dynamics from fine scales simulations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
support a collaboration between geophysicists and mathematicians, and will fund
a graduate student to work on this multi-disciplinary project. Understanding
earthquake occurrence using the models these investigators will explore may help
improve our knowledge of earthquake hazard.