* 0810924
* CPA-SEL-T:   Collaborative Research:   Traceability+:   a Service Oriented Framework to Support Value-Added Software Traceability
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2008,06/30/2013
* Jane Huang, DePaul University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2013
* USD 281,238.00

Proposals: P0811140/P0810924/P0811021

Title: Traceability+: a Service Oriented Framework to Support Value-Added
Software Traceability

PIs: Jane Hayes, Jane Huang, and Jonathan Maletic

Traceability plays an important role in the development and assurance of
software systems that permeate our society. It helps to assure that an as-built
system correctly implements all requirements by supporting change impact
assessment, re-engineering of applications, and other critical software
engineering activities. Although previous work has focused on delivering point
solutions that address specific traceability issues, this research will develop
a new, powerful traceability model, Traceability+, that will deliver value-added
traceability services designed to support diverse stakeholders as they perform
critical software engineering activities. To accomplish this, the investigators
will develop a new traceability query language and associated query mechanism,
identify stakeholders' traceability-related needs, develop traceability services
to meet those needs, build a knowledge base of traceability tasks and related
queries, and handle varied data formats. If successful, the research could
transform the community?s understanding of traceability and its benefits across
the software engineering lifecycle. The evaluation of the proposed framework and
dissemination of results is enhanced by having industry personnel actively
participate as senior staff on the project and by an already-established Center
of Excellence for Software Traceability.