* 0810791
* SBIR Phase I:  Compact NMR for Dilute Pathogen Detection
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2008,12/31/2009
* Eiichi Fukushima, ABQMR,Inc
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 12/31/2009
* USD 149,573.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project develops compact NMR
devices for rapid detection of dilute cells and pathogens to replace blood
culture, providing improvements in detection speed and sensitivity while
decreasing cost. They will enhance medical care and address the growing crisis
of sepsis in hospitals. The devices are based on a combination of technologies -
microcoil NMR and biochemical labeling by magnetic nanoparticles. The research
will extend the performance boundaries of this technology, resulting in a
detector for extremely dilute, immuno-magnetically labeled, pathogens.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this research are based on the
importance of early detection of dilute concentration of pathogens and other
cells that would permit more timely diagnosis of diseases, thereby enhancing
healthcare outcomes. Early detection also reduces costs, as patients recover
faster and require less intervention. Blood culture is a workhorse of the
diagnostic lab, so there is a demand for a device that substantially improves
its performance. Sepsis is a growing public health problem with significant
consequences, so the motivation to adopt new tools for the detection and
treatment of this condition is strong. The NMR device proposed here achieves
enhanced performance in sensitivity, speed, size, and cost that will permit new
uses in the future, including in the primary care setting and in the
field.&lt;br/&gt;