* 0810792
* STTR Phase I: Smart Antenna Systems for Unlicensed ISM-band Public Safety and Remote Meter Reading Data Networks
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Robert Conley, LHC2 Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2009
* USD 147,794.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will characterize
the interference environment of outdoor unlicensed 900 and 2400 MHz wireless
networks used for public safety and energy management. It will also develop a
proof of concept and test innovative interference minimizing smart antenna
prototypes to restore operations and improve performance of public safety
networks. Private wireless broadband networks, deployed by municipalities and
utilities are used for such functions as public safety, public Internet access,
and energy and water management. These networks are experiencing dramatic growth
in both size and number. This growth, along with expanding enterprise and
consumer use of overlapping devices and Wireless Local Area Networks (WLANs),
continue to exacerbate performance reducing interference problems. This
interference has forced many municipalities to double their investments in
infrastructure equipment or to increase transmitter power to overcome
interference, thus producing more interference for overlapping
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful the use of this antenna in the
proposed band will help first responders save lives. For example, interactive
live video, voice and vitals monitoring allow physicians to interact with
disaster victims and their caregivers at the scene and during transport. These
and other applications such as GPS enabled emergency response vehicle and
personnel tracking and fuel-efficient dispatch require large amounts of data to
be delivered over reliable wireless networks. This unique smart antenna
technology will help insure that private municipal wireless networks provide
reliable high data rates that continue to meet performance goals as the
frequencies they use become more crowded.