* 0810415
* RUI: Structure of Entanglement in Macromolecules
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Eric Rawdon, University of St. Thomas
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2012
* USD 150,000.00

The structures of tightly entangled tubes have been used to predict properties
of entangled macromolecules, e.g. the pitch of alpha helices in proteins and the
pitch of the DNA double helix. In addition, physicists have proposed that
subatomic particles known as glueballs are tightly entangled QCD flux tubes.
While there is a great deal of mathematical and scientific interest in these
tight entanglements, explicit descriptions are unknown for all but some simple
examples. In the first portion of this project, the PI, collaborators, and
students determine the structure of tight knots and links by performing careful
numerical simulations and using the data to provide explicit descriptions of
tight configurations and their sets of tube-to-tube contacts. These
configurations provide insights into how long tubes pack into small spaces,
behavior seen throughout nature (e.g. in the packing of DNA in viral capsids).
Entanglement can also be seen in natural materials that form open chains. The
existence (or lack thereof) of entangled regions in polymeric chains, for
example, raises many interesting questions regarding the complex interplay
between structure and function. Recently, the discovery of knotted regions in
proteins has received much attention. However, the algorithms for detecting the
regions (and, thus, the definition of exactly what a knotted open chain is) vary
by research group and is in much need of rigorous analysis. In the second
portion of this project, the PI, collaborators, and students explore new notions
of knotting in open chains that can be used to detect entangled regions in
polymers and then measure the size and shape of these knotted regions. In
particular, they establish a firm theoretical understanding of entanglement in
open chains, use new and established spatial measurements to better understand
the shapes of linked catenanes and knotted polymer chains and loops, and find
connections between the structure of polymer models and those of tight knots.

Knotting and tangling occur frequently in nature at every scale. For example,
DNA forms knots during biological reactions and physicists conjecture that
magnetic fields formed during storms on the sun can be knotted. The early
proposal of Kelvin that elementary particles form knots found recent support in
studies of subatomic particles known as glueballs which are hypothesized to take
the shape of tightly entangled tubes. Other chain-like natural materials pack
tightly as well, e.g. a large amount of DNA is packed into the head of viruses
and the release of the DNA into the cell is what spearheads the infection
process. The structure and function of these chains are inherently intertwined.
In particular, understanding the native structure of these chains is a key step
in manipulating processes, such as in creating designer plastics or identifying
and killing rogue cells. The PI, collaborators, and students study two models:
tight realizations of knots and knots occurring in open and closed chains.
Examples of applications include predicting unidentified glueballs, describing
how materials pack tightly in small spaces, and characterizing the structure of
knots in open chains of protein.

