* 0810794
* SBIR Phase I: Electron Capture Dissociation for Radiofrequency Ion Trap MS
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2008,07/31/2009
* Jack Syage, SYAGEN TECHNOLOGY INC
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 07/31/2009
* USD 99,991.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will test the
feasibility of an electron capture dissociation (ECD) method for radio-frequency
(RF) ion trap mass spectrometers. ECD has emerged as a powerful means to
fragment peptide and protein bonds in a manner that can reveal details of post-
translational modifications (PTMs). ECD is difficult to implement in RF driven
mass analyzers, such as quadrupole and linear ion traps, because the RF fields
drive electrons to excess energy and out of the trap. This research demonstrates
the feasibility for an ECD method for ion traps using a method of gating the RF
off for short periods of time, while introducing low-energy electrons to achieve
ECD.

The broader impacts of this research are in healthcare and disease control.
Studying the entire complement of proteins expressed by a particular cell,
organism or tissue at a given time and under a specific set of environmental
conditions will require developing new automated and high-speed methods for
analyzing the protein content of cell lines. The proposed ECD method for ion
traps will lead to accurate identification of protein structure including PTM
sites. This diagnostic capability has the potential to provide systematic
searches for biomarkers. Studies of cancer cell lines can reveal signatures of
cancerous cells that can serve as biomarkers for actual diagnosis. The economic
impacts in terms of increased productivity and decreased burden on the health
care system are substantial.

