* 0810291
* Scales of mantle heterogeneity from 3D numerical models of mixing
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2014
* Louise Kellogg, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 01/31/2014
* USD 270,000.00

This research addresses the dynamics of the Earth¹s mantle in order to provide
insight into sources and scales of heterogeneity and the long-term evolution of
the Earth¹s deep interior and its influence on geological processes. We use a
new implementation of a method for computing the stretching and thinning of
ellipsoidal tracers in three orthogonal directions in isoviscous, incompressible
three-dimensional flows, combined with new methods for visualizing 3D convection
and mixing to identify stationary points, closed paths, and other features,
found within the complex, 3D data generated by mantle convection models. These
methods are to be implemented in established mantle convection codes to
construct and then analyze time-varying mantle models with a large number of
particles. The research addresses three fundamental topics: (1) the rate of
mixing 3D time-dependent convection in the mantle, and the formation and
destruction of structural patterns that can lead to the observed scales of
heterogeneity (2) the structure and dynamics of mixing in boundary layers,
especially in the lower mantle¹s D² layer and (3) the mixing associated with
mantle plumes.

One of the fundamental open questions in dynamics of Earth¹s deep interior
concerns the scales of the observed heterogeneity in the mantle. The
development, and destruction, of heterogeneity by mantle convection reflects the
long-term history and thermal evolution of the Earth as a planet. To determine
the origins, evolution, and persistence of heterogeneity in the mantle requires
understanding the physics of mixing by mantle convection. This problem has long
been a topic of study, but it has not been resolved because scientists lacked
the means to fully characterize mixing in 3D. Our research addresses this
question by developing the computational methods to study mixing in 3D and
applying these methods to numerical simulations of mantle convection. The
results will enable improved interpretation of the observed seismic and
geochemical observations of anisotropy and heterogeneity in the mantle. In the
course of the research, we will develop and implement new methods for modeling
mixing in viscous fluids, an important area of research across multiple
disciplines, and for flow visualization. The methods developed will be
applicable to computational fluid dynamics research in engineering as well as
having applications to geophysics.