* 0810096
* SHARP: Saronic Harbors Archaeological Research Project
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Daniel Pullen, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2013
* USD 177,043.00

With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Daniel J. Pullen has
designed the Saronic Harbors Archaeological Research Project (SHARP) to conduct
two seasons of archaeological and geoarchaeological research on the Saronic Gulf
coast of southern Greece. The international team from the US, Canada, UK,
Australia, and Greece, led by Dr. Pullen and co-director Dr. Thomas Tartaron,
seeks to examine the interrelationships among archaic states when they compete
for control of peripheral regions, in a process called peer-polity competition.
The project involves an intensive program of surface survey, excavation,
artifact analysis, and paleoenvironmental reconstruction, focused on the
recently discovered Mycenaean port/harbor town of Korphos-Kalamianos in southern
Greece (ca. 1700?1200 B.C.). The particular interest of the site and its setting
is that it appears to have played the role of contested periphery in a process
by which the emerging palace state at Mycenae expanded into the sphere of
influence of an older state centered at Kolonna on the island of Aigina, and
eventually incorporated the Kalamianos region economically and perhaps
politically as well. Kalamianos is unique in Aegean prehistory because urban
ports of the period are virtually unknown, and because the exposure on the
modern surface of stone architectural foundations and lower walls is such that a
nearly complete plan of the settlement has been made before any excavation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field methods, put into practice and refined already
in 2007, will document the urban port and its hinterland by obtaining data on
architecture and town planning, artifacts, settlement patterns, and
paleoenvironment. Careful documentation of architectural remains indicates the
appearance of canonical Mycenaean architecture of the 13th century B.C. is the
peak of palace society at Mycenae, but it is not certain whether this reflects
Mycenaes' presence or local elites emulating imperial architecture. Initial
results from surface survey suggest that settlement and subsistence patterns
underwent striking changes at the same time. The surface pottery comprises both
Aiginetan and Mycenaean types and petrographic analyses of the ceramics will
clarify these complex interactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit
of SHARP lies in examining peripheries within the Mycenaean heartland, instead
of the typical focus on distant regions and issues of raw material acquisition
and interregional trade. SHARP seeks to describe the roles peripheries play in
the expansion and consolidation of archaic states in the context of a
competitive process among peer polities. The impact on Aegean prehistory will be
immediate, and the results will provide comparative data for the study of
analogous processes in other world areas, for example among Maya and Wari
states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among the broader impacts of SHARP are the
development of international collaboration and targeted professional development
for female staff members. Graduate students are provided intensive training and
dissertation opportunities. Public outreach to the local community and tourists
in Greece will have long-lasting and positive outcomes, as will the
dissemination of results in popular media, teaching, and presentations to
schools and other groups in the USA.