* 0810381
* 2008 Plant and Fungal Cytoskeleton Gordon Research Conference to be held August 3-8, 2008 at Ciocco in Barga, Italy
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Susan Dutcher, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 06/30/2009
* USD 5,000.00

This award will provide support for a Gordon Research Conference on the Plant
and Fungal Cytoskeleton to be held August 3-8, 20008 at Il Ciocco in Barga,
Italy. This is a biennial meeting that brings together researchers from across
the globe who study the cytoskeleton in plants, algae, and fungi. This meeting
has been and will continue to be a driving force in the study of microtubules
and actin in these organisms. They both share similarities and differences that
have helped to promote research in both sets of organisms. There will be ten
platform sessions, two keynote addresses, and a daily poster session. Nine to
ten talks will be chosen from the abstracts to allow younger researchers and new
breaking information to be presented.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The conference promotes participation by all members of the
research community. Graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and assistant
professors are encouraged to present their work during platform and poster
sessions. Women and minorities are encouraged to give talks and presentations.
The conference will provide excellent opportunities for researchers to
experience personal contacts with other workers from the geographically diverse
plant and fungal communities thatincludes persons from North America, Europe,
and Asia. With the addition of talks relating to parasites, it is hoped to
attract attendees from Africa and Australia as well.