* 0810626
* STTR Phase I:  Magnetic Nanoparticle Microfluidics for High Efficient Capture, Separation and Concetration of Foodborne Pathogens
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2008,12/31/2009
* Yongqiang Wang, Ocean NanoTech, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 12/31/2009
* USD 200,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I research demonstrates the
feasibility to use the new generation of oxide magnetic nanoparticles for rapid
and high efficient separation of foodborne pathogens. Rapid detection of
foodborne pathogens is urgently needed to ensure food safety and security, and
in developing new detection methods, separation of target pathogens at ultra low
concentrations (1 - 100 cfu/mL) from food is very critical. The recently
developed nanoparticles (4 ? 50 nm) with high magnetization value and well
controlled size and surface chemistry show great potential for their use in
bioseparation. Therefore, the objective of this project is to apply new oxide
magnetic nanoparticles to a portable, inexpensive magnetic separator for rapid
and high efficient separation of foodborne pathogens. In Phase I of this
project, E. coli O157:H7 will be used as the target bacterium to test magnetic
nanoparticles with different sizes and structures, to evaluate antibody-
nanoparticle conjugates, different buffer solutions and protocols.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this research are to improve the
safety and security of the nation?s food supply and biological systems. The
proposed new technology will greatly enhance the rapid detection of pathogens in
food products, and thus to reduce foodborne illnesses. Also, the outcome of this
proposed research should provide direct economic benefits to the food industry
in terms of reduced product recalls and international trade barrier due to
microbial contamination. &lt;br/&gt;