* 0810670
* SBIR Phase I:  Continuous Flow Fixed-bed Biodiesel Production from Algae Oil
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Bin (Ben) Wen, United Environment & Energy, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Walters
* 06/30/2009
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is to develop a highly
energy efficient, high throughput continuous flow fixed-bed reactor technology
for cost-effective algae oil biodiesel production. Algae oil has emerged as one
of the most promising sources for mass biodiesel production to replace all
transportation fuel in the U.S. A large amount of algae oil will be available in
the near future for biodiesel production. However, the current commercial
biodiesel production process - a homogeneous catalyst based transesterification
process - has not changed much in the last two decades and is far from being
efficient. In addition to the significant capital costs required for this
homogeneous alkali-catalyzed process, the neutralization and washing processes,
along with the production of waste water, are energy and labor intensive and not
environmentally friendly. To meet the mass algae oil production demand and
achieve the algae biodiesel economy, a new highly energy efficient and high
throughput biodiesel production process needs to be developed. In Phase I,
research will focus on evaluating the algae oil composition, optimizing the
fixed-bed reactor configuration and operating conditions, producing ASTM D6751
standard biodiesel, and proving the technical feasibility.

The successful application of this technology to algae oil biodiesel production
will significantly increase biodiesel productivity, simplify product separation
and purification, improve glycerin quality, eliminate the washing step and
associated waste stream, and reduce the plant size and capital costs. This will,
in turn, lead to the replacement of the low-efficiency homogeneous catalyst
biodiesel production process with a highly efficient fixed-bed heterogeneous
catalytic process for algae oil biodiesel production, expedite the substitution
of petroleum diesel with domestically produced alternative fuel, decrease energy
consumption and its associated environmental impact, reduce U.S. dependence on
foreign oil imports, and enable the U.S. transportation industry to sustain a
strong, competitive position in domestic and world markets. This technology will
be commercialized in our company. Additionally, we will license it to biodiesel
producers or plant developers to make it available to the entire biodiesel
industry. With collaborations with the largest biodiesel companies in the U.S.,
this technology will be commercialized within three years.