* 0810826
* SBIR Phase I:  Dynamic Device for the Treatment of Stress Urinary Incontinence
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Richard Vecchiotti, Curant, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2009
* USD 99,366.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is devoted to the
development and testing of a novel biomedical implant to better treat stress
urinary incontinence (SUI) - the most common type of incontinence affecting more
than 12 million Americans. SUI is a complex and multifactorial disease that has
a major impact on a person's physiological and psychological wellness. The
objective of this Phase I plan is to demonstrate technical feasibility of
Cûrant's DRD (Dynamic Response Device) by performing pre-clinical testing,
advancing DRD-prototype designs, and completing a risk-reduced design
specification. The DRD is a novel treatment for SUI that will be the first
product to offer a universal, and more effective, solution to this
multifactorial problem. In addition, development of the DRD will lead to a
broader acceptance and understanding of the complexity of SUI in both men and
women. Cûrant is led by a balanced team of engineers and physicians with
outstanding access to industry expertise throughout the bay area's med-tech
community.

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will address a major
deficiency in the understanding, acceptance and treatment of urinary
incontinence - the involuntary leakage of urine. Urinary incontinence is one of
the most common chronic ailments facing Americans. According to the National
Association for Continence (NAFC), over 25 million people are affected by some
form of urinary incontinence. Not surprisingly, this condition is one of the
leading causes of individuals losing the ability to live independently and
having to enter care facilities. Accordingly, the extended yearly cost of
urinary incontinence is estimated at $19.5 billion each year in the United
States. The novel biomedical device being developed in this Phase I project -
the DRD (Dynamic Response Device) represents a dramatic advance in the
understanding of, and approach to, treating the complex, multifactorial,
condition of stress urinary incontinence, (the most common type of urinary
incontinence). The DRD's ability to simply and mechanically provide a dynamic,
therapeutic response more closely resembles natural physiology than any other
incontinence device currently available. The implications of this extend beyond
urinary incontinence and dynamic technology may eventually be used to address
many other complex medical conditions such as glaucoma or gastroesophageal
reflux disease.