* 0810127
* Collaborative Research: Testing Models that Describe the Origin of Compositional Diversity of Subduction Zone Magmatism, Aeolian Islands
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Frank Spera, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2012
* USD 250,448.00

Volcanic rocks provide an integrated, multi-scale record of the processes that
govern how magmas form. Using both theoretical and analytical tools, this work
will document the critical processes that led to the formation of magmas in the
Aeolian Islands, Italy. The volcanoes of the Aeolians were chosen as the study
sites because they are compositionally diverse and geologically young; they thus
represent prime places to study to how and why young volcanoes erupt. In
addition to augmenting our understanding of how these magmas form and evolve,
this work will also help characterize features of this young magmatic system
such as the depth at which the magma bodies reside under the surface of Earth
and the volatile content of the magmas prior to eruption. Such data can provide
information to volcanologists who explore when and how volcanic eruptions
initiate, thereby potentially enhancing volcanic hazard assessment and
mitigation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work utilizes two approaches. One is
application of a phase equilibria model, the development of which was funded by
the National Science Foundation, to document the thermodynamics of processes
that led to formation of magmas in the Aeolian Islands. Results of computer
modeling allow predictions to be made about particular characteristics of the
volcanic rocks. Using state-of-the-art analytical tools, these predictions will
be tested by collecting geochemical, textural and field data on a selected suite
of rocks. Comparison of theoretical expectations and these new data will allow
the strengths and weaknesses of the phase equilibria model to be assessed and
will also lead to well documented hypotheses about how the Aeolian volcanoes
formed. If this marriage of state-of-the-art theoretical and analytical tools is
successful, it will impact how scientists approach studying complex magmatic
systems by providing a methodology by which source to surface compositional
diversity can be understood. Because improvements to the phase equilibria model
are an on-going goal, this work will also provide input that will inform model
improvements. &lt;br/&gt;