* 0810090
* Mountain Weather Workshop; Whistler, British Columbia, Canada; August 5-8, 2008
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2008,11/30/2011
* Fotini Chow, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 11/30/2011
* USD 15,060.00

A mountain weather workshop will be offered prior to the 2008 AMS Mountain
Meteorology conference to provide a unique learning opportunity for faculty,
forecasters, graduate students, and others interested in mountain meteorology. A
major goal of the workshop is to bridge the gap between the research and
forecasting communities by providing a forum for extended discussion and joint
education. The workshop will consist of lectures given by distinguished
speakers, several group discussion opportunities, and will conclude with a day
of laboratory exercises. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field of mountain meteorology
has evolved greatly in the last two decades since the last similar workshop was
held. The workshop will provide participants with a broad understanding of the
fundamental principles driving flow over complex terrain and provide historical
context for recent developments and future direction for researchers and
forecasters. For academic researchers, the workshop will provide a unique
opportunity to engage with the forecasting community, which will lead to a
better understanding of the technical needs of today's forecasters, including
learning about outstanding questions and needed research, and gaining awareness
of current practical limitations of theoretical and numerical models. For the
forecasting community, the workshop will provide training on fundamentals of
flows specific to mountainous regions which are notoriously difficult to
predict, understanding of current research challenges, and an opportunity to
learn about the latest contributions and advancements to the field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;About 12 lectures with extensive discussion sessions will
be given which will provide a comprehensive overview of important and emerging
topics in mountain meteorology. Results of the workshop will be disseminated via
the publication of a meteorological monograph on mountain meteorology which will
be published by the American Meteorological Society (AMS). It is anticipated
that the monograph will be used extensively in mountain weather courses at
universities and forecast offices and also used as a general reference book for
researchers, forecasters, and students.