* 0810413
* High order numerical methods for PDEs on complex domains and their applications in computational biology
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Yongtao Zhang, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2012
* USD 80,575.00

Efficient numerical methods have become more and more important for studying PDE
models in computational biology. These time dependent PDE models can be
parabolic or hyperbolic, and are defined on complex spatial domains. The PI
proposes to perform research in the design, analysis of high order weighted
essentially non-oscillatory (WENO) schemes and discontinuous Galerkin (DG)
methods on two-dimensional (2D) and three-dimensional (3D) unstructured meshes,
for hyperbolic systems of conservation laws and stiff reaction-diffusion
equations. And the PI proposes to apply these methods to high dimensional models
for morphogen systems in developmental biology. Understanding morphogen gradient
formation during embryo development is a fundamental problem in developmental
biology. Mathematical models the PI will study are built on three-dimensional
complex geometrical domains. Computational analysis of these models will reveal
the formation mechanisms of BMP morphogen gradients, and the importance of
incorporating 3D realistic shape of the embryo. In the spatial direction, the
morphogen gradient systems usually develop sharp gradients on the embryo with a
3D complex shape. Hence the high order robust numerical methods on 2D and 3D
unstructured meshes will be especially useful in the numerical simulations to
deal with the 3D complex geometrical domains and the sharp gradients of the
solutions. Four specific tasks are: 1) Develop high order WENO schemes and codes
on 3D tetrahedral meshes; 2) Develop high order implicit integrating factor
discontinuous Galerkin (IIF-DG) schemes and codes on 2D and 3D unstructured
meshes; 3) Develop 3D reaction-diffusion models for BMP gradient formation
during dorsal-ventral patterning of the zebrafish embryo. Starting from a simple
model based on simplified bio-chemical gene network, the PI will create a more
complete model motivated by new biological experiments; 4) Via computational
analysis of the models on 3D complex geometrical domains, study the formation
mechanisms of morphogen gradients, address important biological questions. Then,
apply the model to other organisms such as Xenopus. The proposed numerical
methods will be applied in the simulations.

The proposed research will result in a suite of nice modeling and computational
techniques, suitable for quantitative study of various morphogen systems, during
the embryo development of different organisms. These techniques are expected to
make positive contributions to computer simulations of complicated phenomena in
morphogen gradient pattern formation. The proposed activity will also provide
excellent training and education opportunities for both graduate and
undergraduate students interested in research at the interface of mathematics,
computation, and biology. The students will be well prepared to work in
interdisciplinary research through developing intellectual and technical tools
for the advancement of computational mathematics and applying these tools to
important questions in biology.