* 0810306
* Collaborative Research: Caldera Collapse and Subsequent Evolution of Long-lived Silicic Supervolcanoes: A Case Study of the Tshirege Member, Bandelier Tuff, NM
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2009,12/31/2011
* John Wolff, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* William P. Leeman
* 12/31/2011
* USD 188,467.00

Intellectual merit. Rhyolitic super-eruptions from calderas are rare events that
lie outside recorded human experience, but it is quite certain that they will
continue to occur. Insights into the magmatic processes that accompany the
generation, storage, and eruption of large bodies of rhyolitic magma are
provided by petrologic study of the eruptive products of past events. A
consensus is now emerging among the scientific community that eruptions of
crystal-poor rhyolite with volumes of the order of 100 - 1,000 km3 leave still
greater quantities of complementary non-erupted crystal-rich residue beneath the
surface. This residue may be capable of rejuvenation and production of
subsequent eruptible bodies of crystal-poor magma. This proposal seeks funding
for a detailed study of an example where two super-eruptions of crystal-poor
rhyolite occurred on exactly the same site, separated in time by ~360,000 years.
The Otowi (Lower) and Tshirege (Upper) Members of the Bandelier Tuff were
erupted from the Valles caldera, New Mexico, in two episodes at 1.61 and 1.25 Ma
respectively. Both exhibit strong chemical zonation. From prior work, the pre-
caldera magmatic history is well understood, as are the development and pre-
eruptive architecture of the Otowi magma body. The highly enriched, yet
relatively simple, geochemical character of the Otowi implies that it parted
from a large mass of crystals. The later Tshirege Member shares many petrologic
and geochemical similarities with the Otowi, yet is considerably more complex.
Preliminary data are consistent with a model in which the Tshirege is partly
derived from Otowi crystal residue with added ancient crust. This mixture was
not homogenized prior to production of the Tshirege magma. This hypothesis will
be tested by analyzing pumices, glasses and crystals for major, trace elements
and radiogenic isotopes to identify contributing components and the process by
which they were assembled to form the Tshirege magma. Two additional key aspects
are (1) associated analog experiments to constrain the extent of syn-eruptive
disturbance of the crystal pile induced by the downdropping caldera block, and
(2) high resolution imaging and analysis of Ti distributions in quartz
phenocrysts, which will constrain the timing of recharge and heating event(s)
that may trigger super-eruptions by thermal rejuvenation of the crystal pile.

Broader impacts. Given the potentially devastating global impact of rhyolitic
super-eruptions, the need to forecast the next such event several decades
beforehand is self-evident. Such premonitory indicators as may be detectable at
the surface must necessarily be informed by an understanding of the nature and
timing of magmatic processes that precede supereruptions. This in turn demands
basic research into these processes, which is the subject of this research. The
research outlined in this proposal will additionally serve to train
undergraduates and a graduate student in modern methods associated with
petrologic and geochemical investigations. Additionally, it will contribute to
the development of a young research scientists and an early-career Hispanic
scientist who has just taken a tenure-track position.