* 0810129
* Equilibrium and Kinetic Isotopic Fractionation of Lithium in Mantle Minerals
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Maureen Feineman, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2012
* USD 177,750.00

Intellectual merit. Ultramafic xenoliths provide direct information regarding
the nature of the upper mantle. However, xenolith che geochemistry may be
modified during transport due to reaction with the melts or fluids that carry
them. Lithium may provide a window into the timescales and extent of this
reaction due to its highly mobile nature at high temperatures. Mantle xenoliths
often display inter-and intra-granular lithium isotopic fractionation. In
particular, clinopyroxenes are often lighter and more variable than co-existing
olivines, particularly in depleted xenoliths. The proposed experimental study
aims to determine if this is an inherent characteristic of the Li isotope
geochemistry of the mantle, or if this is reflective of processes occurring
immediately prior to or during eruption. For instance, different diffusion rates
for Li in olivine and clinopyroxene might explain the apparent fractionation of
Li isotopes between these two phases, if one phase is able to equilibrate more
fully with the host melt on the timescales of xenolith mobilization and
transport. With the proposed study, we intend to address the following
questions: 1) What is the equilibrium distribution of Li and its isotopes in
mantle minerals?, 2) What is the rate of Li elemental diffusion in olivine and
clinopyroxene?, and 3) To what extent are Li isotopes fractionated during solid-
state diffusion?. The proposed research constitutes the first attempt to
experimentally verify the presumed lack of equilibrium isotopic fractionation of
Li at high temperatures, to determine Li diffusion rates in olivine, and to
assess the degree to which Li isotopes are fractionated during solid-state
diffusion. If the experimental results show that Li diffusion in olivine is slow
relative to the timescales of xenolith mobilization (which may or may not be the
case), the Li isotope composition of olivines in mantle nodules could be
valuable tools for evaluating the Li isotope geochemistry of the upper mantle.
At the same time, quantifying the rates of Li diffusion in clinopyroxene will
allow us to assess the timescales of mantle-melt interaction prior to and during
xenolith transport. The data generated during this experimental study will allow
future researchers to assess the extent of Li isotope heterogeneity in the
mantle, the timescales and extent of reactive alteration of mantle nodules
immediately prior to and during transport, and cooling rates of olivine- and
clinopyroxene- bearing lavas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. This project
will enable the PI to establish research techniques and facilities.
Collaborations with. David Eggler (Penn State) and James Brenan (U. of Toronto)
will greatly facilitate establishment of a new experimental petrology lab at
Penn State. The project will support one PhD student and senior thesis projects
for several undergraduates at Penn State. Analytical work will be conducted in
Japan (ISEI; Okayama U.) as part of an international educational and cultural
excgange for the PhD student, and promotes East-West intellectual exchange for
the geochemical community.&lt;br/&gt;