* 0810423
* STTR Phase I:  RF-System and Integrated Electronics for Low-Cost Smart Antenna Arrays
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Mihai Banu, MHI Consulting LLC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2009
* USD 149,973.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I project explores the possibility
of designing beam steering base-station quality smart antennas using low-cost
cell-phone quality electronics. The team is proposing a unique system approach
leveraging the latest advances in radio-frequency integrated circuits and signal
synchronization technology. If validated, the proposed method will enable the
introduction of performance levels previously available only to expensive
military systems to cost sensitive commercial wireless networks. This includes
increased capacity for almost any standard, longer communication range, lower
power dissipation, and better reliability. Applied to antenna arrays with a
large number of elements, the proposed solution is suitable for low-cost high-
quality beam-steering systems required in space-division multiplexing. Another
advanced application is in conformal antenna arrays, useful in concealing the
ever-growing wireless infrastructure. The phase I work of this proposal will
answer essential feasibility questions such as system partitioning and key
integrated circuit functionality. In addition, it will carry out the preparatory
calculations and design for building a low-cost beam-steering antenna
demonstration using a future experimental integrated circuit.

If proposed effort is successful a de facto platform technology for low cost
ubiquitous beam-steering antenna arrays will emerge. This will open a new large
market for specialized integrated circuits serving this new application. In
addition to communication and military systems, active arrays are useful in
medical and industrial imaging. The availability of a low-cost beam steering
system solution will affect these areas significantly. For example, portable
scanning equipment may become affordable and more prevalent. Phased array
technology is largely an understood topic outside a small group of specialists,
yet this old concept has a great potential in modern applications.