* 0810351
* SBIR Phase I: Biopolymer reinforced RF Tissue Welding
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2008,03/31/2009
* David Schechter, VitruMed Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia A. Znati
* 03/31/2009
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project focuses developing a
radiofrequency (RF) tissue welding technology using a biopolymer as
reinforcement for use in pulmonary resections. This project is focused on the
development of minimally-invasive RF tissue welding technology for pulmonary
resections including biopsies, to further advance early detection and treatment
of lung cancer. Based on preliminary studies, a single endoscopic grasping
device thermally welds tissue and subsequently delivers molten bioabsorbable
polymer to the weld. The biopolymer fully penetrates the weld, solidifies, and
increases the weld burst strength. The project is focused on the synthesis and
characterization of a series of low-molecular weight bioabsorbable copolymers
with optimum physicochemical properties for use in tissue-weld reinforcement.
Using a series of bioabsorbable copolymers, we will examine the influence of
monomer composition on processibility, wicking ability into the denatured
collagen/elastin tissue matrix, mechanical properties including burst strength,
and degradation rate.

Lung cancer has become the leading cause of cancer mortality in the United
States. Efforts are underway to improve early detection of lung cancer using
Spiral CT (National Lung Screen Trial). Only 16 percent of lung cancer cases are
diagnosed at an early stage appropriate for surgical intervention. Early
screening must be weighed against performing surgically invasive biopsies on
patients where the screening results may be false positive. In spite of
significant advances in video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS), the vast
majority of pulmonary resections including biopsies continue to be performed by
open thoracotomy. RF-based technologies allow for greater design flexibility,
enabling minimally invasive surgery. Many studies support the use of RF energy-
based tissue welding for pediatric pulmonary resections where access through
small intercostal ports is crucial in small patients. With larger and thicker
resections, however, weld strength of RF-sealed lung tissue has been shown to
decrease, limiting widespread use in adults. Our goal is to increase weld
strength in pulmonary resections by reinforcement with a bioabsorbable polymer.
Infusion of low molecular weight polymer into thermally treated tissues can
potentially improve tissue structure, provide hemostatic barriers, or attach
grafts and meshes in a wide array of surgical treatments.