* 0810861
* HCC-Small: Collaborative Mixed-Initiative Access Control
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2015
* Prasun Dewan, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2015
* USD 491,122.00

Today, we are faced with three apparently conflicting problems: users are afraid
to collaborate unless they have fine-grained control over how their data are
accessed by others; many shared environments, especially the new ones, do not
offer such controls because of the difficulty of implementing them; those that
do offer such controls provide access mechanisms that are difficult to
understand and use and result in users being assigned wrong access rights. In
this project the PI will investigate the idea of using special-purpose
collaborative environments to distribute access, with the goal of developing a
general model of access distribution that captures in-use and promising mixed-
initiative schemes that have so far been defined only in an application-
dependent fashion. The model will be defined using several new kinds of
application-independent objects such as access requests and grants that capture
the information exchanged in a mixed-initiative system. It will be compatible
with existing authorization models including object-based models, in which
copies of objects are granted, and rights-based models such as role-based access
control, in which (potentially revocable) rights to the object granted. In the
PI's approach, the initiative in distributing access rights to shared objects
can be taken by information guardians, information consumers, and tools that act
as agents of the guardians and the consumers. Information consumers are
responsible for sending access requests to information guardians; their agents
will (partially or completely) automate this task for them. Information
guardians are responsible for authorizing access; their agents will automate
this task for them. The PI will identify a general architecture for implementing
his model, in which the access-awareness in existing collaboration and
communication tools is kept low. In addition, the PI will develop programming
abstractions that make it easy to implement the model using the architecture. He
will use the abstractions to add mixed-initiative access control in several
target systems, which will include both complex widely-used traditional file
systems and distributed web services; this experience will help the PI evaluate
the programmability of the abstractions. Finally, he will perform field and lab
studies to compare alternative approaches to distribute access supported by the
general model. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: If successful, this work
will open up a new research area focusing on collaborative mixed-initiative
access control, and show that collaborative systems are not only a liability for
access control but also an asset. Project outcomes will lead to significant
improvement in the usability and programmability of fine-grained authorization
mechanisms, thereby facilitating a large number of collaborations that would
otherwise not take place. They will also afford a better understanding of the
similarities and differences between different access distribution schemes and
the consequences of using them. In the short term, the project will develop
research and teaching software consisting of two main components: layers on top
of widely-used file systems that provide several new access distribution
schemes, which can be evaluated by usability researchers and demonstrated in
classes on security; and programming abstractions allowing the incorporation of
these schemes in new shared environments implemented using web services, which
can be used in both class and research projects.