* 0810422
* High order numerical methods for multiphysics couplings
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2013
* Beatrice Riviere, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2013
* USD 341,912.00

The project results in the development of high order discontinuous Galerkin
methods for complex flow and transport problems. The investigator analyzes and
numerically studies different types of couplings, such as the coupling of Stokes
or Navier-Stokes equations with miscible displacement and multiphase flow.
Physically meaningful conditions are imposed at the interface between surface
region and subsurface region. The mathematical advances in numerical analysis
consist of proving existence and uniqueness of high order solutions of coupled
systems and of rigorously deriving a priori error estimates with respect to the
mesh size and the polynomial degree. Verification of the numerical solutions is
performed through convergence studies, adaptivity with respect to the mesh size
and the polynomial degree and comparisons with solutions obtained from other
discretization techniques. A computational framework valid for two and three-
dimensional problems is developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work deals with the
modeling, analysis and simulation of multiphysics problems arising for instance
in groundwater contamination through rivers and lakes. Groundwater becomes
contaminated when human-made substances or sometimes naturally occurring
substances are dissolved in waters recharging the groundwater. Often, as
groundwater is connected with lakes and rivers, the pollution of these surface
waters implies the pollution of aquifers. The investigator studies the
interaction between surface flow and subsurface flow. Accurate and efficient
numerical methods are developed and analyzed. Intensive numerical simulations
and comparison with experimental data allow gaining further knowledge on
multiphysics couplings. The interdisciplinary nature of the task fosters
transfer of scientific knowledge across the engineering and science
communities.&lt;br/&gt;This project advances discovery and understanding while
promoting learning by training several graduate students and undergraduate
students. An important educational activity is a week-long Summer Math School
offered to high-school students entering grades 10-12. The event?s objective is
to encourage students to pursue a career in science and mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;