* 0810118
* Ancient Maya Agroforestry and Water Management Systems at Tikal
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2013
* Vernon Scarborough, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2013
* USD 171,693.00

With support from the National Science Foundation, Drs. David Lentz, Nicholas
Dunning and Vernon Scarborough, along with an international team of scientists,
will conduct two seasons of archaeological and paleoenvironmental field research
at the Tikal site in northern Guatemala. The purpose of this study is to
establish a greater understanding of the interaction between the ancient Maya of
Tikal and their local environment. Of particular interest will be the forest
resources required to build and sustain their great city and the nature and
complexity of the water management system in the site core and the surrounding
area. The primary theoretical question to be addressed in this study focuses on
the lingering concern of how the ancient Maya in the northern Pet√©n were able to
sustain large populations in the midst of a tropical forest environment during
the Late Classic period. A corollary to this question asks how agricultural
intensification was achieved and how other essential resources, such as water
and forest products, were managed. In particular, the team is interested in the
development of irrigation systems at Tikal as they contributed to agricultural
activity, forest clearance and exploitation of the seasonal wetlands. All of
these activities were essential components of an initially sustainable land use
strategy that eventually failed to meet the demands of an escalating population.
This spiraling disconnect with sound ecological principles, coupled with the
potentially exacerbating factor of climate change, undoubtedly contributed to
the Maya "collapse." Furthermore, it is hypothesized that the reservoirs and
small lakes of Tikal served as a fulcrum of political leverage and concentrated
social power. Testing these hypotheses will provide insights that will broaden
understanding of the rise of social complexity, the expansion of the Maya
political economy specifically and, in general terms, the trajectory of cultural
evolution. Moreover, this investigation will provide data vital to answering one
of the greatest and enduring mysteries of the ancient Maya civilization: the
role of land use activities as they contributed to the rise and fall of Maya
urban centers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the study can be
observed in five specific goals relating to archaeological research and
education. The goals are: 1) to advance discovery in archaeology while promoting
hands-on training, teaching and learning, 2) to complete all aspects of this
investigation and disseminate the results broadly, 3) to enhance the
infrastructure for research and education through the teaching of a
geoarchaeology field methods class for University of Cincinnati graduate and
undergraduate students, as well as students from other US and Guatemalan
universities, 4) to broaden participation from underrepresented groups in
science by offering opportunities for field research to urban scholars and
underrepresented minorities where none currently exist, and 5) to accrue
benefits to society through the generation of advanced understanding of
environmental issues across broad time scales and through the training of a new
diverse cadre of environmental archaeologists who will become the leaders and
teachers of tomorrow.