* 0810255
* Renewal: Chemistry of the Earth's Deep Interior
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2008,05/31/2011
* Ho-kwang Mao, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 05/31/2011
* USD 399,941.00

The proposed project aims to determine the chemical properties of lower mantle
and core materials at relevant deep Earth conditions in order to obtain direct
experimental constraints on the chemical composition, formation, and evolution
of the planet's interior. By far the major fraction of minerals in the solid
Earth are hidden at great depth under high pressures (P) and temperatures (T).
These minerals dictate the formation, evolution, present state, and destination
of the planet. Recent geochemical studies of the Earth's deep interior present
us with a rich array of large-scale processes and phenomena that are not fully
understood. These range from the fate of deeply subducting slabs, the origin of
plumes, the reactions at the core-mantle boundary layer, the differentiation of
elements to form the present day crust, mantle, and core, the distribution of
trace elements, and the uptake and recycling of volatiles over the course of the
Earth's history. Resolving these questions requires a detailed understanding of
the chemistry of the relevant materials that are profoundly altered at high P-T,
causing new and unforeseen reactions to occur and giving rise to structural,
electronic, and magnetic transitions not observed in mineral systems in the
near-surface environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project takes advantage of
recent developments in a number of enabling technologies, including high P-T
diamond anvil cells, new neutron diffraction facilities and instrumentation,
advanced in x-ray diffraction and spectroscopy, and electron microscopy and
focused ion beam methods. Key high P-T crystal structures of iron and iron
alloys, post-perovskite crystallography at the P-T conditions of the core-mantle
boundary, post-spinel structures, and crystal structures of dense hydrous phases
using neutron diffraction will all be studied with state-of-the-art techniques.
K-edge x-ray Raman spectroscopy of the high-pressure bonding properties of
oxides, silicates, carbonates, borates, and nitrates will be conducted.
Electronic and magnetic transitions of pressure-induced spin pairing transitions
of 3d elements and pressure-induced magnetic moment changes will also be
pursued. Selected measurements of phase relations, melting, and Fe-Mg
partitioning in lower mantle and core materials will be carried out. Although a
broad range of techniques will be used, the properties measured will be
interrelated to provide important cross checks on the measurements as well as
critical input for chemical models of the Earth's deep interior.