* 0810434
* SBIR Phase I:  Intelligent Tool Wear Monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Donald Esterling, VeritasCNC, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 06/30/2009
* USD 137,500.00

This Small Business Innovative Research Phase 1 project will investigate the
confluence of process verification and tool wear technologies. Process
verification - physics-based analysis and optimization of the machining process
and sequel to purely geometric NC verification - can significantly improve the
reliability and productivity of 21st Century manufacturing. Physics-based
systems are based on tool force modeling and depend critically on input process
model parameters called cutting energies. As the tool wears, these cutting
energies and associated tool forces can double or triple, invalidating
recommended cutting conditions based on sharp tool parameters, leading to broken
tooling and disruptions in manufacture. This project will monitor spindle power
to determine the cutting energies in situ, providing accurate updated model
parameters and tool forces. Most importantly, in addition to providing reliable
tool forces, the updated cutting energies may provide valuable tool wear
information. In contrast to current commercial tool monitoring systems, the
proposed system does not require laborious user-directed learning experiments.
Following on some preliminary experiments, this effort will investigate whether
the absolute value and time dependence of the cutting energies can be used to
inform the user of the dominant wear mechanism, the extent of the tool wear and
the expected remaining tool life.

NC verification (virtual machining validating the part geometry) has become an
ubiquitous technology. Process verification, based on tool force modeling, in
principal can provide valuable guidance in setting optimal machining conditions.
In practice, very few such systems have been sold, for three reasons. 1 The
available systems focus on tool forces and few, if any, machinists know how to
choose optimal force profiles. 2 Those tool forces, if based on sharp tool model
parameters, are not reliable as the tool inevitably wears. 3 The primary market
competitors have a small direct sales force, reaching only a limited market. In
contrast, 1 the proposed process verification system will interface with
machinist-friendly terms such as CNC performance limits and desired surface
accuracy. 2 The technical solutions developed under this project will integrate
with existing software-only process verification products to include reliable,
updated tool forces as the tool wears. The integrated products will assist the
machinist in selecting cutting conditions where more desirable wear mechanisms
(flank wear) dominate and, if the technical program is successful, provide
valuable estimates of the remaining tool life. If successful, this project could
have a significant commercial impact on global 21st century manufacturing
operations.