* 0810033
* Collaborative Research: Dynamics at the Base of a Pseudotachylyte-bearing Fault System
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2012
* David West, Middlebury College
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 06/30/2012
* USD 51,124.00

A concerted effort through EarthScope is currently underway to better understand
seismicity along the San Andreas Fault, which poses serious threats to society
from large-magnitude earthquakes. The San Andreas Fault Observatory at Depth
features an instrumented drill hole, allowing characterization of the rocks,
fluids, kinematics, and stress orientations and magnitudes within the fault zone
to depths of approximately 3 km. These studies are designed partly to
investigate the strength of the San Andreas Fault, which is critical for seismic
forecasting. In conjunction with these studies it is important that we locate
and study appropriate exhumed examples of similar faults at the surface today.
One of the very few surface occurrences of an analog for the San Andreas Fault
is the Norumbega Fault System (NFS), which cuts across the entire State of Maine
and is the field site for this study. Through the NFS study we hope to clarify
the value of near-surface stress measurements on the San Andreas Fault as
indicators for the strength of the fault. This work is intended to support the
dissertation of a female PhD student, and several undergraduate student theses.
Our close cooperation with the Maine Geological Survey, and our involvement with
K-12 Earth Science teachers in Maine, lends additional societal relevance to the
work.

Due to the large elastic moduli of solid Earth materials elastic stresses are
transmitted over great distances and depths within the Earth. For this reason,
the stress orientations and magnitudes measured near Earths surface provide only
a partial picture of the state of stress on active faults. For a more complete
picture, we must understand the state of stress on faults at greater depths,
particularly near the frictional-to-viscous transition where the strongest part
of the crust occurs. For this reason we are focusing on the deeply exhumed NFS.
To provide relatively tight constraints on the stress tensor the field locality
should contain irrefutable evidence for coseismic rupture (pseudotachylyte), and
be characterized by: (a) tightly constrained kinematic boundary conditions, (b)
microstructures amenable to estimates of differential stress and mean kinematic
vorticity, and (c) lithological (rheological) heterogeneity providing natural
variability in the stress and vorticity estimates. In such a system, 3D
numerical experiments can provide best-fit solutions for the field-derived
stress and vorticity estimates, and in doing so solve for the principal and
Cartesian stresses. Our work in the NFS involves field mapping, microstructural
analysis using optical and electron-beam techniques, and 3D numerical modeling
that is tightly constrained by the field-derived data. Our primary aims are to:
(a) systematically evaluate the microstructural variation across the strain
gradient in the fault zone mylonites, (b) use microstructural measurements to
calculate temperatures, differential stresses and mean kinematic vorticity
numbers for numerous samples across the field area, (c) use these calculated
values and 3D numerical experiments to help constrain the stress tensor at the
time when this mylonite zone was overlain by a seismically active fault, and (d)
extend our numerical modeling to the surface to explore how kinematic boundary
conditions and stresses at depth influence active faults above.