* 0810778
* STTR Phase I: Compact Aberration Compensated Focus and Scan Control for Biomedical Sensors
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2008,12/31/2009
* Randy Reibel, Bridger Photonics, INC
* Standard Grant
* Maria Josephine Yuen
* 12/31/2009
* USD 175,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I project will demonstrate the
technical and commercial feasibility of an innovative aberration compensated
focus control device for a revolutionary improvement in medical imaging.
Currently, a variety of medical conditions are diagnosed and treated through in
vitro imaging of suspicious tissues, requiring invasive, time-consuming
biopsies. Several in vivo medical imaging technologies have been developed and
shown to be efficacious for disease diagnosis and treatment (confocal, OCT,
etc.). These commercial systems, however, remain too large for imaging of most
native biological systems. This is due to the size of the optical assemblies,
the manner in which they are raster scanned to create images, and inherent
optical aberrations induced during scanning. This project will solve these
problems by creating a compact, miniaturized aberration free focus
control/scanning device by combining two critical innovations: extremely small,
low cost, large stroke, micro-electro-mechanical deformable mirrors for focus
control and compensation of spherical aberration and a miniaturized wavefront
sensor to detect and control aberrations induced by the deformable mirror. After
providing critical proof-of-concept demonstrations, the team will create a
prototype device design and determine its technical feasibility based upon its
expected performance and projected size, weight and power consumption.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential commercial payoff for this miniaturized
aberration compensated focus control/raster scanning device is very large.
Applications encompass not only biomedical imaging but extend to other markets
including digital cameras and cell phone cameras. Conservative market estimates
suggest that within the next three years, sales of this device could provide
gross annual revenues greater than $27M. The team will consult with industry
experts, engage potential customers for the medical imaging market, and identify
market insertion points for the device. The team will also contact major cell
phone and digital camera manufacturers. Based upon the response from these
potential customers, the examination of the competitive landscape, and the
projected time to market, the team will determine the device's commercial
feasibility.