* 0810918
* Collaborative Research: A Software System for Algebraic Geometry Research
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2010
* David Eisenbud, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2010
* USD 18,000.00

Macaulay2 is a free computer algebra system dedicated to the qualitative
&lt;br/&gt;investigation of systems of polynomial equations in many variables.
It &lt;br/&gt;was developed by Daniel Grayson and Michael Stillman with NSF
funding. &lt;br/&gt;Grayson and Stillman will continue the development of
Macaulay2. They &lt;br/&gt;will upgrade existing algorithms, develop and publish
new algorithms, and &lt;br/&gt;implement new algorithms. In particular, they
will develop the interaction &lt;br/&gt;of the symbolic computations that are
Macaulay2's strength with the new &lt;br/&gt;floating point algorithms in
algebraic geometry that are now being &lt;br/&gt;developed by Andrew Sommese,
Jan Verschelde, Anton Leykin, Frank Schreyer &lt;br/&gt;and others. It is
anticipated that these will make a whole new class of &lt;br/&gt;problems
accessible to experimentation and, in many cases, solution. &lt;br/&gt;Eisenbud
will organize contacts for the extended integration with other
&lt;br/&gt;systems and will engage other mathematicians in the development work
that &lt;br/&gt;needs to be done. Central to the project are the continued
expansion of &lt;br/&gt;the collaborations that have been the hallmark of
Macaulay2 development. &lt;br/&gt;For this purpose two Macaulay2 Workgroup
Meetings will be held in the &lt;br/&gt;course of the two-year grant. One
particular research problem to be &lt;br/&gt;attacked is: the use of
computational systems to (probabilistically) &lt;br/&gt;disprove, or suggest a
proof of, the Jacobian Conjecture on polynomial &lt;br/&gt;automorphisms of
affine spaces (this will require the use the new floating &lt;br/&gt;point
algorithms). Other areas where new algorithms can make an impact
&lt;br/&gt;include the study of numerical systems, fractions with specified
types of &lt;br/&gt;denominators, ideal factorization, systems where the
multiplication of the &lt;br/&gt;variables doesn't satisfy the commutative law,
geometric optimization, the &lt;br/&gt;analysis of observations of gene
expression levels over time, and &lt;br/&gt;bioinformatics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Macaulay2 is part of the infrastructure that
supports mathematical &lt;br/&gt;research involving systems of polynomial
equations in many variables. The &lt;br/&gt;study of such systems of polynomial
equations is central in pure and &lt;br/&gt;applied mathematics and in physics,
with recent new impacts in such fields &lt;br/&gt;as cryptography, robotics and
string theory. Increasing computer power &lt;br/&gt;and the availability of
programs like Macaulay2 are making a new level of &lt;br/&gt;experimentation
possible. The experimental results found with Macaulay2 &lt;br/&gt;are helping
in the formulation and development of tractable conjectures in
&lt;br/&gt;mathematics as well as in physics. A measure of Macaulay2's impact is
that &lt;br/&gt;at least 270 research papers have cited Macaulay2, several
mathematicians &lt;br/&gt;have contributed code, and books and course materials
are now using it. &lt;br/&gt;The PI's will develop the software further and will
recruit developers &lt;br/&gt;from the research community. They will introduce
graduate students and &lt;br/&gt;mathematicians to the use of computers in
research mathematics and the &lt;br/&gt;requisite skills in programming and
development of algorithms, through &lt;br/&gt;workgroups at Berkeley and through
the appointments of graduate students &lt;br/&gt;as graduate assistants.