* 0810167
* Collaborative Research: Tectonic Rates From Garnet Differential Geochronology
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2010
* Frank Spear, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* William P. Leeman
* 07/31/2010
* USD 9,468.00

Summary: Collaborative research: Tectonic rates from garnet differential
geochronology Funding is requested to investigate rates of garnet growth and P-T
changes through Sr isotope differential geochronology. The last two decades have
witnessed rapid growth in analytical capabilities for measuring Sr isotopes in
minerals, such that compositional changes can be resolved with a spatial
resolution almost an order of magnitude better than 20 years ago, and rates of
garnet growth can be measured more efficiently. Rates of garnet growth and P-T
changes through differential Sr isotope analysis will be characterized in
metamorphic suites from three regions. Intellectual Merit. The proposed research
addresses two basic questions regarding mineral growth and metamorphism: (1) How
fast do garnets grow in regional metamorphic settings? (2) Are regional
metamorphism and tectonism punctuated and brief, or gradual and prolonged?
Samples will include 3 classic settings: the nappe pile of central New England,
HP/UHP rocks of the Alpine-Cyclades belt, and Barrovian rocks of Cordillera
Darwin (southernmost Chile). Garnet growth rates will be measured in 10 samples
total that are most representative of their respective terranes and metamorphic
evolution. Geochemical characterization, and petrologic and tectonic
interpretations have already been published for these rocks, vastly simplifying
the proposed research. Most samples have experienced closed-system behavior with
respect to fluid exchange with adjacent lithologies. Specific grains in each
rock will be screened using X-ray maps (electron microprobe, RPI) and trace
element profiles (LA-ICP-MS, WSU) to ensure that zoning patterns conform with
published data. Microsamples (< 1mm) of garnets will be analyzed for Rb/Sr and
87Sr/86Sr ratios. Differential geochronology will establish how long each garnet
took to grow, and used to test tectonic models based on each rock's P-T path.
These data will test the validity of the recent proposal that garnet growth in
Barrovian terranes is brief (<1 Myr) and associated with distinct thermal
pulses, viz a viz classic models of garnet growth in response to tectonically-
induced thermal perturbations, which imply that garnets grow over Myrs to 10s of
Myrs.

Broader Impacts. This work will support the education of a graduate student in
geochemistry, petrology, and geochronology. Also, the PIs publish and present
results in a timely and appropriate fashion to other geoscientists, so results
will become rapidly available to the scientific community.