* 0810906
* ExPert: dynamic analysis based fault location via Execution Perturbations
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Rajiv Gupta, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Krishna Kant
* 08/31/2011
* USD 196,051.00

ExPert: dynamic analysis based fault location via Execution
Perturbations&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
studying dynamic characteristics of runs of faulty programs
and&lt;br/&gt;designing promising dynamic analysis techniques to identify
executed program&lt;br/&gt;statements where a fault lies, i.e. the fault
candidate set. To narrow the set of&lt;br/&gt;statements in the fault candidate
set, an array of automated dynamic analyses are&lt;br/&gt;being used in
conjunction with each other. These analyses consider not only
the&lt;br/&gt;failed run but also execution perturbations of this faulty run.
The goal of this&lt;br/&gt;work is to focus the users attention on a small
subset of statements in the&lt;br/&gt;fault candidate state. Identification of
fault candidate set is based upon&lt;br/&gt;uncovering of two types of evidence:
negative evidence and positive evidence. &lt;br/&gt;A negative evidence is
considered as an indicator that leads to the conclusion &lt;br/&gt;that a value
encountered during a failed program run is related to the program's
&lt;br/&gt;failure. Positive evidence on the other hand indicates that some of
the values &lt;br/&gt;computed during a failed run are in fact correct. Through
a combination of negative&lt;br/&gt;and positive evidence we aim to produce a
small fault candidate set. As part of &lt;br/&gt;this work we are identifying
new sources of evidence. We are also carrying out a &lt;br/&gt;systematic
integration of above dynamic analyses technology into a practical
&lt;br/&gt;debugging environment.