* 0810925
* Collaborative Research: Efficient High Order Methods for Deterministic and Stochastic Problems in Flow Analysis and Control
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* David Kopriva, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2012
* USD 251,767.00

Efficient, high order, spectral element algorithms will be developed to analyze
and control large-scale deterministic and stochastic problems in unsteady
compressible fluid flow. The focus will be on spatial, temporal, polynomial
chaos, and adjoint based optimal control algorithms that can be used for active
control of complex time-dependent flows, particularly those that include the
generation and propagation of aerodynamic noise. For the time and space
approximations, we will develop discontinuous Galerkin spatial
&lt;br/&gt;approximations and high order, optimized implicit/explicit (IMEX)
methods that minimize phase and dissipation errors. Adjoint based methods for
flow control will be used, and control strategies developed for appropriate use
with the discontinuous Galerkin approximation. Since uncertainty is present in
real flows, we will include efficient stochastic collocation approximations.
Finally, we will allow controls to be deterministic or stochastic, and develop
strategies to control flows in the presence of
uncertainty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The class of problems addressed by these
methods are of great practical importance and require very large,
computationally intensive simulations with efficient and high order methods. The
ability to control acoustic noise generation is important to a wide variety
applications, from windmill farms to jet engines. Problems of optimality under
uncertainty occur frequently in a wide variety of problems in science,
engineering and technology that have &lt;br/&gt;probabilistic parameters,
nondeterministic initial conditions, uncertain input situations, and models
based on incomplete knowledge. A large number of problems such as engineering
design, supply allocation, production planning and scheduling, transportation,
inventory networks, finance, energy systems, environmental protection, pattern
recognition, and military logistics require that decisions be made in the
presence of uncertainty. Uncertainty governs the prices of fuels, the
availability of electricity, and the demand for chemicals. Much of life requires
us to make optimal choices under uncertainty, i.e., to choose the optimum from
some set of optional courses of action in uncertain situations. Clearly, the
development of the mathematics and computational methods for optimal control
with and without uncertainty has broad impacts both inside and outside
mathematics.