* 0810856
* Workshop:  Zebrafish - a Model System for Exchange of Ideas, Integration of Knowledge, &amp; Collaboration between Developmental Biologists &amp; Comparative Endocrinologists (see
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2008,03/31/2009
* Cunming Duan, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 03/31/2009
* USD 9,520.00

This workshop titled "Zebrafish- a Model System for Exchange of Ideas,
Integration of Knowledge and Collaboration between Developmental Biologists and
Comparative Endocrinologists" will be held as a special event coordinated with
the 6th International Symposium on Fish Endocrinology in Calgary, Alberta,
Canada. The workshop will mainly focus on the functions and molecular mechanisms
of hormones and their receptors and will be divided into three sessions: 1)
Zebrafish-A Model for Comparative Endocrinology Session; 2) Zebrafish-A Model
for Developmental Endocrinology Session; and 3) General Discussion. The goals of
this workshop are to promote the exchange of information and international
collaborations between developmental biologists and comparative
endocrinologists, inform investigators about the genomic and molecular tools
available in the zebrafish model, and ultimately facilitate the growth of the
field of "developmental endocrinology". Scientists of different nationalities,
genders, and career stages will participate in the workshop. Travel awards for
graduate students, especially those from underrepresented groups, will be
provided. It is anticipated that this workshop will advance discoveries, not
only in the basic sciences, but also help develop applications in related fields
such as biotechnology and aquaculture.