* 0810283
* DUSEL R&D:  New WIMP Detector Technique Based on High Pressure Xenon Gas
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2010
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 06/30/2010
* USD 25,200.00

A large body of scientific evidence suggests that most of the matter in the
universe is in the form of weakly interacting massive particles (WIMPs) whose
properties are largely unknown. Since the halo of the Milky Way galaxy appears
to be mostly dark matter, the possibility of direct detection in the laboratory
exists via observation of WIMP collisions with normal atoms.

This award will provide funds to develop, construct and operate a new type of
discriminating WIMP detector based on high pressure gaseous xenon (HPXe) with
the primary aim being to ascertain its viability for a future large-scale DUSEL
experiment. Recent measurements by this group along with theoretical
considerations suggest that nuclear recoil discrimination may be superior in
HPXe compared to liquid phase xenon. An important component of the proposed work
will be to determine if this is the case in a practical detector.

As part of the Broader Impacts, the development of a new instrument to detect
subatomic particle interactions will impact the educations of the undergraduate
and graduate students and post-doctoral associates connected with the project.
Students will work on all phases including design, fabrication, assembly, data
acquisition, and analysis. The final product may also have applications in other
fields where radiation detection is employed.