* 0810322
* ADVANCE IT Start Award:  Assessing the Participation of Women Faculty in Science at the University of Wisconsin - La Crosse
* EHR,HRD
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Cynthia Berlin, University of Wisconsin-La Crosse
* Standard Grant
* Beth Mitchneck
* 07/31/2011
* USD 199,029.00

Women faculty at University of Wisconsin - La Crosse (UW-L) are underrepresented
in the sciences, particularly in the science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) disciplines. The Crosse UW-L project will conduct a research-
driven assessment of the status of women in science at UW-L, focusing on the
STEM disciplines but also including the social and behavioral science (SBS)
disciplines. Three overlapping research questions will be investigated: (1) What
is the status of women in sciences at UW-L? (2) What are the barriers to the
recruitment and advancement of women in the sciences? (3) How successful are
existing structures (programs and policies) at addressing these barriers?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of this project include advancing
the understanding of the status of women at UW-L by identifying the barriers to
full participation in academic sciences as well as investigating how successful
existing structures are at addressing these barriers. Baseline data will be
collected on patterns of tenure and non-tenure track status; hiring, retention,
tenure and promotion; teaching assignment; distribution of resources; service;
and mentoring. University policies and work/life issues will also be examined.
These will provide a data-driven basis for developing an institutional
transformation plan of action that can be implemented at UW-L. This project may
also serve as a model for peer institutions in the UW System.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has potential to provide significant broader
impacts at UW-L and at peer institutions in the UW-System. Increasing the
participation of women in academic science has been shown to increase student
retention overall and encourage female students to pursue careers in sciences.
The larger scientific community will be informed of the project through national
forums. The UW System community will be informed through presentations to our
peer institutions, the Women in Sciences and Wisconsin Alliance for Minority
Participation (WiscAMP) programs, and the UW System Letters and Sciences Deans
meetings. The results of this project will also be presented at science
departmental meetings and the annual UW-L Faculty Research Day, thus raising
awareness and advancing change throughout the UW-L community.