* 0810244
* Did Impact-Generated Fields Magnetize the Rocks of Vredefort?
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2010
* Benjamin Weiss, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 01/31/2010
* USD 200,000.00

A key unresolved question in planetary science is whether the magnetization
observed in meteorites and lunar rocks was generated internally in the metallic
cores of the parent bodies or was instead produced by an external source. In
particular, the discovery of large crustal magnetic fields associated with
craters on the Moon has led to the speculation that large impacts could generate
magnetic fields. Subsequent experimental studies have shown that strong magnetic
fields are produced by electric currents in plasma clouds. If we wish to use
extraterrestrial samples to learn about internally generated fields and the
evolution of metallic cores on other bodies, it is essential that we determine
whether impact-magnetization is a common process in the solar
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the best ways to test whether impacts can
generate fields is to examine rocks from impact craters on Earth. Members of the
team have recently hypothesized that magnetization in the rocks of the 2.02
billion year old Vredefort crater in South Africa also originated from impact-
produced plasmas (Carporzen et al. 2005). They found that magnetization in these
rocks is extremely intense and heterogeneously oriented on spatial scales
ranging from tens of kilometers down to less than a few
centimeters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; They will address three important unanswered
questions:&lt;br/&gt;Question 1. Were magnetic fields generated by the Vredefort
impact and if so what were their intensities?&lt;br/&gt;Question 2. What was the
characteristic length scales of any impact-generated magnetic
fields?&lt;br/&gt;Question 3. What is the dominant magnetic mineral that carries
impact-generated magnetization?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The answers to these
questions have critical implications for the interior structures, bulk
compositions, and thermal histories of the terrestrial planets.&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators plan to drill four 10-m deep cores into the basement rocks and
sediments of the Vredefort impact structure in order to obtain unaltered samples
that are likely to record the impact event. Because these samples should be free
of lightning remagnetization, the PIs can test a persistent criticism that
magnetization in Vredefort rocks is not from the impact but rather from recent
lightning strikes. Analysis of the drill cores will be conducted in the MIT
Paleomagnetism Laboratory using a 2G Superconducting Rock Magnetometer (spatial
resolution of ~10 mm) and the SQUID Microscope (spatial resolution of 0.1 mm).
The broader impact of this grant is that it would support the postdoctoral
training of Laurent Carporzen at MIT as well as fieldwork in South Africa with
MIT graduate students and South African geologists.