* 0810113
* Computational Methods for Heteroepitaxial Growth, Grain Boundary Motion, and High Frequency Wave Propagation
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2013
* Peter Smereka, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2013
* USD 256,429.00

This proposal involves three projects. The first concerns modeling
and&lt;br/&gt;efficient simulation of heteroepitaxial growth using kinetic Monte
Carlo &lt;br/&gt;and will build from prior NSF support which resulted in
the&lt;br/&gt;development of a Fourier multigrid method for the fast solution
of&lt;br/&gt;discrete elastic equations for complex geometries. This work will
be &lt;br/&gt;extended to develop methods for obtaining inexpensive upper bonds
on&lt;br/&gt;rates, the use of local computations for elastic equations, and the
inclusion of&lt;br/&gt;intermixing of multiple species. The second project
involves the &lt;br/&gt;simulation of grain boundary motion in two and three
dimensions using&lt;br/&gt;a recently developed multiphase variational level set
framework which&lt;br/&gt;allows one to systematically deduce level set
equations for a network of&lt;br/&gt;grains moving under curvature flow. We plan
to extend this formulation to &lt;br/&gt;allow the simulation of thousands of
seeds by using only a few level set&lt;br/&gt;functions. The efficient
computation of high frequency wave propagation &lt;br/&gt;and the semi-classical
limit of the Schrodinger equation is the third&lt;br/&gt;project. The proposed
algorithm is based on the observation that most of &lt;br/&gt;the time, in these
limiting regimes, the solutions are very localized &lt;br/&gt;in the wavenumber
domain. This can be exploited by solving the equations in this&lt;br/&gt;domain
using a fast local convolution. It is planned to update the
solutions&lt;br/&gt;by the computation of the matrix exponential using a Krylov
subspace&lt;br/&gt;approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each of the proposed projects
has the potential to have a significant impact &lt;br/&gt;on problems that are
both fundamental and technologically important. &lt;br/&gt;Heteroepitaxial
growth is scientifically interesting since it has effects&lt;br/&gt;on both
nanoscales and mesoscales. It is technologically relevant
since&lt;br/&gt;quantum dot materials are made in this way. Our proposed
techniques will&lt;br/&gt;greatly increase the simulation speed thereby
facilitating model development.&lt;br/&gt;The study of grain boundary motion
using curvature flow is a classic problem &lt;br/&gt;in applied and
computational mathematics which has importance in material s&lt;br/&gt;cience.
Since there are no robust simulations of a large number grains in
&lt;br/&gt;three dimensions the proposed project should have significant impact.
&lt;br/&gt;The efficient computation of high frequency wave propagation has
important &lt;br/&gt;facets ranging from antenna design to seismic sensing. On
the other hand,&lt;br/&gt;fast simulation of the semi-classical limit of the
Schrodinger equation &lt;br/&gt;could provide deeper insight into chemical
reaction dynamics, &lt;br/&gt;molecular-surface scattering, and
photodissociation, for example.&lt;br/&gt;