* 0810272
* Theory of thermoelastic properties of iron bearing minerals
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Matteo Cococcioni, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 09/30/2013
* USD 405,053.00

&lt;br/&gt;Thermoelastic properties of minerals and melts are the crucial link
that permit seismic tomography images of the Earth's interior to be translated
into information of geophysical significance: mineralogy, composition, and
temperature. Over the last decade, enormous advances have been made in our
ability to compute elastic properties of materials under the extreme conditions
of Earth's interior using only the fundamental constants of nature as input.
Nevertheless, great challenges remain, especially regarding iron bearing
minerals. In oxides and silicates, iron has magnetic moment and its electrons
are strongly correlated. Materials with strongly correlated electrons have
challenged theorists for more than half century and mantle minerals are among
the most complex of them. Besides, their behavior must be understood at extreme
conditions of pressures and temperatures, which change their magnetic state, a
phenomenon known as spin transition. Under this grant novel methods based on the
DFT+U approach will be applied to investigate spin transitions and its
consequences for the thermoelastic properties of the most important phases of
Earth's lower mantle: ferropericlase, ferromagnesium silicate perovskite and
postperovskite. Fe2O3 is a possible stable phase at the core-mantle boundary and
an ideal material for testing the new methods. Atomic vibrations, atomic
diffusion, and collective magnetic excitations will be studied to shed light on
the thermal, elastic, rheological, and transport properties of these phases and
of the mantle. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcome of this research will be
essential input for researchers investigating the state and evolution of the
mantle. The novel methods, whose development is being stimulated especially by
mineral physics, have been implemented in the open source at initio materials
simulation package Quantum ESPRESSO. They will be available in subsequent
releases of the package to the mineral physics and materials communities. The
PIs are deeply involved with education and outreach programs that include a)
training of graduate students and post-docs, b) training of undergraduates
through summer internships offered through the Minnesota Supercomputing
Institute, and c) giving tutorials to the materials and mineral physics
community.