* 0810475
* SBIR Phase I: Fast Two-Color Heterodyne Non-Contact Scanning System for Mapping Optical Parameters of Human Eye
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2008,12/31/2008
* Filipp Ignatovich, Lumetrics, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 12/31/2008
* USD 99,932.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project develops a high speed
and high sensitivity system for measuring optical dimensions of human eye, such
as the total axial length, corneal thickness and the location and thickness of
the crystalline lens, in a non-contact manner using infrared light, invisible to
the eye. This task is accomplished by improving the existing technique of time
domain low-coherence interferometry. In the case of a live patient, which in
general cannot be immobilized for steady measurements, speed and sensitivity of
the measurements are especially important to achieve high accuracy and
precision. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this research will
benefit a large part of the population that suffers from cataract and other
vision problems. The U.S. population of over 65 years old is expected to
increase to over 70 million in 2030. Therefore, there is a dramatic need for
tools to treat the wave of eye diseases and problems inherent to such
population. Information on the structure of the eye is required in eye
surgeries, including those that deal with replacing the crystalline lenses
affected by cataract. The proposed research will result in an array of critical
tools aimed at mapping out the eye, for medical research and for more successful
treatment of eye diseases. &lt;br/&gt;