* 0810274
* Melt Generation Beneath the Colorado Plateau and its Transition Zones
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2010
* Mary Reid, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2010
* USD 45,326.00

A fundamental challenge for earth scientists is to understand the origin of
volcanic activity not associated with plate boundaries and especially that
interior to the continents. Volcanic rock chemistry provides one of the most
powerful ways to probe the sources and melting mechanisms responsible for this
activity and, at the same time, to gain insights into the present structure and
dynamics of the continents. This grant supports an international collaboration
that will produce new geochemical limits on magma generation beneath the
southwestern U.S. where numerous young volcanoes sample the continent and its
underlying mantle over a broad geographical region. Interpretations based on
these results will be refined in the context of ongoing geophysics-based efforts
such as Earthscope to arrive at internally consistent models for volcanic
activity associated with the Colorado Plateau and its transition zones.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite efforts to understand the origin of continental
basalts in the southwestern U.S., disparate observations and interpretations
persist for how and where melting occurs. In many cases, existing data are too
piecemeal or too general to determine if and where the mantle is actively
upwelling, the depths at which melts segregrate, and the chemical and physical
role that mantle lithosphere plays in melt generation. This project will result
in a comprehensive chemical and Th-Hf-Nd isotope characterization of young
basalts from the Colorado Plateau and its transition zones. Inferences based on
paired trace element and isotopic characteristics and from inversion of major
element data will delimit the depth and depth interval of melting and the
relative contributions of enriched and depleted sources. These constraints, as
well as limits on the sizes of melt fractions, will permit a better
understanding of the relationship between the structure and evolution of
lithosphere and melting dynamics in the southwestern U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;