* 0810419
* Effect of ion flows on heating and instabilities in weakly coupled dusty plasmas
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Edward Thomas, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven J Gitomer
* 08/31/2012
* USD 446,484.00

Dusty (complex) plasmas are four-component plasma systems that consist of ions,
electrons, neutral particles, and the addition of a fourth species, charged
microscopic particles or "dust". The charged dust, which is typically composed
of micron- or nanometer-sized particles, fully interacts and self-consistently
modifies the properties of the surrounding plasma. Once primarily focused on
astrophysical phenomena such as planetary rings or interstellar dust, the growth
of laboratory studies of the role of charged microparticles in plasmas has
offered a unique opportunity to observe plasma physics phenomena at the kinetic
level. As a result, this field has become, over the last two decades, a robust
scientific enterprise within the larger field of plasma science.&lt;br/&gt;In
laboratory studies, the microparticles become charged through the collection of
ions and electrons from the background plasma. This process alters the ion and
electron distributions in the plasma. Furthermore, in the presence of flows in
the plasma, particularly ion flows, not only are the charging conditions of the
microparticles modified, but the flows alter the force balance that allows the
microparticles to remain suspended in the plasma and provide a free energy
source for heating the microparticles and driving instabilities. Thus, a
continuing challenge to the understanding of dusty plasmas remains the
interaction between the charged microparticles and the ions. However, a complete
model of this ion drag force remains&lt;br/&gt;elusive and an essential piece of
information for resolving the differences among the models "the ion drift
velocity" is often difficult to obtain in many
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most studies of ion-dust interactions infer
the ion flow either from collected currents on probes or by the response of the
dust particles to an applied perturbation. In this investigation, the PI
proposes to directly and independently measure both the ion flow and the dust
response to determine the correlation between these two parameters. To
accomplish this, the PI?s group will utilize its unique capabilities for optical
measurements of microparticle velocities using two-dimensional and stereoscopic
particle imaging velocimetry (PIV). PIV facilitates measurements of
microparticle transport and the velocity&lt;br/&gt;space distribution function
of the microparticle component of the plasma. Furthermore, through a
collaboration with Prof. Earl Scime's group at West Virginia University and
access to the Auburn Fusion Laboratory's dye laser system, the PI proposes to
use laser induced fluorescence (LIF) to directly&lt;br/&gt;measure ion flow
velocities in the plasma. Additionally, complementary studies using Prof. Robert
Merlino's Dusty Plasma Device at the University of Iowa will allow a
verification of the measurements performed at the PI's laboratory at Auburn
University.&lt;br/&gt;Consequently, this proposed work offers a unique
opportunity to address a number of outstanding questions of importance to the
dusty plasma community. Specifically, this project will investigate two specific
aspects of ion-dust interactions: (a) testing a proposed model of dusty plasma
heating that&lt;br/&gt;occurs via an ion-dust two-stream instability; and (b)
characterizing how ion flow acts as a trigger for the generation of dust
acoustic waves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed research project has several
opportunities to have a broader impact. The PI will continue to actively engage
undergraduate and graduate students and post-doctoral scholars in hands-on
research training. The PI has a successful track-record of student training and
will continue encourage&lt;br/&gt;and include student participation in
publications, national and international conferences, and laboratory outreach
activities. Additionally, this work will support collaborative activities among
different researchers within the dusty plasma community (e.g., at Auburn and
Iowa) and establish a new&lt;br/&gt;partnership (with WVU), thereby
strengthening the community of researchers involved in basic plasma science.
Furthermore, this project will provide continuing support for many of the public
outreach activities that have been undertaken by the PI's laboratory to
illuminate the physics of plasmas and dusty plasmas.&lt;br/&gt;Funds for this
award are provided by the Physics Division and the Office of Multi-disciplinary
Activities within the NSF's Mathematics and Physical Sciences Directorate,
Combustion, Fire, and Plasma Systems within NSF's Engineering Directorate, and
the Office of Fusion Energy Sciences of the DoE within the context of the
NSF/DOE Partnership in Basic Plasma Science and Engineering.