* 0810947
* CPA-CSA:   BLUE CHIP:   Security Defenses for Misbehaving Hardware
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Jonathan Smith, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Hong Jiang
* 07/31/2012
* USD 200,001.00

The goal of the BlueChip project is to develop security defenses against
malicious hardware. Hardware and software are functional equivalents. To date,
computer security problems have generally been attacks or exploitations of
software systems. However, the sophistication and complexity of hardware systems
is now great enough that many opportunities for malice exist in the path from
design to realization.

This project will be the first to demonstrate the feasibility of Intelligent
Malicious Processors (IMPs). Initial investigations indicate that small hardware
alterations can be used to bootstrap many varieties of malicious behavior into
existence, such as hardware supported access to privileged operation. Such
misbehaving hardware has outsized system effects, because software designers
depend on (i.e., trust) hardware to perform correctly, and therefore do not
defend against malicious hardware. One may address these problems, in principle,
by tightly controlling each step and handoff in the path from design to
realization (sometimes called the "supply chain''). A superior solution is to
presume that attackers will overcome these technical and procedural hurdles, and
to build defenses. BlueChip will develop new architectural approaches to
defending against a wide variety of malicious hardware. For example, BlueChip
will develop a family of anomaly detection schemes for processors that can
detect malicious hardware and trigger remediations.

