* 0810271
* Earthquake Rupture Simulation: thermo-mechanical models and validation with strong motion data
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2013
* Steven Day, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 01/31/2013
* USD 289,999.00

Large earthquakes are rare, complex events and their sources are deep-seated and
inaccessible to direct observation. Moreover, relatively few near-source strong
motion recordings exist for events of very large magnitude, i.e., those
earthquakes that pose the greatest potential threat to life safety and the built
environment. Well-validated computer simulations provide a means to forecast
strong ground motion from large earthquakes, based upon the best available
earthquake physics and wave propagation models. Simulations can help fill the
pressing need for site-appropriate ground-shaking estimates for use in
performance-based engineering and structural analysis, a requirement that is
especially acute in light of the construction boom in very tall buildings in
western U.S. cities. Computer simulations are also essential for advancing our
basic scientific understanding of earthquakes, as they reveal how large-scale
effects emerge from smaller-scale interactions that are difficult to study
experimentally or via traditional theoretical analysis. This project is
developing numerical earthquake models that represent the principal mechanical
and thermal processes of faulting, including the weakening of frictional
resistance by the heating of rock contacts and the pressurization of pore
fluids. These computer models also incorporate established statistical
representations of fault roughness and of the stress state in the earth, as well
as the strength limits of geologic materials (which place upper bounds on the
amplitude of the stress wave disturbances excited by faulting). The models must
run efficiently on large computer clusters (i.e., those with thousands of
processor cores), so that they can combine (i) the small-scale resolution
required to accurately simulate fault-zone processes with (ii) the large overall
physical volume required to simulate large earthquake sources and compute
surface ground motion at distances of engineering interest. The project engages
both earth and computational scientists and trainees to address these modeling
challenges. The project team is testing the computer models by comparing the
ground motion predictions from large suites of simulations with comparable
compilations from actual earthquake recordings. For example, the distributions
(including median and statistical spread) of ground motion parameters such as
spectral acceleration and peak ground velocity, as functions of event magnitude,
site distance, and other variables, are among the targets of these observational
tests. Those computer models that can be validated in the above sense are then
used to (i) simulate earthquake shaking from future large earthquake scenarios,
(ii) develop improvements to simplified modeling methods for ground shaking (the
so-called kinematic methods), and (iii) improve the empirical ground motion
models that are conventionally used in engineering design, by providing a
physics-based extrapolation beyond the range in which they have significant
support from data (i.e., to large magnitude and small source-to-site distances).