* 0810152
* Collaborative Research: Constraining the Relative   Importance of Fluid Fluxes and Lithospheric Metasomatism on the Evolution of the Rio Grande Rift, New Mexico
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* John Lassiter, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2012
* USD 57,990.00

Recent models of rifting in the Southwest United States have suggested that the
mantle beneath the North American Plate has undergone hydration, potentially
from shallow subduction of the Farallon Plate beneath the North American Plate
from ~80-40 million years ago. The addition of water and other volatile elements
(chlorine, sulfur, fluorine) to the continental mantle (lithosphere) may have a
profound influence on volcanism and tectonic processes. Water (along with
volatile and fluid-mobile trace elements) added to the mantle reduces the
melting temperature, allowing magmas to be generated at lower temperatures.
Additionally, hydration of the mantle weakens the lithosphere, potentially
allowing for a greater extent of rifting. Despite the clear significance of
hydration of the mantle, direct constraints on the amount of water in the
lithosphere or the source(s) of this water are few. The primary focus of this
research therefore is to measure volatile abundances in basaltic lavas to
determine the extent to which volatiles have been added to the continental
lithosphere. This study will concentrate on the Rio Grande Rift in New Mexico-
the extent of rifting varies from N-S making this an ideal location to test for
a correlation between hydration of the lithosphere and the extent of rifting and
volcanism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because magmas degas upon eruption on the
Earth's surface, precise measurements of volatile abundances can be problematic.
In order to address this dilemma, melt inclusions, small parcels of magma
trapped within minerals during crystallization and prior to degassing, will be
analyzed to provide constraints on the volatile content of primitive basaltic
magmas. Primitive lavas will be collected for this study from N-S and E-W
transects along and across the Rio Grande Rift to adequately compare volatile
concentrations to the extent of rifting and to look for lateral variations in
the degree of mantle hydration. Additionally, lavas of varying ages will be
examined to address potential temporal variations in the hydration of the
lithosphere and potential transition from lithospheric to asthenospheric mantle
melting. Despite prior evidence of enrichment in fluid-mobile trace elements
(e.g., high Ba/Nb and Sr/Nd), the source of the enrichment, either in the mantle
or the crust, has long been debated. In this new approach, the combination of
fluid-mobile trace elements (characteristic of subduction) and volatile
concentrations from melt inclusions with whole rock isotope (Sr-Nd-Pb) and trace
element analysis will allow us to distinguish potential crustal and mantle
components, a significant obstacle to positively identifying mantle hydration.
Analytical techniques for melt inclusions have greatly benefited from
advancement in microbeam technology. Major elements and volatiles (S, Cl, and F)
will be analyzed by electron microprobe at Oregon State University while trace
element abundances will be measured by ion microprobe at Arizona State
University. Whole isotope analyses will be conducted using the new TIMS facility
at University of Texas at Austin resulting in collaborative research at several
institutions. Broader impacts of this research include training of undergraduate
students in petrologic techniques and the continued development of early career
scientists.