* 0810595
* SBIR Phase I: Nanostructured Biocidal Coatings Targeting Spore-Forming Bacteria
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2008,03/31/2009
* Steve Kaganove, DENDRITECH, INC
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia A. Znati
* 03/31/2009
* USD 99,933.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to develop smart
antimicrobial coatings that will be able to effectively neutralize both
vegetative and spore forms of harmful bacteria with at least 3-6 log reductions.
The coatings combine two biocidal chemical entities optimized for synergistic
impact and operational lifetime advantages. Spore-killing activity is enhanced
through the incorporation of a cocktail of known small molecule spore
germinants. The coatings will be targeted toward fighting hospital acquired
(nosocomial) infections as the first priority, and defense/homeland security
applications as the second priority. While the first and best line of defense
against nosocomial infections is scrupulous hand washing and diligent cleaning
of environmental surfaces, these antimicrobial coatings will help compensate for
unavoidable inconsistencies in compliance with recommended protocols. The
coatings to be tested here are expected to possess key advantages over emerging
commercial antimicrobial coatings that contain silver, and as a consequence,
would not be sufficiently biocidal against spores. In the course of this
program, fabrication of the coatings will be demonstrated, followed by testing
of their ability to germinate and kill bacterial spores.

It is estimated that as many as 10% of the hospital patients in the U.S. will
acquire a nosocomial infection (e.g., 2 million patients a year), at an annual
cost of $4-11 billion. In 1995, nosocomial infections contributed to 88,000
deaths in the U.S., and Clostridium difficile-associated disease (CDAD)
represented a significant portion of the problem. The CDC estimates that there
were 400,000-500,000 cases of CDAD in 2004, with an estimated cost of $3,669 per
case, or $1.1 billion a year, and an average lifetime cost of $10,970 per
person. It is estimated that public health officials would be willing to spend
up to 5% of this annual cost ($55 million) on promising new antimicrobial
approaches. In addition to their contribution to public health, these coatings
are also expected to serve critical needs in defense and homeland security
applications, and hence, they will be tested against spores of well known
anthrax mimics, including Bacillus subtilis, and the Sterne strain of Bacillus
anthracis. Arrangements with the Biomedical Laboratory Diagnostics Program at
Michigan State University for biological testing of the coatings will directly
facilitate the integration of education and research for an M.S. student.