* 0810551
* SBIR Phase I:  Optimization of a Microscale Human Liver Tissue for Evaluating Chronic Drug Toxicity
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Salman Khetani, HEPREGEN
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 06/30/2009
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I project optimizes an in vitro
model of human liver tissue and assess its utility for evaluating liver toxicity
following chronic drug exposure. While primary human hepatocytes isolated from
the liver are utilized by pharmaceutical and biotech industries to evaluate drug
metabolism and toxicity, these cells under conventional culture rapidly lose
liver-specific functions, which does not allow for chronic effects of drugs to
be tested earlier in drug development. Recently, a miniaturized, multiwell human
liver tissue model with defined microscale architecture has been developed that
maintains phenotypic functions for several weeks. This project will utilize
microtechnology tools to functionally optimize the microscale liver tissue for
enhanced longevity (months), and assess utility of the system for evaluating
clinically-relevant chronic (weeks) drug toxicity using high content imaging
readouts and gene expression signatures.

The broader impacts of this research are to provide an improved understanding of
protein/gene expression changes in primary human hepatocytes following chronic
drug exposure, and development of a novel chronic toxicity assay for use in
industry. In the future, chronic toxicity screening with microscale liver
tissues may be used to eliminate toxic compounds much earlier in the drug
development pipeline towards reducing the $1 billion per drug development costs,
increasing likelihood of clinical success, and limiting human exposure to unsafe
drugs. More broadly, microscale human liver tissues may enable the investigation
of mechanisms of toxicant action, allow identification of new biomarkers, and
enable studies to assess the risk associated with exposure to mixtures of drugs.