* 0810190
* Collaborative Research: Control of Arsenic in Groundwater by Microbial Arsenate Reduction
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2013
* Qusheng Jin, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 07/31/2013
* USD 229,757.00

Title: Microbial Arsenate Reduction Control on Arsenic in
Groundwater&lt;br/&gt;Abstract The proposed research addresses natural
occurrences of elevated arsenic in aquifers, a compelling public health hazard
to a large population in both the United States and areas around the world. We
focus on the role of microorganisms in controlling arsenic concentrations in
aquifers, particularly at low values but still above the drinking water
standards. The proposed study will determine quantitatively the role of
microbial arsenate reduction in the bedrock aquifer in the Southern Willamette
Basin, Oregon, USA. Arsenic occurs naturally in the aquifer at concentrations as
high as 2000 parts per billion (ppb). This aquifer serves as a model for
studying arsenic contamination in aquifers of felsic volcanic rocks and related
alluvial sediments. We will conduct field biostimulation experiments and
biogeochemical reactive transport modeling to test the hypothesis that microbial
arsenate reduction controls significantly arsenic attenuation and mobilization
in anoxic aquifers. Results of this study will pinpoint quantitatively the
significance of different microbial functional groups in regulating arsenic
concentrations in the aquifer. The theoretical component of this study will
advance biogeochemical reaction modeling that couples microbial metabolisms with
geochemical reactions. Results of this study will also provide critical
information concerning groundwater microbiology for government agencies in
designing effective strategies and regulations for groundwater resource
management, monitoring, and protection. We will collaborate with science
instructors at high schools near the field site to develop a replicable and
sustainable classroom lesson on arsenic into their science curriculum. The
teaching portfolio of the arsenic lesson will be distributed to all Oregon K-12
educators to help Oregon public schools better prepared for a new requirement of
a science class with laboratory experience by the Oregon State Board of
Education. &lt;br/&gt;