* 0810026
* SBIR Phase I: Highly Efficient CdTe Thin Film Solar Cells with Ordered Structure
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2008,12/31/2008
* Lisen Cheng, NanoGreen Solutions Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2008
* USD 99,998.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses an
innovative device fabrication process and bulk hetero-junction structure to
fabricate CdTe solar cells with unprecedented performance. Today's crystalline
silicon based solar cell technologies are not cost effective as a viable
alternative to existing energy sources. CdTe based solar cells have shown very
promising as a low cost alternative to current crystalline silicon solar cells.
However, the energy conversion efficiency of commercial CdTe solar cells is only
~ 10%. With this innovative approach it is intended to improve energy conversion
efficiency up to the limit efficiency of ~29% for CdTe based solar cells,
representing a real breakthrough in thin film solar cells and leading to
tremendously wide applications.

World solar photovoltaic (PV) market installations reached a record high of
1,744 megawatts (MW) in 2006, representing growth of 19% over the previous year.
World solar cell production reached a consolidated figure of 2,204 MW in 2006,
up from 1,656 MW a year earlier. Global industry revenues were $10.6bn in 2006.
According to a new report from Solarbuzz, LLC, annual worldwide industry
revenues will reach between $18.6bn and $31.5bn by 2011. Currently, the solar
cell market is dominated by crystalline silicon solar cells with a market share
of ~93%. If successful the proposed approach can improve the energy efficiency
of CdTe based solar cells to the next level, which enables them to compete with
(even outperform) current crystalline silicon solar cells. With improved
efficiency and low cost, CdTe solar cells will get a significant share of the
solar market. There is an extensive range of applications where solar cells are
already viewed as the best option for electricity supply such as ocean
navigation aids, telecommunication systems, remote monitoring and control, rural
electrification, space power and domestic power supply. The proposed green
technology harvests solar energy, reducing the emission of CO2 and global
warming. This program also provides a route to enhance scientific and
technological understanding of crystal growth process at the nano-scale.