* 0810294
* CPA-DA:   Hierarchical Design Tools for Bio-NEMS
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* N Aluru, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

Proposal Number: 0810294&lt;br/&gt;Title: CPA-DA: Hierarchical Design Tools for
Bio-NEMS&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: N. R. Aluru &lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;b
r/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymers are
attractive materials for nanoelectromechanical (NEMS) as they can respond to
various stimuli such as pH, salt concentration, electric field, etc. Polymers
are easy to manufacture, cheap, disposable, biocompatible, low-power actuators
and exhibit attractive sensitivity and selectivity properties. Polymer-based
NEMS find applications in sensing cells, proteins, DNA and biomolecules, and as
key components in microfluidic networks with applications in chemical and
biological analysis. Polymer-based bio-NEMS devices when combined with
microfluidics, MEMS, and control electronics can enable significant advances in
the design and development of integrated systems. The objective of this proposal
is to develop hierarchical design tools to enable rapid design and development
of bio-NEMS. The proposed research focuses on performing quantum-mechanical
studies to understand the electrostatic behavior of polymers, atomistic
simulations to understand diffusion in polymers and to extract stress-strain
relations characterizing the constitutive behavior of the biomaterials,
continuum calculations based on coupled chemical, electrical, and mechanical
theories to understand the macroscopic response, and extracting compact models
for bio-NEMS devices from detailed and extensive continuum simulations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research proposed here is multidisciplinary and some
of the applications that could benefit from this research are nanoscale sensing
and actuation, DNA purification, chemical and biological processing, etc. This
project will result in the education of graduate students in the highly
interdisciplinary area of bio-NEMS. Students working on this project will be
trained in quantum, atomistic and continuum simulation methods, physics of
polymers, system-level modeling and design of large scale integrated bio-NEMS
systems. The results from this project will be presented in archival journals
and conferences around the world. In addition, the results from this project
will be integrated into an existing course on modeling and simulation of MEMS
and summer schools offered at UIUC.&lt;br/&gt;