* 0810531
* STTR Phase I: Diamond Carbon Coated Graphite-Copper Material for Use in RF Power Amplifier Packaging
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* James Connell, ADVANCED THERMAL TECHNOLOGIES
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2009
* USD 149,997.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is focused on the
development of a unique diamond carbon coated graphite-copper composite
material. The composite material will be used to produce low thermal resistance
packaging components for use in RF power amplifiers. Under the Phase I effort, a
low-cost diamond carbon coating process will be demonstrated. There is a
critical need for advanced materials with improved thermal properties capable of
meeting the thermal management requirements of current and future high power RF
amplifiers. Due to advances in packaging, circuit architecture and semiconductor
materials, the heat dissipation rate of electronic systems has increased
dramatically. Today's high power RF power amplifier devices are approaching a
heat dissipation of 600 to 800 W/cm2 and this level is projected to reach1,000
W/cm2 within several years. The research objective of this project is the
refinement of the chemical synthesis process for the polymer precursor used to
produce the diamond carbon coating and establish the coating process to deposit
the polymer precursor onto the graphite-copper substrate, and thermally convert
the polymer precursor to a high thermal conductivity diamond carbon coating.
Ideally, the diamond carbon coated graphite-copper composite would have a
thermal conductivity of from 500 to 600 W/m-oK and a coefficient of thermal
expansion that can be adjusted from 5 to 10 ppm/oC in order to minimize the
thermal expansion between the substrate and the RF semiconductor device that
would be attached to it. The results of this research program will enable the
manufacture of a cost effective diamond carbon coated graphite-copper composite
that offers improved thermal properties critical to thermal management solutions
for next generation RF power amplifier. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful this
research effort will advance the basic understanding of (1) the chemical
synthesis process to produce the polymer precursor; (2) the methods to produce a
diamond carbon coating on a graphite-copper substrate and (3) the impact of the
composite material variables (e.g., carbon fiber and copper matrix volume
fraction; diamond carbon structure; diamond carbon thermal processing; diamond
carbon coating thickness; etc.) on the composite's microstructure, and its
mechanical and thermal properties. These results will provide the basis for
establishing an empirical understanding of the basic properties of the diamond
carbon coated graphite-copper composite material. This understanding will be
critical to the design of electronic packages based on the composite material.
The adoption and wide-spread use of the diamond carbon coated graphite-copper
material for electronic systems will enable commercial products based upon more
efficient higher power semiconductor materials that will provide benefit to
society in the form of more efficient, longer life electronics; reduced energy
consumption; and improved environmental quality.