* 0810989
* ADVANCE Institutional Transformation Award:  In the footsteps of Katharine Wright: Promoting STEM Women through LEADER
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2017
* Michele Wheatly, Wright State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jessie Dearo
* 08/31/2017
* USD 3,029,202.00

Women are underrepresented in STEM units in Dayton academic institutions, as
they are nationwide. Four institutions in the Dayton region with diverse
histories, missions and demographics form the LEADER consortium for the purpose
of Launching Equity in the Academy across the Dayton Entrepreneurial Region. The
institutions include a public doctoral university (Wright State University, host
institution), a private Catholic institution (University of Dayton), a minority-
serving public institution (Central State University) and a federal graduate
institution (Air Force Institute of Technology). All are located in close
proximity and collaborate routinely on STEM initiatives. They also share a
commitment to regional STEM education, pipeline, and economic development, and
recognition that inclusiveness, including directed efforts to recruit and
support women in STEM, is a necessary component of that mission. Our ADVANCE
collaborative will address these issues through a unique combination of inter-
institutional coordination and approaches drawn from social and organizational
psychology to improve climate and thereby transform the individual participating
institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The underrepresentation
of women among academic STEM faculties reflects gender disparities in
recruitment, support, and promotion. Underlying the persistence of these
problems are features of institutional climate that are rooted in the often
nonconscious attitudes and behaviors of individuals. Thus, progress toward
gender equity in the STEM academy requires transformation of institutional
structures and processes, and transformation of climate. The LEADER consortium
will implement models of social/organizational psychology based on gender
schemas, persuasion theory, and social contracts, to transform institutional
climate in support of STEM women. We will facilitate implementation of
strategies proven in prior ADVANCE initiatives to enhance recruitment, retention
and advancement of tenure-track STEM women. Implementation of these initiatives
within a framework of inter-institutional accountability and administrative
architecture (the LEADER Consortium) will catalyze transformation of climate
within institutions, thus creating a sustainable women-friendly STEM culture
within a region built upon a legacy of STEM innovation. &lt;br/&gt;The specific
aims of LEADER are: (a) to conduct a comparative analysis of climate for STEM
women across the institutions and thereby identify best practices related to
recruitment, retention, and advancement; (b) to initiate gender schema education
and a campaign based on persuasion theory that will promote new norms of
expectation and thereby facilitate implementation of those best practices; and
(c) to implement social contracts across the consortium that promote
transparency and accountability for transformation of climate, leading to
recruitment, promotion and success of STEM women. &lt;br/&gt;Implementation and
Management: Social science research will be undertaken by a social psychologist
and a philosopher working in the area of moral psychology and gender theory.
Initially climate will be compared across the institutions to inform climate
initiatives. At the unit and institutional levels, chairs and faculty equity
advisors will implement proposed initiatives with the assistance of a
centralized LEADER administrative office. Accountability for achieving
benchmarks in recruitment and advancement of women will be centrally monitored
using accepted metrics, formative and summative evaluation, and continuous
improvement under the direction of the LEADER Council (composed of
representatives from each institution) and with external oversight from an
Advisory Board. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The inter-institutional
collaboration and accountability should significantly increase retention and
advancement of women in the STEM academy. More broadly, our ADVANCE program is
designed to promote equity and that model can be applied to diverse target
populations. The consortium includes an HBCU (Central State) and an institution
committed to accessibility for the disabled (Wright State); as such, this
project should promote significant gains in these two demographic groups within
the community of STEM women. Our selection of the acronym "LEADER" recognizes
this transferability; advancement of STEM women in the Dayton region today will
provide leadership, by example, for efforts toward equity within the academy.