* 0810930
* Adults with Cerebral Palsy: A workshop to define the challenges of treating and preventing the secondary musculoskeletal and neuromuscular complications in this rapidly growing pop
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2008,01/31/2009
* Nancy Maher, United Cerebral Palsy Research & Educational Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 01/31/2009
* USD 8,000.00

CBET-0810930, Maher

This grant provides partial support of a workshop entitled "Adults with Cerebral
Palsy: A Workshop to Define the Challenges of Treating and Preventing the
Secondary Musculoskeletal and Neuromuscular Complications in this Rapidly
Growing Population." The sponsor of the workshop is the United Cerebral Palsy
Research and Educational Foundation (UCPREF). Funding from the National Science
Foundation will help support one session on engineering approaches for cerebral
palsy rehabilitation. The workshop will be held prior to the American Academy of
Cerebral Palsy and Developmental Medicine (AACPDM) annual conference in Atlanta,
Georgia on September 16th & 17th, 2008.

Intellectual Merit:

The purpose of the special session on engineering is to begin to explore the
usefulness of new cutting edge technologies in neurorehabilitation such as
virtual reality and haptics, robotics and functional electrical stimulation to
treat loss of mobility and functionality in cerebral palsy patients during
middle and later life, as well as draw attention to these areas for future
clinical research.

Broader Impacts:

The broader impacts arise from the objectives of this workshop which include
dissemination to the research and medical communities. CP effects the general
population, and as such, improvements in technology may have beneficial effects
to the overall health of the nation.

UCPREF is the nation's principal non-government agency sponsoring research
directly relevant to cerebral palsy. In its 50 year history, UCPREF has provided
more than $40 million for research grants to support approximately 500 research
projects in the biomedical and clinical sciences and bioengineering. The goal of
UCPREF is to revolutionize the treatment and prevention of CP with rigorously
proven new cutting edge therapies.