* 0810083
* Collaborative Proposal: Laboratory Experiments to Understand Dynamic Slip Weakening in Rocks and Analog Materials
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Vikas Prakash, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 08/31/2012
* USD 250,000.00

In order to determine where best to deploy limited resources for mitigating
earthquake loss in the US, we need to understand when and where earthquakes may
occur and how intense their accelerations can be. Every time an earthquake
occurs, we gain more understanding of the earthquake problem through
measurements of ground motion and modeling of seismic sources. In addition to
information derived from earthquakes, we can also benefit from improved
understanding of the seismic source through laboratory measurements and
modeling, to anticipate what may occur in future earthquakes. One of the great
gaps in our understanding of source processes is how shear resistance varies on
a fault during rapid co-seismic slip and what this implies about the magnitudes
of stress drops and near-fault accelerations.

In our proposed work plan we will continue our studies on dynamic friction in
rocks and analog materials to better understanding thermally-induced slip
weakening processes and their consequences for earthquakes, focusing on studies
of flash heating/melting at asperity junctions, and fault zone rheological
response when there is rapid change in normal stress. We will employ the plate-
impact pressure-shear and the modified torsion Kolsky bar experimental
configurations. These experimental techniques, developed in our laboratory at
CWRU, have been shown by us in pilot experimental studies funded by SCEC, to
provide friction data in the slip-speed and normal stress range of relevance to
earthquake physics. Besides being useful in the study of dynamic friction at
coseismic slip rates, these experimental configurations allow transients,
including sudden alterations in both normal stress and shear loading, to be
produced to investigate their effects on the fault strength. These studies will
be carried out at both room and higher than room test temperatures. The
intellectual merit of this proposal is strengthened by the fact that it
addresses some of the outstanding problems in earthquake-physics, including the
influence of slip, slip velocity, and alterations in normal stress on fault
strength during a typical fault rupture process.

The broader aspects of our proposal are strengthened by noting that our proposed
research will contribute directly towards reducing losses due to earthquakes in
the US in a variety of ways. We will acquire data that are essential for
creating realistic models of the earthquake process. Moreover, the proposed
program provides exciting opportunities for interdisciplinary research and
educational interactions. It involves faculty from two universities?Vikas
Prakash from Case School of Engineering, CWRU, and David Goldsby from the
Department of Geological Sciences at Brown University. The proposed research
program will involve one post-doctoral student and undergraduate students at
CWRU. These students will receive valuable and unique interdisciplinary exposure
to various aspects of earthquake physics, and will benefit from training in
diverse areas such as fault mechanics, fracture mechanics, stress wave
propagation, experimental diagnostic techniques, and analytical modeling. The
available facilities at CWRU represent the state-of-the-art in high-speed
friction testing thereby offering the students involved a unique experimental
environment. The University is strongly encouraging the involvement of
undergraduate students in cutting edge faculty research, and this would occur
for the proposed work as well. Special attention will also be given to
recruitment of underrepresented minority students for the project. Dissemination
of research results is planned by conference presentations and publications in
relevant peer-reviewed journals. Topics in the area of earthquake physics and
fault mechanics will undoubtedly enter the departmental seminar series. The PIs
will also employ internet and mass-media-based information dissemination to
increase awareness of the potential impact of the proposed research in
earthquake hazard mitigation. This resource will be available to university
level and K-12 students as well as the general public.