* 0810258
* The Dynamics of Short-Duration, Unsteady Volcanic Eruptions
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Amanda Clarke, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2012
* USD 304,678.00

Approximately 30 of the more than 550 historically active volcanoes in the world
are adequately monitored despite the threats they pose to encroaching human
populations. Better predictions of volcanic eruption timing and scale are
critical for reducing risk to these vulnerable populations. To that end,
scientists are attempting to identify currently unrecognized patterns in
explosive eruption dynamics and subsequently build reliable predictive models.
Computer models of large, sustained (Plinian) eruptions, like the eruption of
Mt. St. Helens on May 18, 1980, or the June 12, 1991 eruption of Pinatubo
volcano in the Philippines, form the basis of our current understanding.
However, despite the fact that pulsating or unsteady source properties are
thought to have significant impact on eruption behavior, such models are
necessarily simplified by time-averaging key source properties such as density
and velocity. In response to this apparent disconnect, this research aims to
establish robust relationships between unsteady source conditions and explosive
eruption dynamics. The study will focus on small, short-lived, highly unsteady
(vulcanian) eruptions, which occur much more frequently than Plinian eruptions,
and are thus a valuable and accessible source of data for enhancing general
understanding of eruption dynamics and improving models.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collapsing eruption columns and resulting pyroclastic
flows (avalanches of hot gas, blocks and ash) are one of the deadliest phenomena
produced in explosive volcanic eruptions. The complexity and danger presented by
volcanic eruptions motivates the laboratory investigations that will take place
with the aim to define the transition between stable, rising eruption columns
and unstable, pyroclastic-flow-producing columns in terms of the unsteady forces
driving the eruption. Of particular interest is how variations in the initial
buoyancy and momentum forces influence changes in the ash and velocity
distribution of these flows. The team will also test the effectiveness of
existing mathematical models of eruptions in capturing the behavior of simple
laboratory experiments. Simultaneously, they will assess whether the same models
are valid representations of real volcanic eruptions. The ultimate goal of the
project is to establish theoretical understanding of a wide-range of flows
generated by impulsive, unsteady sources, including large-scale explosive
volcanic eruptions, industrial explosions, contaminant plumes, forest fires and
many other phenomena. &lt;br/&gt;