* 0810790
* SBIR Phase I: Non-Eigen Decomposition Beamforming for Smart Antenna Systems
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2008,12/31/2008
* Garret Okamoto, Adaptive Communications Research Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2008
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposed the
development and evaluation of a new class of adaptive interference mitigation
techniques via smart antenna beamforming algorithms. Current blind (no user or
interference information required) beamforming algorithms require computational
complexity too high for many target applications; consequently, the proposed
work focuses on a promising new technique for blind beamforming that does not
rely on the eigenvalues and eigenvectors utilized by standard algorithms.
Current blind interference mitigation research focuses on incrementally
improving previous techniques fundamentally limited by unnecessary assumptions
and their basis in Eigen Decomposition techniques. This new category of Non-
Eigen Decomposition beamforming techniques achieves comparable performance
(approaching theoretical maximums for SINR gain) to conventional blind
algorithms in nulling interference sources while reducing computational
requirements by an order of magnitude or more (order M instead of M2 or M3,
where M is the number of antennas). Unlike most conventional techniques, the
beamforming weight for this new technique does not require the weight at the
previous snapshot because it is only a function of the cross correlation vector
and initial guess. When the array autocorrelation matrix is known, the optimal
solution is found with zero transition time, resulting in fast convergence and
excellent tracking ability.

If successful this SBIR Phase I project will have a significant impact on
commercial applications and will foster a new field of scientific and
technological understanding. By significantly reducing computational
requirements for blind beamforming algorithms this work will make it feasible
for low-cost commercial applications to eliminate co-channel interference
signals despite limited computational resources. Current blind beamforming
algorithms cannot be used in many applications due to their heavy computational
loads and nonblind algorithms require significant overhead to obtain spatial
information for the user and interference sources. If feedback is also required
for non-blind beamforming techniques then significant throughput and bandwidth
are wasted. Creation of a new class of adaptive blind interference mitigation
techniques for smart antenna systems will enhance scientific and technological
understanding. Published works over the past decade made incremental advances in
blind beamforming algorithms, but those techniques are based on past works and
do not have the potential for revolutionary improvements in this research area.
Academia and Industry researchers will be able to evaluate the simulations and
over-the-air measurement results from this work and adapt these algorithms for
their purposes.