* 0810429
* STTR Phase I:  Active Fiber Optic Sensor Array for Cryogenic Fuel Monitoring and Management
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Philip Swinehart, Lake Shore Cryotronics, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2009
* USD 149,887.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I proposal addresses key
components for managing the liquid natural gas and hydrogen fuel supply economy.
Transporting and storing cryogenic liquid fuels entails danger of fire and
explosion. Since these fuel technologies are growing and acquiring increasing US
strategic as well as worldwide importance, sensors and instrumentation to safely
manage it are required. The outcome of this work will be a basic technology,
first demonstrated at the University of Pittsburgh, consisting of active fiber
optic sensors powered by in-fiber light, to measure cryogenic liquid level,
temperature and hydrogen concentration in air. Such sensors can be multiplexed
at multiple points on a single fiber. The sensors are fiber Bragg gratings
(FBG), which produce a signal that is independent of optical intensity noise,
electromagnetic interference, and are all-dielectric, avoiding the potential for
electrical sparking. With the heating laser off, temperature can be accurately
measured to detect liquid density stratification and other management problems.
With the heating laser on, Bragg grating with functional coating can be used to
measure the thermal conductance difference between cold liquids and gases for
leveling sensing. Hydrogen is detected by the strain on the fiber induced by the
absorption of hydrogen in a palladium film applied to the fiber at each Bragg
grating. The palladium will be heated by the heating laser into a temperature
range where it is most active even if it is near a cold pipe or vessel.

If successful this technology will assist in providing security when
transporting liquid natural gases. The safety of people and facilities are also
great importance and impact. A bad accident could delay the wide adoption of
hydrogen as a major fuel source. Having a flexible, multi-use system available
that can be installed with absolute confidence to monitor and manage these
fuels, as well as the health of installed systems, will have a major impact on
the acceptance of hydrogen as a safe alternative fuel source. The ability to
multiplex many sensors on a single fiber will enable safer and more economical
penetrations in cryogenic walls and the low corrosion potential of the fibers
will enable sensors to be placed along piping underground. The same basic active
fiber sensor technology has the potential to be extended to fuel flow and other
economically useful functions.