* 0810979
* Femtosecond Probing of Magnetic Fields Generated from Ultra-Intense Laser Plasma Interactions
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Karl Krushelnick, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Steven J Gitomer
* 08/31/2013
* USD 650,001.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal involves an experimental
investigation into the characteristics and dynamics of the huge magnetic fields
generated during high intensity laser interactions with solid density plasmas.
Previously, proof-of-principle measurements of magnetic fields up to 0.7
Gigagauss were done which were generated at ultra-relativistic incident laser
intensities where the electron oscillation velocity in the laser field is larger
than the speed of light (this was about 100 times greater than other previous
measurements of magnetic fields in the laboratory). The present research plan is
to extend these measurements to intensities 1000 times larger and also to obtain
a clear physical understanding of the behavior of plasma in these extreme
conditions by developing unique time-resolved probing diagnostics using both a)
mono-energetic relativistic electron beams and b) high order XUV harmonic
emission.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The ultra-high intensities to be used in these
experiments will be made possible using the 500 TW Hercules laser system at the
Center for Ultrafast Optical Science (CUOS) at the University of Michigan. This
laser system has been constructed as part of an NSF Physics Frontier Center
(FOCUS). The results of the proposed work will stimulate progress in the
theoretical understanding of magnetic field generation and evolution in these
interactions. Such understanding is critical not only for an improved
fundamental understanding of the dynamics of relativistic plasma (both in the
laboratory and in astrophysical situations) but is also required for almost all
of the proposed applications of these laser beams such as fast ignition fusion,
medical radio-therapy as well as for the development of compact x-ray and
energetic particle sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was submitted to
the NSF-DoE Partnership in Plasma Science and Engineering joint solicitation.
This award is being funded by the Plasma Physics Program in the Division of
Physics.