* 0810640
* STTR Phase I:  Processing Genetically Engineered Biomass to Obtain Optimal Enzymatic Digestion of Cell Wall Polysaccharides in Cellulosic Biofuel Production
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Kirk Pappan, EDENSPACE SYSTEMS CORP
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2009
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I project will demonstrate methods
of increasing the performance of lignocellulosic enzymes engineered into crop
feedstocks that are used to produce cellulosic ethanol. Current feedstock
conversion processes use a dilute acid, high temperature "pretreatment" step to
make polysaccharide substrates such as cellulose and hemicellulose more
accessible to bioreactor produced glycolytic enzymes, "glycozymes," that are
added at a later step. Such glycozymes have recently been produced in crop
feedstocks themselves as a means of reducing enzyme costs. Since pretreatment
heat and acid can denature plant-produced glycozymes, there is a need to develop
material process flows that preserve glycozyme activity through the pretreatment
process into downstream saccharification. This project will characterize
conditions for activating and preserving endogenous glycozyme activity
throughout the cellulsic ethanol production process.

Successful completion of the project will reduce the cost of producing
cellulosic ethanol from a wide variety of agricultural residues and dedicated
energy crops. This technology will help realize the enormous potential of
engineered bioenergy crops by making feedstock processing improvements necessary
for the commercialization of this novel energy resource. By increasing the
efficient use of plant-produced enzymes, the costs of pretreatment and
downstream saccharification can be reduced, thereby facilitating expanded
production of cellulosic ethanol as a renewable transportation fuel, reducing
CO2 emissions and pollution from fossil fuels, fostering increased energy
independence, and raising rural and farm incomes.