* 0810278
* Uplift, Subsidence, and Basin Development Along the Evolving Pacific-North American Plate Boundary
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Craig Nicholson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 06/30/2011
* USD 201,427.00

Understanding continental structure, basin development and the dynamics of plate
boundary deformation are important problems in earth science. The offshore
California Continental Borderland is an ideal natural laboratory to investigate
many aspects of this deformation, because it was the locus of Pacific-North
America plate motion for about 70% of its displacement history, and recent GPS
data suggest that up to 20% of current plate motion is still located offshore.
Moreover, the Borderland is generally an area of deposition rather than erosion,
suggesting that the record of plate boundary deformation is more complete, more
accessible and can be better imaged in three dimensions offshore. This project
will use grids of high-quality industry multichannel seismic reflection data
(originally collected for hydrocarbon exploration) to investigate the crustal
deformation and tectonic evolution of this offshore portion of the plate
boundary. Digital fault surfaces and stratigraphic reference horizons will be
produced to define active fault, fold, and basin geometry in three dimensions
offshore, and to help quantify the finite strain field with time. A prime
objective is to document the timing, rates, and spatial patterns of uplift,
subsidence, and related volcanic activity that are most sensitive to important
parameters of plate boundary processes, such as mechanical strengths,
viscosities, cooling histories, plate coupling and changing plate boundary
geometry. This will then help distinguish between competing tectonic models for
plate boundary evolution and provide a more accurate picture of plate boundary
strain accumulation. Our results will thus complement land-based studies and
provide a more synoptic view of the plate boundary, including what some of the
important geodynamic processes are that help drive modern basin development, and
the regional pattern of uplift and subsidence along this active transform
system.

Evaluating the offshore structure, stratigraphy and plate boundary deformation
of the Continental Borderland will help address several important fundamental
questions about the evolution of continents and continental deformation,
including how strain accumulates and is partitioned within plate boundaries, and
what controls the crustal architecture at plate boundaries. Evaluating this
deformation is important because these active offshore structures represent a
largely as yet unknown hazard to many California coastal communities, and
provide important analogs to active buried (less-accessible) onshore structures
that may produce large, damaging earthquakes in the Los Angeles basin and other
areas. Project results will thus be incorporated into regional community fault
models for southern California that form the basis for estimating earthquake and
tsunami hazards, for interpreting geodetic strain data, and for understanding
other aspects of continental deformation, including fault interaction and fault
system dynamics. The project will also provide further insight into the nature
of offshore basin development that forms important reservoirs for hydrocarbon
accumulation.