* 0810975
* Collaborative Research: Plant Regulation of Competition Between Methanogens and Iron-Reducing Bacteria in Freshwater Wetlands
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2007,07/31/2009
* David Emerson, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2009
* USD 100,721.00

Non-Technical Abstract (Proposal 0516197)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title:
Collaborative Research: Plant regulation of competition between methanogens and
iron reducing bacteria in freshwater wetlands&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The purpose
of this work is to enhance our understanding of important but 'unseen' processes
in wetlands that influence climate. We will examine how plants and microbes
interact below ground to regulate the production of methane, a powerful
greenhouse gas that currently accounts for 20% of global warming. We suspect
that there are important ecological interactions between plants, methane-
producing bacteria (i.e. methanogens), and iron-reducing bacteria. Wetland
plants create micro-niches in which their extensive root network provides
organic carbon and introduces O2 into the predominately anoxic soil environment.
These plant-driven factors appear to profoundly influence microbial community
structure and the outcome of microbial competition. We will manipulate a
freshwater wetland by removing plants and/or adding organic substrates, then
track methane production, iron reduction, and other key microbial processes. In
order to successfully link measurements of microbial activity and microbial
community composition, we will use molecular techniques to track microorganisms
that differ in key aspects of their physiology. We hypothesize that increases in
methane production will be the result of microbial competition for resources and
changes in microbial community structure. This information will help inform the
development of process-based models of greenhouse gas emission from
wetlands.&lt;br/&gt;