* 0810548
* SBIR Phase I:  Micro-Compliant-Interconnect-Mechanisms (MCIMs)
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2008,12/31/2008
* David Bloom, ALCES TECHNOLOGY, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2008
* USD 99,969.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I research project investigates
the feasibility of using Micro-Compliant-Interconnect-Mechanisms (MCIMs) to
provide chip level communication to Micro-Electro-Mechanical-Systems (MEMS)
devices. MCIMs are microscopic spring connectors fabricated directly on silicon
wafers which provide an alternative to soldered flip chip technology for
interconnecting individual dies in multi chip modules. Evolving MEMS designs
have led to increasingly high-density devices. Providing reliable inter-die
electrical interconnections to high density MEMS represents a substantial
portion of the overall complexity of these devices. The MCIM connection
technology described in this project offers to dramatically reduce the cost of
packaged MEMS devices making them available to a much broader market.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this technology is that MCIMs
represent a novel solution to the challenge of providing high density inter-die
electrical connections in devices utilizing multi-chip module architectures. The
higher yields and lower production costs provided by MCIMs will lead to new
market opportunities for MEMS based laser light modulators. The high costs and
relatively low per wafer yields of these devices restrict their use to high end
markets. Other applications of MCIMs include the development of micro-probes for
use in semiconductor testing. &lt;br/&gt;