* 0810485
* SBIR Phase I:  High Resolution Tunable Receiver For Remote THz Sensing
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2008,12/31/2008
* Darold Wobschall, Esensors Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2008
* USD 97,186.00

This SBIR Phase I research project will demonstrate the feasibility of
inexpensive high-resolution tunable terahertz (THz) receivers based on electron-
heating in semiconductor nanodevices. The nanosensor will be composed of a low-
mobility channel shaped from a Aluminum Gallium Arsenide/Gallium Arsenide
(AlGaAs/GaAs) two-dimensional electron gas. The proposed tunable inexpensive
heterodyne detector (mixer) will operate at moderate cooling temperatures (~77K)
within the 0.3-30 THz range. The proposed device will have the advantages of low
noise, broad spectral coverage, technological compatibility of the detector with
available solid-state local oscillators. The proposed system will provide
critical information on the status of atmosphere, aid in the demarcation of
pollutions, and monitor the progress of cleanup efforts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the concept of the proposed system
is that it is very flexible and could be applied to a variety of chemical and
biological contaminants. Besides environmental monitoring, the proposed receiver
can be used for screening of personnel and handheld materials. THz screening is
non-invasive and non-destructive for living beings. Explosives and biological
agents can be detected and identified even if concealed in clothing and
suitcases because the THz radiation is transmitted through clothing and
luggage.&lt;br/&gt;