* 0810187
* Collaborative Research: Tuning-Free Adaptive Multilevel Discontinuous Galerkin Methods for Maxwell's Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2012
* Timothy Warburton, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2012
* USD 188,167.00

The investigator and colleagues are formulating, analyzing, and implementing
adaptive multilevel Discontinuous Galerkin methods for coupled interior/exterior
domain problems associated with the time-harmonic Maxwell equations. These
advanced finite element methods are being realized as multilevel techniques on
the basis of an adaptively generated hierarchy of triangulations of the
computational domain. The research team is focusing on three central issues
related to the basic steps `SOLVE', `ESTIMATE', `MARK', and `REFINE' of the
adaptive loop. First, the smoothing process within the multilevel solver is
performed only on the newly refined part of the triangulation obtained by a
residual type a posteriori error estimator. Second, the a posteriori error
analysis, which additionally has to take into account the effect of such local
smoothing, aims to provide conditions guaranteeing a reduction of the global
discretization error at each refinement step. Third, the selection of elements,
faces and edges of the triangulation for refinement are based on a bulk
criterion with an automatic (`tuning free') choice of the parameters controlling
the amount of refinement in order to achieve optimal performance of the overall
algorithm. Finally, the team is developing criteria to choose the parameters of
artificial radiation boundary conditions automatically, such that no tuning on
behalf of the user is required there as well.

Simulation of electromagnetic phenomena is a particularly challenging problem in
computational mathematics. The investigator and colleagues are establishing a
profound theoretical foundation for adaptive multilevel discontinuous Galerkin
methods in electromagnetic field computations. They are developing a reliable
algorithmic tool, of optimal computational complexity, that can be used for the
numerical solution of challenging real-life problems in electrical engineering
applications. The methods developed in this project have numerous technical and
scientific applications, for instance semiconductor simulation or particle
accelerator design. The results will be disseminated through publication of
algorithms and results and reference computer codes being developed during this
project will be made available to practitioners.