* 0810008
* Collaborative Research: Submarine Fluid Recharge - The Role of Anhydrite and Reactive Transport  Modeling of the Endeavour Segment, Juan de Fuca Ridge
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2007,02/28/2009
* Grant Garven, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 02/28/2009
* USD 28,023.00

Intellectual Merit: The proposed research targets advancing our understanding of
the structure and evolution of the recharge zone on a well-explored section of
the Juan de Fuca Ridge through reactive transport modeling calculations. The
research involves: (1) development of numerical computer models of hydrothermal
circulation that simulate a variety of geometries (spatial extent, distance of
recharge from the ridge), physical properties (porosity, permeability and fault
distribution) and recharge styles (along axis, cross-axis); (2) use of improved
geochemical models of anhydrite precipitation including the role of low-
temperature mineral precipitation, competing chemical reactions, kinetic effects
and microbial activity (sulfate reduction) during fluid recharge and subsequent
sediment/basalt-seawater reactions as a function of temperature (processes such
as different rock composition and varying water rock ratios will also be
explored), and (3) incorporation of the geochemical model into the hydrothermal
model to obtain a 2-D reactive transport model to further investigate the
theoretical nature of hydrothermal recharge controlled by anhydrite
precipitation, basalt-seawater reactions and subsequent porosity changes. The
work focuses on the deep circulation system related to high-temperature
hydrothermal venting and will explore the feedback between anhydrite
precipitation and the hydrologic evolution of a recharge zone. Methods include
use of finite-element numerical computer modeling techniques to simulate heat
and fluid transport in the hydrothermal systems encountered at the Endeavor
Segment under varying conditions based on field data (temperature, heat output,
geologic structure) and other published material and use of geochemical modeling
software to improve our understanding of the complex geochemical processes that
characterize the hydrothermal system by including effects of low- and high-
temperature mineral precipitation/ dissolution, and kinetic effects with
microbial metabolism. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The research is a
multidisciplinary inter-institutional collaboration between institutions in the
states of Maryland, Georgia, and Massachusetts as well as international
collaboration with the University of Tasmania. The work supports the research of
three faculty, one of whom is female, and involves cross training of a postdoc.
It also leverages funds by sharing the cost of a postdoc with the University of
Tasmania. The models developed in this program are readily transportable to
other areas of research such as weathering and soil development, sediment
diagenesis, petroleum migration, ore deposit genesis, radioactive-waste
disposal, carbon sequestration, reactive barriers in geoenvironmental
engineering, geomicrobiology of hot springs, and life in extreme environments.
&lt;br/&gt;