* 0810568
* STTR Phase I:  Engineering Clostritrial Fermentation for Biobutanol Production
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2008,12/31/2009
* I-Ching Tang, Bioprocessing Innovative Company, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2009
* USD 150,000.00

Intellectual Merit:

This STTR project will develop novel engineered Clostridia strains for
fermentation to economically produce butanol as a biofuel from sugars derived
from starchy and lignocellulosic biomass. Butanol is an important industrial
solvent and potentially a better transportation fuel than ethanol. Recent rising
oil prices and limited petroleum resources have generated high interest in the
production of biobutanol by anaerobic Clostridial fermentation. However, the
conventional acetone-butanol-ethanol (ABE) fermentation has low butanol yield
(<20%), butanol concentration (<16 g/L) and reactor productivity (<0.5 g/L*h)
due to a strong butanol inhibition, and the fermentation process is difficult to
improve due to the complicated metabolic pathways and gene regulation involved
in the production microorganisms, mainly Clostridium acetobutylicum. To develop
a novel high-butanol producer, Clostridia mutant strains with inactivated ack
(acetate kinase) and pta (phosphotransacetylase) will be cloned with an alcohol
dehydrogenase gene in Phase I and the mutants will be further adapted in a
fibrous bed bioreactor to attain a high butanol tolerance. Functional genomic
studies of the mutants and further metabolic engineering and process development
will be carried out in Phase II to evaluate the feasibility and advantages of
producing butanol from glucose and xylose. The new fermentation process can
double the butanol yield and concentration, thus reducing the product cost to an
economically competitive level for fuel application.

Broader Impact:

Currently, butanol is almost exclusively produced via petrochemical routes. Its
uses include industrial applications in solvent, rubber monomers and brake
fluids. Butanol has also been shown to be a good alternative transportation
fuel. Biobutanol will have a great potential to compete with ethanol as a
transportation fuel when its production cost is reduced by using advanced
fermentation technologies such as metabolically engineered butanol-tolerant
mutants. By increasing the butanol yield from glucose and xylose from the
current low of <20 % (w/w) to ~40%, the economics of biobutanol can be greatly
improved. With the engineered mutants, the productivity and butanol product
concentration can also be improved by at least 100%. Overall, the biobutanol
product cost can be reduced to less than $2 per gallon. This technology thus can
provide an economical and better biofuel than ethanol. This project will focus
on generation of value-added products from industrial waste streams and low-cost
biomass feedstocks to enhance the economic viability of the biorefinery
industry. Successfully developing the proposed butanol fermentation technology
will satisfy the public interest, especially in providing a safe, renewable
energy, protecting natural resources and the environment, and enhancing economic
opportunity and quality of life. There will be job creation throughout the
commercial development and manufacturing phases. At least one postdoctoral
scholar and one Ph.D. student will be trained in this project.