* 0810213
* Nonlinear Optimization: Algorithms, Theory and Software
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Jorge Nocedal, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2012
* USD 291,172.00

Numerical optimization plays an essential role in a wide variety of scientific
and engineering applications. Medical imaging, electrical power network
simulations, computational finance, and atmospheric sciences make extensive use
of optimization models to simulate real-life phenomena. As these models become
increasingly more complex and incorporate a larger amount of data, the demands
placed on optimization techniques have surpassed their capabilities. This
proposal presents three projects designed to address this
challenge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first project proposes matrix-free methods
for very large constrained optimization problems; we have in mind applications
where the number of variables and constraints range in the millions. The new
algorithms compute inexact Newton steps by applying iterative methods to the
inner linear systems of equations. Questions to be addressed in this research
include the appropriate management of inexactness, nonconvexity, and Jacobian
singularity. The second project concerns the development of open-source software
for problems in which the constraints are defined by the discretization of
partial differential equations. The new optimization solvers will be created in
collaboration with Argonne National Laboratory and will operate in a matrix-free
environment. The third project investigates procedures for detecting if a
nonlinear optimization problem is feasible. This question has not received
sufficient attention in spite of its importance in mixed integer nonlinear
programming and in parametric studies of optimization models. The goal is to
develop new optimization techniques that transition smoothly between
optimization and feasibility, and vice versa. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merits of the proposed activity lie in the complexity of designing
optimization methods that are capable of dealing with nonconvexities and
nonlinearities. The broader impacts resulting from this work will be seen in the
successful application of the new algorithms and software in areas such as
circuit simulation, computational chemistry, medical imaging, atmospheric
sciences, and machine learning. The principles and ideas developed in this
project will stimulate future research in new areas of application.