* 0810188
* Experimental Constraints on the Rheology of the Lower Continental Crust
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* J. Gregory Hirth, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2012
* USD 260,000.00

The goal of this proposal is to provide new experimental data on the rheology of
mafic crustal rocks at temperatures and pressures appropriate for the lower
continental crust. Rheology is the study of deformation and flow of matter under
an applied stress. Understanding the rheological properties of the lower crust
is important for a broad range of geologic problems. In terms of societal
relevance, the most important reason to understand crustal rheology is for the
accurate assessment of earthquake hazards produced by time-dependent loading of
seismogenic faults. The rheology of the lower continental crust also controls
the geochemical evolution of the crust and mantle (the chemical composition of
the continental crust remains a controversial subject; one hypothesis that
reconciles differences in current models supposes that melt that moves upwards
from the mantle to the crust beneath volcanoes begins to crystallize at depths
of ~30 km. As these crystals cool they become denser than the material below and
thus can sink back into the mantle, but only if they are weak enough to flow at
relatively rapid rates), the coupling of mantle flow to crustal dynamics (for
example, how are movements at the Earth?s surface related to the long term
convective motion in the interior) and the long-term support of mountain belts.
Existing flow laws for mafic rocks do explain many geologic observations.
However, extrapolation to conditions appropriate for the base of continental
crust indicates that the interpretation of rheologic data derived using
geophysical techniques could be improved with new experimental data.

We propose to: (1) Conduct experiments on dry, coarse-grained gabbroic and
plagioclase-rich rocks to provide creep data in the dislocation creep regime at
conditions where we can minimize (a) the potential effects of microcracking
and/or cavitation and (b) problems with resolving the relative contributions of
diffusion creep and dislocation creep. (2) Quantify how water influences the
rheological properties of plagioclase-rich rocks and evaluate how much water is
needed to produce significant differences between dry and wet rheologies. (3)
Determine if the phenomenal cavitation microstructures produced in lower
pressure torsion experiments are inhibited at higher pressure. We will obtain
rheological data at conditions beyond the conventional range used in gas medium
machines ? and/or at temperature/strain rate conditions where brittle processes
initiate at lower pressure. The experimental program will provide results that
bridge the gap between different deformation apparatus, improving confidence in
the application of laboratory mechanical data.