* 0810408
* CPA-DA: Low Power Asynchronous Circuits from Traditional Clocked Verilog and ASIC CAD
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Kenneth Stevens, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2011
* USD 450,079.00

Project ID: 0818408&lt;br/&gt;Title: Low Power Asynchronous Circuits from
Traditional Clocked Verilog and ASIC CAD&lt;br/&gt;Inst: University of
Utah&lt;br/&gt;PI name: Ken
Stevens&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Asynchronous design
has been shown to provide substantial power and performance advantages to a wide
range of designs when compared to traditional clocked design. This advantage
results in extended battery life and energy efficiency. However, asynchronous
design (clockless design or ?handshake clocking?) has remained an exotic
technology due to its incompatibility with traditional clocked CAD and design
methodologies. A fundamental problem to adoption of asynchronous design methods
is the inability to characterize and predict performance through static timing
analysis, and use timing driven power/performance optimization to place and
route these designs. This proposal develops fundamental technology that resolves
this roadblock, thus enabling asynchronous design to be integrated into clocked
designs and into the clocked CAD tool flows. This opens up a broad capability
for designs to operate at higher performance and become more energy efficient.
This work is founded on a novel technology called relative timing which uses
formal verification techniques to prove both timing and behavioral correctness
of asynchronous templates. Timing is now represented as logical constraints.
These logical constraints are used to break cyclical sequential circuits into
directed acyclic graphs (DAGs). These designs are now directly supported in
clocked designs and tool flows as .sdc
constraints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is currently very limited
expertise in this technology, so training students must primarily be provided at
the university rather than on the job. The combination of a lack of industrial
expertise and the high potential of this breakthrough approach has resulted in
significant industrial interest. Both Intel, the worlds largest semiconductor
firm, and Synopsys, one of the worlds top two design automation companies, are
providing funding and mentorship to help commercialize and technology transfer
this project. Nanochronous, a startup, is providing CAD tools and research
collaboration. The involvement of under represented minorities are also a focus
of this project as a female engineer will be supported by this research. A
workshop will be formed to disseminate the results of this work. Finally this
project will work collaboratively with a sister grant developing Network-on-Chip
technology to prove the simplicity of adopting this work into broader
applications.&lt;br/&gt;