* 0810085
* Collaborative Proposal: The Effect of Dislocations on Magnetic Properties of Small Titanomagnetite Minerals
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Joshua Feinberg, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 06/30/2012
* USD 44,784.00

Variations in the intensity of the geomagnetic field are connected to the
geodynamo in the Earth's core, and the history of these variations can provide
information on the evolution of the core and the core-mantle boundary. However,
to acquire reliable data on paleointensity one must avoid many pitfalls. Efforts
to develop more reliable paleointensity methods are hampered by our poor
understanding of how the field is recorded in all but the smallest crystals. In
particular, we know almost nothing about how the recording process is affected
by dislocations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dislocations are imperfections that
impose internal stresses on a crystal. These stresses couple with the
magnetization. There is good reason to expect that dislocations are common in
the most important minerals for paleomagnetism, submicron ferromagnetic
crystals, but there is almost no hard evidence for their presence. Nor is
anything known about the effect they would have on the magnetic properties in
such crystals. We propose to make a major advance in this knowledge using both
experiment and theory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Samples from a variety of geologic
settings, as well as synthetic magnetite samples, will be examined using
transmission electron microscopy (TEM) to characterize the dislocations. We will
calculate the stress fields around dislocations, taking advantage of a
theoretical breakthrough at Lawrence Livermore Laboratories. The stress fields
will be incorporated in a numerical micromagnetic model to calculate the
coupling between dislocations and magnetization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
micromagnetic model will be used to model the acquisition of thermoremanent
magnetization (TRM) as minerals cool. It will incorporate realistic grain sizes
and shapes, as well as crystallographic dislocation geometries, determined from
the TEM measurements. The model will be used to calculate the effect of
dislocations on (1) magnetic hysteresis as a function of temperature,
&lt;br/&gt;(2) low temperature demagnetization and (3) TRM acquisition. We will
attempt to reproduce a variety of anomalous results that have been reported for
TRM experiments in large magnetite crystals, and we will investigate various
protocols for measuring paleointensity experiments. &lt;br/&gt;This work should
lead to a better understanding of the protocols and better paleointensity
methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will include the first systematic
search for dislocations in small magnetite crystals, the first calculations of
stress fields around dislocations in finite crystals, and the first calculations
of the fine-scale coupling between dislocations and magnetization in any
material. It also involves the first unconstrained physical model of TRM for
crystals with nonuniform magnetization. It may lead to better paleointensity
methods and should also be important to applications of environmental magnetism.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These advances are made possible by a new partnership
between two university scientists (one of whom is a Beginning Investigator) and
a researcher at a government laboratory. This partnership has great potential
for future studies of the interaction between stress and magnetization.