* 0810785
* SBIR Phase I: Development of Novel Repellents for the Honeybee, Apis mellifera
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2008,12/31/2008
* Daniel Woods, Inscent, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 12/31/2008
* USD 99,903.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project provides the scientific
foundation for a paradigm shift in insect pest control away from traditional
insecticides toward products that alter insect behavior by directly manipulating
insect chemosensory proteins. A rational design approach is used to isolate
compounds that bind to critical chemosensory proteins, and those compounds
capable of altering insect behavior will be further selected. These compounds
are referred to by the trade name, Arometics. In response to citrus grower
demand, small molecules that should affect the foraging behavior of the
agriculturally and economically significant insect, Apis mellifera (European
honeybee) are being isolated. The final products will be repellents capable of
protecting citrus from unwanted pollination.

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will alter insect
control practices by avoiding the use of insecticides and the need for
complicated pheromone synthesis. The initial insect targeted, the European
honeybee (Apis mellifera), provides essential pollination that adds an estimated
$14 billion annually in value to US crops. This research will lead to better
honeybee management strategies that will protect the honeybee, a critical crop
pollinator. This project will have broad scientific and societal impact, as it
introduces the technologies necessary to develop novel, environmentally
responsible insect control methods that are compatible with modern integrated
pest management schemes.