* 0810919
* Collaborative Research: Workshop: Forum for Developing US-Swedish Research Cooperation on Oden In Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2008,12/31/2008
* Peter Minnett, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Falkner
* 12/31/2008
* USD 49,975.00

&lt;br/&gt;As part of an Implementing Arrangement between the Polar Research
Secretariat and the Swedish Research Council and the National Science Foundation
for Cooperative Research and Logistical Activities in Polar Regions,
approximately 20 days of dedicated science time for the Swedish Icebreaker Oden
in the Southern Ocean are anticipated for the next 4 years. This science
opportunity is being supported by both the US and Sweden and arose in
conjunction with the arrangements for the Oden to break a resupply channel into
McMurdo station each of these years. This collaborative proposal requests
support for coordination and participation of 20 US science participants in a
workshop to develop science priorities for the US-Swedish research cooperation
on the Oden. The Swedish Research Secretariat is hosting the workshop and will
support 20 Swedish scientists to attend. The workshop will be held near
Stockholm on 10-14 February 2008. The PIs will be responsible for selecting US
participants, arranging for and covering their travel, working with Swedish
colleagues to organize and run the workshop, coauthor a workshop report with the
Swedes and making the report broadly known to the US research community. The
Swedish research Secretariat is covering the costs of accommodations and meals
for the US research scientists. The main outcome of the workshop will be a
report, posted to the web immediately following the workshop, which outlines the
vessel capabilities, identifies science themes appropriately addressed from the
Swedish Icebreaker Oden under this opportunity, and provides an open registry of
scientists interested in bi-lateral collaboration. The PIs will assure broad
advertisement of the report and opportunity through a variety of media and list-
servers. The purpose of this report is to provide guidance to the broader
community for competitive proposal development under open solicitations to be
released both in the US and Sweden. US researchers will have the opportunity to
compete for available ship time as part of the Annual Antarctic Solicitation.
The US participants in the workshop will be selected to cover a range of
disciplines, institutions, ideas and career stage and to include members of
underrepresented groups. They will be asked to represent their larger
communities. This workshop will provide a new opportunity for US Swedish
research collaboration consistent with NSF's focus on broadening participation
and developing new partnerships. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;