* 0810931
* Collaborative Research:  Simulations of MILAGRO Meteorology and Transport for Analysis of Atmospheric Chemistry Data
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Luisa Molina, Molina Center for Strategic Studies in Energy & the Environment
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 07/31/2011
* USD 182,653.00

Improved meteorological simulations for the Mexico City Metropolitan Area (MCMA)
will be developed for further analysis of data from the 2006 MILAGRO (Megacity
Initiative: Local Global and Research Observations) field campaign. The
objective is to better understand meteorology and air pollution in the MCMA and
regional effects of the MCMA plume. Satellite remote sensing data will be used
to evaluate and improve numerical weather simulations, with a focus on urban
impacts on local meteorology such as the urban heat island and urban-induced
circulations. Data assimilation techniques will be used to improve the
simulations and to better quantify uncertainties. Forward and backward
trajectories based on the meteorological analyses will be used to evaluate
mixing processes in the Mexico City basin and the impact of different source
regions on air quality. Data on gas and aerosol phase concentrations will be
combined with trajectory simulations to further identify possible source regions
and to evaluate the strength of impacts from known sources, including
industrial, volcanic, and biological.

This project will assist in the development of science-based environmental
policies for Mexico City as well as provide insights into other urban areas
worldwide. Visualization tools will be used to demonstrate air quality issues
and to increase stakeholder participation through workshops and outreach
activities with both government agencies and local academic and research
institutions. The project will provide research opportunities for undergraduate
students as well as research and mentoring opportunities for a graduate student
and a post-doctoral researcher who will be involved in the analysis and
modeling.