* 0810420
* SBIR Phase I: Method of Integrated Web-Based Tools to Enable a Collaborative Community of Professional Creatives
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2008,12/31/2008
* Elizabeth Messina, Artbox LLC
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 12/31/2008
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes to attract and
organize a revenue-generating, web-based, collaborative community of independent
"creatives" - writers, photographers, animators, video producers, graphic
artists, designers, musicians, etc. by providing web tools designed to increase
their productivity and ability to interact with peers and with potential
clients. Artbox plans to build the platform by integrating web-based tools into
an efficient online application, creating a virtual community for people who
usually work alone. These free-lance workers are a growing portion of the
creative labor market. They need a network of creative people with different
skillsets to carry out multifaceted multimedia projects they could not do on
their own.

The net has changed the economic realities of almost every business, and the
American economy is at a turning point. Old models based on manufacturing and
information technology have been greatly affected by the availability of cheap
labor overseas. Observers of these trends have identified that innovation and
imagination and collective intelligence form the new basis for competitive
advantage in the global marketplace. In an innovation economy, creators of
original content, concepts and products are also the creators of value. By
aggregating this "Creative Force", Artbox.com will build a powerful network and
efficient talent-sourcing tool for businesses and individuals alike. If
successful, the commercial impact of this platform promises to be significant.