* 0810084
* Collaborative Research: Deformation Processes in the Andaman Islands
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Robert Smalley, University of Memphis
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2011
* USD 256,257.00

The December 2004 Sumatra-Andaman earthquake was the second largest (Mw 9.3) and
second deadliest (~280,000 casualties) earthquake ever recorded. It was also
unusual in that it combined a normal ?fast? rupture with a more unusual slow
fault slip event. This unique occurrence presents an important opportunity to
examine two questions with potentially wide-ranging implications for global
earthquake studies: (1) What processes and rheologies re-equilibrate stress
following great earthquakes in island arc settings? And (2) What Earth
properties control the speed of rupture in great earthquakes? The boundary
between the Indian and Andaman tectonic plates is almost entirely submarine, but
the Andaman-Nicobar Island group enables a revealing look at postseismic
deformation in the segment that ruptured principally as a slow earthquake and
hence generated relatively little ground shaking. &lt;br/&gt;The investigators
on this project are continuing to capture postseismic deformation after the
Sumatra-Andaman earthquake by operating a network of 14 Global Positioning
System (GPS) sites in the Andaman-Nicobar Islands. The network currently
consists of 4 continuous and 10 campaign sites. These ?ground-truth? geodetic
data (from a locale where data acquisition is notoriously difficult) are being
combined with satellite measurements of gravity and shoreline changes to examine
key scientific questions about the deformation and stress cycle on a subduction
thrust that exhibited unusual slow slip behavior during one of the largest
earthquakes of the past century. &lt;br/&gt;Modeling of the first several years
of GPS postseismic displacements indicates slip down-dip of the seismic rupture
dominated near-field deformation during that period. Modeling suggests the early
fault slip response is now completed and that mantle flow will dominate near-
field deformation for the next several years. The network is designed to capture
these viscoelastic flow signals, to fingerprint any continuing fault slip that
may illuminate slip stability of the shallow plate-bounding thrust, and to
assess whether time- and space-dependent nonlinear effects of power-law creep
rheology are in evidence. Slip stability in particular is being assessed by
examining the data for evidence of nonlinear fault slip (so-called ?slow slip
events?) on the shallow plate boundary that ruptured during the earthquake. The
rock flow process is also being examined for evidence of a different type of
nonlinearity that is expected based on laboratory rock deformation experiments,
but that has not been observed unequivocally in the real Earth. University of
Memphis investigators are operating the GPS network in partnership with the
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore and the Society of Andaman &amp; Nicobar
Ecology (SANE). Modeling and interpretation combines the expertise of
investigators at the University of Memphis and Utah State University (USU).
Deformation processes that re-equilibrate stress following large earthquakes are
intrinsically linked to the processes that accumulate stress leading up to large
earthquakes, so this ongoing investigation will illuminate the physics of
earthquake slip and the earthquake cycle globally&lt;br/&gt;