* 0810937
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Monitoring the Ionospheric Weather Over Egypt Using a Chain of Coherent Ionosphere Doppler Receivers
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2008,05/31/2012
* Wendell Horton, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Anja Stromme
* 05/31/2012
* USD 88,651.00

This project will develop, deploy, and operate a network of passive radio
instruments to monitor ionospheric weather over Egypt. Three Coherent
Ionospheric Doppler Receivers (CIDRs) will be situated along a roughly north-
south line in Egypt, with the viewing geometry extending from 5 degrees to 32
degrees magnetic latitude. Each CIDR will measure the total electron content
once per second over a 15 degree geographic latitude field-of-view. The CIDRs
will be run in Alexandria by Alexandria University, in Cairo by Helwan
University, and in Aswan by the National Research Institute of Astronomy and
Geophysics. The scientific focus is the morphology of the equatorial ionization
anomaly that develops in the low latitude ionosphere due to the interaction of
the Earth's magnetic and electric fields. The anomaly consists of two peaks of
electron density located at 10 to 20 degrees on either side of the geomagnetic
equator, where there is a trough. In Africa, the peaks typically occur over
southern and central Egypt. The movement of and density variations in the
anomaly cause significant perturbations to the radio environment, which can
disrupt high frequency radio communications and introduce errors into
transionospheric navigation systems. The installation and operation of the CIDRs
in Egypt will enable real-time monitoring of the ionospheric space environment
in a region that has long been data poor. By analyzing the CIDR data set as a
function of time and ionospheric drivers, this project will gain valuable new
insights into the weather of the equatorial fountain and the radio environment
over Egypt, enabling an understanding of how ionospheric weather is associated
with the equatorial fountain over Egypt. An international collaboration in space
science between US and Egyptian universities will be established and will
contribute to the science, technical, and educational infrastructure in Africa
and the middle East, supporting the efforts of the United Nations International
Heliophysical Year. Helwan University will establish a space weather forecast
center which will provide real-time monitoring and forecasting of ionospheric
weather using the data collected from the three CIDR stations. The center will
also conduct research in solar-terrestrial physics and develop techniques for
forecasting solar and geophysical disturbances. The data sets obtained through
this project will be used in the education and training of graduate students at
the Egyptian host sites. The project is co-funded by NSF's Office of
International Science and Engineering.