* 0810388
* SBIR Phase I:  Fault Isolation of Open Circuits in Semiconductor Products using Magnetic Current Imaging
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2008,12/31/2008
* Antonio Orozco, NEOCERA, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2008
* USD 99,938.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I research project will extend the
capabilities of magnetic current imaging to detect open failures in
semiconductor packages with an accuracy of 30 microns to facilitate the
integration of semiconductor components and devices into systems. The largest,
most difficult problem encountered in packages is electrical opens due to
increasing shrinking and complex technology in leading edge designs. The only
available techniques are time domain reflectometry with practical resolution of
1-2 mm and time consuming layer-by-layer deprocessing. It is proposed to use
magnetic current imaging with a SQUID sensor to solve this critical problem
through increasing the frequency detection limit of the equipment to detect high
frequency signals at the defect location.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The semiconductor
industry has a critical need for localization of buried open defects in packages
with resolution below 30 microns. The proposed technology is targeting a 30
micron resolution to fill a known gap in fault isolation technology for
packaging. For the semiconductor companies it will enable the packaging
manufacturing sites to isolate open defects and improve their manufacturing
processes to minimize or eliminate these defects quickly so that they can get
high quality reliable products to market faster. &lt;br/&gt;