* 0810992
* Collaborative Research: CPA-DA: Noise-Aware VLSI Signal   Processing: A New Paradigm for Signal Processing Integrated Circuit Design in Nanoscale Era
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,12/31/2011
* Tong Zhang, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 12/31/2011
* USD 136,000.00

PI: Zhang, Tong &amp; Parhi, Keshab&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No: 0810992 &amp;
0811456&lt;br/&gt;Title: Collaborative Research: CPA-DA: Noise-Aware VLSI Signal
Processing: A New Paradigm for Signal Processing Integrated Circuit Design in
Nanoscale Era&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute &amp;
University of Minnesota&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this proposal is to develop a new noise-aware design methodology
that can maximize the error resilience of signal processing integrated circuits.
As CMOS technology approaches its end-of-roadmap physical limit, there have been
increasing levels of environmental and process variations, and susceptibility to
noise, which make it a challenge to maintain the historical yield and
reliability. This proposal will develop methodology and approaches that tackle
this grand challenge in the context of signal processing integrated circuits
implementation. The intellectual merit of this proposal lies in the research
theme of leveraging the unique characteristics of signal processing functions to
substantially improve the tolerance to noise. There are two major parts to this
project: developing noise analysis techniques for signal processing integrated
circuits, and exploring design space for noise-aware VLSI signal processing. In
particular, this research will develop analysis techniques that can
quantitatively estimate how variations in signal processing integrated circuits
may affect the signal processing performance. This research will further explore
the design space for noise-aware VLSI signal processing where the objective is
to minimize the noise-induced signal processing performance degradation at
minimal energy consumption and/or silicon cost. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research program represents the first step towards exploring a new
research area. If successful, it will have broad impact on the semiconductor
industry and national economy in both the near term and long term: In the near
term, it will generate considerable economic benefit by improving the noise
tolerance and the effective yield of signal processing integrated circuits. From
another perspective, it will enable more aggressive CMOS scaling for
implementing signal processing integrated circuits, which will be greatly
beneficial since the signal processing functions are typically very hardware
resource demanding. In the long term, this research will shed light on signal
processing system implementation using post-silicon nanotechnology, such as
molecular electronics, where a significant degree of noise is presumably
inevitable. The education objective of this proposal is to promote the education
of VLSI signal processing, the inter-disciplinary area linking semiconductor and
signal processing/communication, to a wider spectrum of students. &lt;br/&gt;