* 0810216
* DUSEL R&amp;D Collaborative Research: Light Amplifier Compressor Photodetector Development for Astroparticle Experiments
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Yasar Onel, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 08/31/2011
* USD 40,000.00

This award will provide funds to develop a new class of photodetectors for
astroparticle physics, cosmic ray phenomena, nucleon decay, neutrino
oscillations, and high energy physics, which can scale to very large sizes,
exceeding available photomultipliers (PMTs). This photodetector compresses the
phase space of the incident photons, and amplifies them ? a Light Amplifier
Compressor (LAC) tube. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technology is based on proven
techniques used in image intensifiers, and on the experience of a pre-prototype
already constructed by the proposers. Photoelectrons are accelerated to a
phosphor screen, and the resulting light is collected by wavelength-shifting
(WLS) optical fibers. Because the photoelectron trajectories at the phosphor
screen are not critical, high collection efficiency and nearly isochronous
photoelectron arrivals result. Two configurations are considered, one with a
planar photocathode, proximity focused to a planar phosphor screen anode, and
readout by WLS fibers behind the screen. The other is a cylindrical
photocathode, radially focused onto a much smaller cylindrical hollow coaxial
phosphor anode, readout by WLS fibers coaxially inserted into the center of the
anode cylinder. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Compared with spherical-type PMTs, the
vacuum volume for a comparable photocathode area is much reduced, and the vacuum
envelope is amenable to much higher external pressures. For a mega-tonne-class
neutrino or nucleon decay detector, a 20-30 cm diameter by 1-2 m long
cylindrical Optical Compressor Amplifier might be contemplated, readout by a
pair of mm diameter pixel detectors, with ~40 cm spatial resolution along the
axis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts include photon detection
applications where low power and/or compactness are essential at the site of
detection. Such applications include space and satellite applications, CT
scanners, gamma cameras, and fluorescence instruments. At least six students are
anticipated to participate in this work. It is also likely that if successful,
companies that work in electro-optics will use the technology for a variety of
applications. &lt;br/&gt;