* 0810057
* Collaborative Research:  Community Organization in the Casas Grandes Core Zone
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Michael Whalen, University of Tulsa
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2011
* USD 83,588.00

Casas Grandes, located in northwestern Chihuahua, Mexico, is one of the largest
and most elaborate of prehistoric pueblo communities. It contains a unique
combination of pueblo-style housing and ceremonial architecture, including ball
courts and platform mounds, from Mesoamerica. During its peak in the Medio
period (ca. A.D. 1200-1450), Casas Grandes was the primate center of its region
and a focal point of the extensive interaction between the U.S. Southwest and
Mesoamerica. Excavations at Casas Grandes provide a good picture of the
community, but there never has been much study of neighboring communities.
Accordingly, most details of the size, structure, level of centralization, and
mode of organization of the Casas Grandes polity remained
obscure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With National Science Foundation support, Dr.
Michael E. Whalen and Paul E. Minnis are attempting to remedy this situation by
their long-term study of the neighbors of Casas Grandes. In the present project,
two seasons of excavation and one of analysis of the recovered materials will be
carried out at site 315. The site lies about 2 km from Casas Grandes, within
what is defined as the Core Zone. Earlier studies indicate that this was the
zone of maximum interaction and integration around the primate center. There are
two things that need to be clarified about site 315. The first is the
occupational history of the community. One alternative is that the larger Core
Zone communities diminished as Casas Grandes rose to its peak. The other is that
large, near settlements were contemporary with the apogee of the primate center.
These two scenarios require very different organizational models. This leads to
the second question: what level of community complexity did site 315 maintain?
The authors' previous work in the region provides a well-tested strategy that
uses archaeological data to monitor levels of community complexity across time.
All of these questions bear on the question of how and to what extent the
primate center organized its nearest neighbors of the Core Zone. This poorly
understood issue is a limiting condition on the level of complexity of all the
rest of the regional system's structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
significant not only in a regional context, but in terms of general theory.
Casas Grandes is widely agreed to have been one of the few complex societies to
develop north of Mesoamerica. However, its rise, mode of organization, and
decline still are so incompletely understood that it plays almost no role in
discussions of sociopolitical evolutionary processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project has several public impacts. First, it promotes training of students in
archaeological field and laboratory research methods, and it provides continued
opportunities for students to pursue research topics for theses and
dissertations. These opportunities are extended to Mexican students as well as
to those from North America. Second, the project and others like it
significantly enhance the infrastructure for research in northwest Mexico by
increasing contact and interaction between North American and Mexican
archaeologists and by raising the visibility of the national patrimony for the
citizens of this part of Mexico.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;