* 0810976
* ADVANCE IT Start Award:  Investigation of the Reasons for Participation &amp; Advancement of Women in Academic Science &amp; Engineering Careers at California Polytechnic State Uni
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2008,10/31/2010
* Nilgun Sungar, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Beth Mitchneck
* 10/31/2010
* USD 199,943.00

The overall objective of this IT Start proposal is to gather information that
will enable us to devise a comprehensive plan to support and empower the growing
number of female STEM faculty at California Polytechnic State University, San
Luis Obispo. Our goal is to develop an effective plan for institutional
transformation that is data-driven, institution specific, and broadly
sustainable. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cal Poly is a predominantly undergraduate,
comprehensive institution with an enrollment of approximately 18,700 students,
the vast majority of whom are in technical fields. Nationally, Cal Poly plays a
major role in STEM education, graduating the largest cohort of engineering
degrees of any non-PhD granting institution in the country last year (974 BS
degrees); many Cal Poly STEM department and programs are nationally ranked. Yet
despite a reputation for excellence, the university does not successfully retain
a diverse student body, especially in engineering: while the national average
for undergraduate women in engineering is 17.2%, Cal Poly only enrolls 14%
women. As part of its mission to prepare the scientific and technical leaders of
the twenty-first century, Cal Poly is committed to increasing the diversity of
STEM faculty. A diverse faculty will create a more welcoming climate and
transform the experiences of Cal Poly students who study in STEM areas. And,
given the prominence of Cal Poly in many technical fields, effectively
supporting our female STEM faculty will have broad impact on diversity within
the STEM disciplines nationwide, as well. The absence of significant diversity
among STEM faculty has been an ongoing challenge for Cal Poly. However, the
institution has lacked the resources needed to systemically address those
concerns. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several factors make this the ideal time to
assess our institution and design a plan for sustainable change. The leadership
is dedicated to comprehensive transformation and has committed resources to
support this assessment project. Additionally, current university-wide
preparations for reaccreditation are strongly focused on campus diversity and
will provide opportunities for institutional self-study. Moreover, waves of
faculty retirements are in progress and will continue: 46% of the tenured
faculty are over 55 years of age. It is urgent that we understand how to support
the retention and leadership development of the many new female STEM faculty
that recently have been (and will be) hired. This is the right moment to design
and implement institutional changes that will transform Cal Poly into a
polytechnic university that attracts and retains diverse faculty and students.
[Broader Impact]&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our current plan has merit because it
identifies and utilizes the expertise of key faculty, engages the institution at
every level, and is supported by executive administrators, college leaders, and
the leaders of faculty-lead initiatives, both in principle and by allocation of
resources. We have three central goals: 1) Develop and refine an institutional
infrastructure that will administer our assessment efforts and coordinate
existing climate-related initiatives. 2) Assess the current status of women STEM
faculty at Cal Poly. 3) Establish "institutional mentoring" relationships with
existing ADVANCE institutions. [Intellectual Merit]