* 0810879
* CPA-SEL:    Automated Quality Prediction:    Exploiting Knowledge of the Business Case
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2012
* Bojan Cukic, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 05/31/2012
* USD 350,000.00

Proposal Number: NSF Proposal 0810879&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Automatic
Quality Assessment: Exploiting Knowledge of the Business
Case&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PIs: Tim Menzies, Bojan
Cukic&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fault prediction models are very useful, as they
allow software project managers to guide the allocation of quality assurance
resources to artifacts which need them the most. Recent results now indicate
that this research area has reached its limits. All data miners hit a
performance ceiling effect when they cannot &amp;#64257;nd additional
information that better relates software quality measures with fault occurrence.
To build better quality predictors that break through ceiling effects, more
topology must be introduced into the search space. Standard machine learning
algorithms lack the business knowledge which characterizes software projects. To
add that business knowledge, it is proposed to investigate which business level
project concerns will be the most promising so they can provide guidance for
automated fault prediction models. Human-in-the-loop rule elicitation and
maintenance environments will be combined with automated rule
inference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is expected that this approach will allow
software managers to safely focus on the application of quality assurance
techniques of choice, confident that automated quality predictors will raise
alerts about the artifacts in which quality issues actually exist.&lt;br/&gt;