* 0810209
* Elasticity of Pyrope-Almandine-Grossular Garnet Solid Solution Series at High Pressure and Temperature using Ultrasonic Interferometry in Conjunction with Synchrotron Radiation.
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2013
* Gabriel Gwanmesia, Delaware State University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 07/31/2013
* USD 379,066.00

The deepest drilling into the interior of the Earth is limited to less than 15
km. Consequently, the bulk of its interior is inaccessible to direct sampling,
and its structure and mineralogical composition can only be inferred using
indirect evidence. Efforts to understand the mineralogy of the Earth?s mantle
have combined information from several different fields including seismology,
petrology and geochemistry, but the most direct information about the physical
structure of the Earth?s deep interior comes from seismology which provides
information about variation of the elastic wave velocity and density as a
function of depth. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Seismic studies have provided models
that show rapid increases (velocity jumps or discontinuities) in the seismic
waves at 410 to 660 km depths in the Earth and unusually steep velocity
gradients in the region between the discontinuities, called the transition zone.
Experimental petrological studies of minerals of the upper mantle show that they
transform to high-pressure forms at the pressure and temperature conditions of
the transition zone. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular pyroxene, one of the
dominant upper mantle minerals in basaltic and peridotitic rocks transforms into
the garnet structure at pressure and temperature conditions of the lower regions
of the upper mantle and transition zone. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research
program, we propose to systematically measure the pressure and temperature
dependence of the elastic properties of the pyrope (Mg3Al2Si3O12?Py) - almandine
(Fe3Al2Si3O12-Alm)-grossular (Ca3Al2Si3O12-Gr) solid solutions. We will conduct
these experimental studies using specimens synthesized in the Stony Brook High
Pressure Laboratory, the techniques of ultrasonic interferometry, and in
conjunction with the synchrotron X-ray facilities at the National Synchrotron
Light Source of the Brookhaven National Laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;