* 0810703
* SBIR Phase I:  Knowledge Discovery based on Personal Web Content Annotation
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2008,03/31/2009
* Victor Karkar, skribel, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 03/31/2009
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to demonstrate the
feasibility of an intelligent recommendation system based on users? personal
online research annotations. A combination of three key characteristics makes
this system novel. First is the use personal Web page annotations (highlights,
comments in notes, etc.) to understand users? information needs. Second is
social recommendation based on the personal Web page annotations of related
users with shared research interests. Third is the integration of recommended
content directly into users? normal reading and information gathering behavior.
Taken together, these qualities of the proposed system represent a significant
advance in knowledge discovery.

The broader impact of this project consists of a contribution to research and
education by saving time, cost and frustration for institutions and individuals
seeking information online for any project. While researching online, users wish
to take notes to enforce their understanding of what they read. In the absence
of adequate online annotation tools, they print important Web pages to annotate
them by pen. Switching from the interactive, networked Web environment to the
static, disconnected medium of paper presents two limitations. First is the
inability to leverage this research to identify and pull related content. Second
is the inaccessibility of the researched content to others with shared research
interests such as professional colleagues. The proposed research leverages a
powerful web annotation system under development that allows users to directly
annotate Web pages and thereby eliminates the need to print. The proposed
recommendation system will analyze users? annotations and suggest related Web
pages, thereby saving the time, cost and frustration experienced by students,
scientists, business analysts and others who aggregate online information.