* 0810223
* Computer Simulations of Phase Transitions
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2013
* David Landau, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2013
* USD 288,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education in the use of state-of-the-art computer simulations. The research
complements traditional theoretical and experimental approaches in the study of
challenging problems in statistical physics that involve phase transitions. The
program of research is diverse in scope, broadly developing methods to study
phase transitions in systems that cannot be treated analytically. The methods
used include Monte Carlo and Spin Dynamics simulations and these employ
sophisticated software packages are being enhanced by the research group. This
is part of a significant effort in the ongoing exploration and development and
refinement of new large-scale simulation methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
diverse set of physical systems are examined with particularly attention to
those with relevance to magnetic materials, growing films, polymers, and
proteins. Both static and dynamic critical phenomena for systems in equilibrium
are examined, and this includes simple non-equilibrium models related to film
growth and superionic diffusion (driven diffusive systems). Monte Carlo
simulations are used to explore models with coupled magnetic and elastic degrees
of freedom, lattice systems with geometric frustration (a physical system with
intrinsic local frustration between magnetic spins on a pyrochlore lattice) or
competing interactions, and systems with finite geometries and associated
boundaries. The resulting behavior, which is fundamentally different than that
which is found in the bulk, is a primary motivator of the research. Spin
dynamics simulations are also used to explore dynamic phenomena for systems in
equilibrium. Nonequilibrium behavior is examined in models related to film
growth and superionic diffusion is studied using Monte Carlo and Kinetic Monte
Carlo methods. The results are compared with those from theory and experiment.
The combination of the discovery and explanation of the phase transition
behavior and possible new universality classes together with the anticipated
methodological developments forms a coherent activity with substantive
intellectual substance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effort undertaken has broader
impacts with both scientific and educational consequences. There are many
analogous phenomena in other fields, and the understanding of those systems will
also be enhanced. For example, the problem of protein folding has much in
common, e.g. a rough ?energy landscape?, with magnetic models with frustration.
Many of the algorithmic implementations and advances have applicability to a
wide range of simulations in different areas. In many sub-areas of investigation
(including chemistry, biochemistry, and statistics) the improvements in Wang-
Landau sampling are broadly applicable. The research provides training of
graduate students in a broad range of computer simulation methods and enables
them to pursue scientific careers in multiple related fields. The Center for
Simulational Physics where this work is carried out has an excellent record of
educating graduate students from other institutions as well as those from The
University of Georgia. The annual Workshop hosted by the Center continues to
provide a forum for exchange of ideas and
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports research and education in the use of state-of-the-art computer
simulations. The research complements traditional theoretical and experimental
approaches in the study of challenging problems in statistical physics that
involve phase transitions. The program of research is diverse in scope, broadly
developing methods to study phase transitions in systems that cannot be treated
analytically. The methods employ sophisticated software packages are being
enhanced by the research group. This is part of a significant effort in the
ongoing exploration and development and refinement of new large-scale computer
simulation methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A diverse set of physical systems are
examined with particularly attention to those with relevance to magnetic
materials, growing films, polymers, and proteins. Both static and dynamic
phenomena for systems in equilibrium are examined, and this includes simple non-
equilibrium models related to film growth and driven diffusive systems. Computer
simulations are used to explore models of systems with finite geometries and
associated boundaries. The resulting behavior, which is fundamentally different
than that which is found in the bulk, is a primary motivator of the research.
The results are compared with those from theory and experiment. The combination
of the discovery and explanation of the phase transition behavior and possible
new phase transitions together with the anticipated methodological developments
forms a coherent activity with substantive intellectual
substance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effort undertaken has broader impacts with
both scientific and educational consequences. There are many analogous phenomena
in other fields, and the understanding of those systems will also be enhanced.
For example, the problem of protein folding has much in common with magnetic
models studied. Many of the advances in computer simulation methods have
applicability to a wide range of simulations in different areas. In many sub-
areas of investigation (including chemistry, biochemistry, and statistics) the
improvements are certainly applicable. The research provides training of
graduate students in a broad range of computer simulation methods and enables
them to pursue scientific careers in multiple related fields. The Center for
Simulational Physics where this work is carried out has an excellent record of
educating graduate students from other institutions as well as those from The
University of Georgia. The annual Workshop hosted by the Center continues to
provide a forum for exchange of ideas and information.&lt;br/&gt;