* 0810158
* High-Performance Computing to Evaluate Hierarchical Heterogeneity Paradigms in Sedimentary Aquifer Systems
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2013
* Robert Ritzi, Wright State University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 06/30/2013
* USD 299,978.00

The scaling of processes governing ground-water flow and mass transport in the
near subsurface is being linked to the hierarchical sedimentary architecture
found within geo-reservoirs. The PIs have developed a code that generates three-
dimensional models that represent the heterogeneity of hydrogeologic attributes
arising from hierarchical sedimentary architecture in braid-belt deposits. The
sedimentary architecture represented ranges in scale from centimeters to
kilometers. This architecture does not represent all deposits, aquifers, or
reservoirs, but it does represent important ones, including the Fortymile Wash
alluvium at Yucca Mountain, glaciofuvial aquifers in the northern United States,
the Ringold Formation at the Hanford site, and the Ivishak Formation, an Alaskan
north-slope petroleum reservoir. The model is not meant to represent any one
site exactly, but to represent important aspects of heterogeneity common to many
sites. The full model represents a domain 2.5 km by 2.5 km by 10 m thick with
voxels of 1 cubic centimeter on a 62.5 trillion-voxel lattice. While parts of
the domain have been created on desktop workstations, we are currently
collaborating with scientists at the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
(PNNL) to generate the full 62.5 trillion node domain using the high performance
supercomputer located at the Environmental Molecular Sciences Laboratory (EMSL)
at PNNL. The full model domain will be freely distributed to the research
community as a resource for testing ideas related to the upscaling problem, the
inverse problem, and for other computational research requiring high-resolution
grids. In our work, we are generating simulations to test the hypothesis that
the percolation of highly permeable open-framework gravels must be understood
not only from their proportions and geometry, but also from the proportions,
geometry, and spatial distribution of the strata at multiple scales (unit bars,
compound bars, channel fills, etc.). Furthermore, we are generating numerical
transport simulations to test the hypothesis that solutions to upscaling
problems may require accounting for the presence of percolation, as well as the
hierarchy of unit types defined at different scales. If successful, the full
model domain and numerical tracer tests will be freely distributed to the
research community. Thus, the research will promote the testing of emerging
ideas in computational research on ground water flow and transport. The
hypotheses we will test using these models are relevant to heterogeneity and
upscaling issues in environmental cleanup and to enhanced petroleum recovery.
The project also benefits human resources and education in science and
engineering through the training of a post-doctoral scholar in the areas of
high-performance computing, hydrogeology, and sedimentology, and through
mentoring from university and national laboratory scientists.