* 0810088
* oCollaborative Research: Rock Friction, Nanoindentation, and Atomic Force Microscope Experiments Focused on Understanding Earthquake Mechanics
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2010
* Robert Carpick, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2010
* USD 191,648.00

Significance and importance of the project. The initiation of earthquakes on
faults in the Earth?s crust is controlled, incredibly, by physical processes
that occur at microscopic contacts between rough surfaces of rock that touch
along the fault. Despite the success of empirical friction equations in
describing the results of laboratory friction experiments and producing a
variety of earthquake-related phenomena in computer models of earthquakes, these
equations lack a physical basis. That is, the precise identity and nature of the
physical mechanisms that occur at microscopic contacts, and give rise to the
observed friction effects in experiments, remain unknown. The empirical nature
of the descriptions reflects the difficulty of isolating and studying the
physical processes at microscopic fault contacts. Without a sound physical
understanding, we remain limited in our abilities to reliably apply the
equations to earthquakes in nature, to obtain a better general understanding of
the earthquake process, and to ultimately make reliable predictions of
earthquakes. In this transformative study, we will make use of state-of-the-art
materials science testing methods, namely atomic force microscopy and
Nanoindentation, to provide a physical basis for friction observations at a
coarser scale and thereby gain a much improved understanding of the earthquake
process. This work may allow us to learn whether we are likely to be able to
detect accelerating creep on faults just prior to an earthquake and thereby
predict earthquakes days to hours before an earthquake, which would save many
lives and mitigate damages to the built environment. From the perspective of the
scientific fields of mechanics and materials science, these new insights, gained
by identifying and connecting frictional behavior across many length scales,
have potential application well beyond geophysics, for example, in many
engineered systems, including silicon-based micromechanical devices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description. The overarching goals of the
proposed studies are to isolate and identify the physical mechanisms that occur
at asperity contacts at frictional interfaces. A more specific major goal of our
study is to understand the origin of the friction state ?evolution? effect in
rate and state friction, the simplest manifestation of which is an increase in
?static? friction with the time of quasi-stationary contact. To that end, we
will conduct a coordinated, interdisciplinary collaboration that will employ
laboratory experiments that investigate frictional phenomena over a wide range
of length scales. One outcome will be to develop constitutive equations that
will allow extrapolation of these mechanisms to the elevated temperatures and
longer times relevant for earthquakes. We will perform macro-scale friction
experiments on rocks at Brown University, micro-scale to nano-scale indentation
creep, adhesion, and friction experiments in the Nanoindenters at Oak Ridge
National Laboratory, and nano-scale adhesion and friction experiments in atomic
force microscopes at the University of Pennsylvania. To make connections between
the different types of experiments and to isolate different origins of the state
evolution effect, we will vary the same environmental conditions in all three
sets of experiments. These include tests as a function of humidity, pH (in
liquid), and temperature. All three environmental factors have been demonstrated
to influence the evolution effect in macroscopic rock friction experiments.
Nanoindentation and AFM measurements should allow us to determine the processes
on an asperity scale responsible for the macroscopic behavior. &lt;br/&gt;