* 0810029
* SBIR Phase I:  Active Device for Reliable Cleaning of Feeding Tubes
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Roger Bagwell, Actuated Medical, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2009
* USD 149,998.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop the Tube-
Clear device to remove clots from feeding tubes. In excess of 411,000 people
receive feeding tubes annually in the United States. Feeding tubes become a
requirement when critically ill and compromised patients lose the ability to
swallow, but still need nutrients or medication. Clogging is a significant
problem in the treatment of these patients, leading to time without nutrients or
medication. While several approaches exist for clot removal, none are 100%
successful, and when they fail, an uncomfortable and expensive process is
required to replace the tube. Existing processes for cleaning feeding tubes can
be time consuming, even when they succeed. With the aging population, a more
reliable device to remove clots becomes critical. This SBIR Phase I program will
develop the Tube-Clear, an activated device, to pass into a feeding tube and
break up food clots, quickly and reliably, without removing or damaging the
feeding tube. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Tube-Clear will ease the burden on
nursing staff and patients dealing with the frustration of clogged feeding
tubes. The anticipated selling price would be $35 with a reusable control unit
selling for $300. Anticipated volume would be 2,000 per year. The effect of
pricing on market acceptance will be studied in more detail in Phase II. In
addition to the market for cleaning feeding tubes, PRII believes our technology
can be extended to cleaning of other medical devices and tubes, such as
catheters and endoscopes for Minimally Invasive Surgery (MIS) and drain tubes.
Markets for these devices are in the hundreds of thousands to millions of units
per year. Nursing experts have expressed that the Tube-Clear device would be a
significant advance in dealing with clogged feeding tubes.&lt;br/&gt;