* 0810474
* SBIR Phase I:  High Throughput Screening of Multivalent Drugs and Nanomedicine
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2008,05/31/2009
* Athena Guo, MICROSURFACES INC
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 05/31/2009
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project develops cell membrane
mimetic-microarrays for high-throughput screening and analysis of multivalent
drug candidates, particularly nanomedicine. Traditional drugs based on mono-
valent and high-affinity interactions can lead to non-specific side effects and
toxicity. Advances in synthetic and processing techniques for nanoparticles
(inorganic, organic, dendrimer, polymer, liposomes, and etc.) have made
available an increasing library of drug candidates that incorporate multivalent
surface functionalities for targeting specific cells. The proposed cell membrane
mimicking microarrays will be based on an air-stable and fluidic supported lipid
bilayer system; the robustness of the proposed membrane microarrays greatly
simplifies manufacturing, product distribution, and usage. This product will be
of high value to pharmaceutical companies and research institutions that are
involved in multivalent and nanomedicine development as well as fundamental
research on cell-cell interactions.

The broader impacts of this research are contributions to drug development and
human health. Nanomedicine is a $7 billion market today and growing at double
digits annually. While pharmaceutical companies, biotech startups, and academic
laboratories are actively developing nanoparticle-based therapies, there are no
products that provide high-throughput analysis of these potential drug
candidates. The proposed research will allow development of a superior product
to meet the needs for large-scale screening of multivalent drug candidates and,
in return, accelerate the development of nanomedicine.