* 0810913
* Further Study of Hierarchical Reconstruction Algorithms
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Yingjie Liu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2012
* USD 167,780.00

High resolution capturing schemes for solving conservation laws, e.g., the ENO
scheme, smear discontinuities within a few mesh cells and achieve high accuracy
where the solution is smooth. A series of works by Cockburn and Shu et al. on
discontinuous Galerkin (DG) methods and local DG introduce many new techniques
to the DG family and enable it to solve a broader class of equations including
conservation laws. Still, the limiting technique for DG is not very mature and
is considered to be one of the major open problems in scientific computing. The
investigator and his colleagues propose the further study of a new limiting
technique, the hierarchical reconstruction (HR). It is a general reconstruction
procedure used as a limiter to remove spurious oscillations in the presence of
shocks. The HR algorithm, motivated by the moment limiter of Biswas, Devine and
Flaherty (1994), involves only a MUSCL, a second order ENO or other piecewise
linear reconstructions in each stage of a multi-layer reconstruction process
without characteristic decomposition. Therefore it is compact and easy to
implement for arbitrary meshes. It does not truncate higher degree terms of a
polynomial and actually uses the information from all degree terms. It has been
proved that HR does not reduce the approximation order of a polynomial.
Moreover, HR can be used for finite volume and central schemes as well without
characteristic decomposition, which leads to a new finite volume approach. The
investigator and his colleagues also propose the study of the local constant
velocity version of the back and forth error compensation and correction method
(BFECC) for velocity advections in multi-phase fluid simulation, BFECC for
moving meshes and for interpolation between grids. Adapting HR to BFECC wherever
necessary could significantly improve the robustness of BFECC for non-smooth
solution.

This project is on the study and development of new methods for using computers
to simulate certain natural phenomena such as airflow passing a wing, shock
waves propagating in a body, smokes etc. Computer simulations help scientists
and engineers testing various experimental configurations and product designs
without conducting costly experiments. Nowadays a lot of special effects in
Hollywood movies are made by computer simulation. The BFECC method co-developed
by the principal investigator has been used by NVIDIA for smoke simulation,
http://developer.download.nvidia.com/SDK/10/direct3d/Source/Smoke/doc/Smoke.wmv.
However, computer simulation is a noisy process. Noises constantly come from
machine errors, and from the non-smoothness of simulated objects, such as
shocks, corners of boundaries, interfaces separating different fluids or tissues
in a body etc. Without special techniques, simulation noises caused by shocks
can easily destroy a simulation result. In fact, two of the fundamental
challenges for developing computational methods are to reduce simulation time
and noises from the non-smoothness of simulated objects. The investigator and
his colleagues study a new method for removing noise, which is easier to use for
complex geometry and less dependent on simulated objects. Preliminary results
for simulations of shocks are encouraging. The new idea could be adapted to many
other areas and motivate the development of improved computational methods. For
example, it could allow a complicated aircraft shape to be simulated more
easily, motivate more robust techniques to stabilize simulations of multi-phase
fluids, fuel cells etc and provide a black-box de-noising tool for simulations
whose underlying physics are more empirical.