* 0810003
* Molecular Nanopolaritonics
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Daniel Neuhauser, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 07/31/2012
* USD 420,000.00

Daniel Neuhauser of UCLA is supported by an award from the Theoretical and
Computational Chemistry program for work to develop a theoretical methodology to
understand molecular nanopolaritonics. The project is intended to unify the
treatment of radiation and matter in such a way as to efficiently and accurately
describe systems of arbitrary physical geometry and electronic structure. Prior
to this reseach, combined plasmon-matter studies typically utilized multipole
mode expansions on the plasmon-carrying structure, which although simple, are
unable to accurately capture arbitrary geometries or field singularities. Using
TDDFT for the whole system, on the other hand, is prohibitively expensive
computationally. The PI is, thus, extending previous simulations, both in terms
of method used and applications chosen for testing those methods. The research
starts with FDTD-type algorithms (to be modified for near-field applications),
and continues on to discrete-dipole studies, and finally implements embedding
formalisms using Hydrodynamic Tensor DFT. The molecular part is being described
by a real-time TDDFT algorithm, and treated non-linearly as to capture the
multiharmonic and frequency mixing characteristics of the system.

The drive towards ever smaller scales for radiation features has led to the new
field of plasmonics in which light transport along metal nanoparticle arrays and
waveguides is studied at distances as small as a few nanometers (nm). At the
same time, electronic structure calculations have also reached the nm size
scale, so that the distinction between radiation and matter scale is being
blurred out. This has led to a variety of studies where dipolar emission
coupling of a few plasmons and excitons are considered, with interesting
resonance, field- and spatial-dependence and more. Matter-radiation on the
nanoscale (nanopolaritonics in short) is now ripe for a realistic description of
both near-field radiation and molecules. The PI and his group are merging
Maxwell's near-field description with modern studies of electronic dynamics, to
simulate combined matter-radiation (plasmon-exciton, i.e., polariton) systems on
the nanoscale. Some applications being considered are: gating of radiation
transfer, specifically in large scale plasmonic systems with birefringence
effects, including questions about whether molecules can control these systems,
an application with possible use in imaging; nonlinear selective microscopy on
the nanoscale -- a field with potentially huge impact for sensing applications
from engineering to medicine; conversion of electromagnetic near-field energy to
physical motion on the nanoscale, which will have practical importance in any
field requiring motion control; photovoltaics where plasmons are hoped to reduce
absorber sizes; matching of near and far fields, which could conceivably be
affected by molecular motion; and the development of plasmon logic circuits .