* 0810332
* Cone-Forming Explosive Eruptions of Basalt Magma: Etna, Kilauea, Stromboli
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2008,10/31/2012
* Sarah Fagents, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 10/31/2012
* USD 295,460.00

Kilauea has produced eruptions with high fountaining (&gt;400m) activity in
1959, 1960, 1969(-1974) and 1983-1986(-2007) as well as other summit (1971,
1974, 1982) and flank eruptions characterized by low fountaining activity. This
study considers the eruption dynamics and products of the best-documented
examples of these eruptive episodes. The immediate goal is to develop integrated
models for the full range of styles and intensities of Hawaiian explosive
volcanism, making it possible to compare activity there with other well
documented Strombolian and basaltic subplinian eruptions and to create a new
self-consistent classification for their pyroclastic products. The work will be
divided into six sub-projects as follows: re-analysis of movie/video footage,
new isopach and stratigraphic studies, grain size/componentry, microtextures,
pre-eruptive volatile analysis, magma rheology and
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: This work will expand
understanding of how basaltic systems erupt in Hawaiian (and Strombolian
fashion) and enhance classifications of these types of explosive events by using
the best documented recent examples from the volcano. His work is expected to
improve classification of less well-documented basaltic eruptions, where
eruptive style and intensity must be inferred from the pyroclastic deposits.
This work will ultimately aid in forecasting future explosive eruptions at
Kilauea and other analogous basaltic systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: An understanding of the factors promoting diversity of basaltic
explosive eruptions is of fundamental importance in order to improve prediction
of the behaviors of these volcanoes and to assess hazards of future explosive
events at basaltic volcanoes. Kilauea is the site of a large and growing
volcano-tourism operations and there is a public need both for better knowledge
of the volcano's behavior and improved forecasting of the likely course of
future eruptions. Results will be widely disseminated via the Internet using
linked web sites hosted by Hawaiian Volcano Observatory and University of
Hawaii. Additionally, the project will bring together one graduate and several
undergraduate students into research contact with a team of established
researchers comprising 4 sub-disciplines in volcanology.