* 0810933
* Collaborative LTREB: Experimental and Observational Studies of Mangrove Forest Structure and Gap Dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2007,09/30/2011
* Le Wang, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 09/30/2011
* USD 40,883.00

The proposed research continues a long-term investigation of regeneration in
mangrove forests on Panama's Caribbean coast. Mangrove forests are a dominant
vegetation type along tropical shorelines and are inhabited by a unique fauna
and flora that are often distributed in zones along the tidal gradient.
Mangroves also provide resources and services to humans, including nursery
grounds for harvested crustaceans and fishes, shoreline protection, and trapping
of sediments and pollutants carried in runoff from upland areas. They are now
among the most threatened of coastal habitats due to deforestation associated
with resource exploitation (e.g. aquaculture, mining) and development. In the
study area, mangrove forest structure and dynamics are the products of
regeneration across a mosaic of differently aged canopy gaps created by
lightning. This study employs long-term observations and field experiments to
identify the mechanisms that determine patterns of regeneration following
disturbance and the distributions of mangrove species along the tidal gradient.
This is one of the most comprehensive studies of mangrove community ecology ever
conducted. In addition to enhancing our general understanding of the
contributions of abiotic and biotic processes to forest dynamics, it is
providing vital information for predicting and remediating human-caused
alterations that endanger these valuable wetlands. The project provides research
experience to numerous university students, and supports the environmental
education program at Smithsonian's Galeta Marine Laboratory.