* 0810837
* International Human Dimensions Programme (IHDP): 2008-2010
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Andreas Rechkemmer, United Nations University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2011
* USD 750,000.00

Concerns about changes in the world's environment have led scientists from many
different nations to collaborate on a broad range of research and training
activities. Many of these activities are coordinated by one or more of major
international organizations, including the World Climate Research Program
(WCRP), which is overseen by the World Meteorological Organization; the
International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme (IGBP), which is overseen by the
International Council of Science (ICSU); and the International Human Dimensions
Programme on Global Environmental Change (IHDP), which is overseen by the
International Council of Science (ICSU) with cooperation from the International
Social Science Council (ISSC). The IHDP aims to provide international leadership
in framing, developing, and integrating social science research on global
environmental change and to promote the application of the key findings of this
research. IHDP's activities focus on development of themes for focused research
and long-term collaborative efforts. It addresses critical gaps in international
research on global change, including (1) the gap in contributions of the social,
economic and cognitive sciences; (2) the gap in capacity for international and
interdisciplinary collaboration in the area; and (3) the lack of coherent long-
term research strategies for policy-relevant research topics and enhanced
science-policy interaction. This award will provide support for the IHDP
Secretariat, which coordinates IHDP at the United National University in Bonn,
Germany. The IHDP Secretariat facilitates IHDP's Programme and implements the
strategic priorities. Its core functions encompass coordination of research
activities, capacity building, organization of major events and policy
dialogues, and dissemination of outcomes and results of IHDP activities. Core
support for the IHDP and its Secretariat is provided by NSF on behalf of
agencies participating in the multi-agency U.S. Climate Change Research Program.

Through support of the IHDP, a solid investment is made in the infrastructure
that fosters broader and deeper international, interdisciplinary collaborative
networks. This further strengthens scientific inquiry across a range of topics
and projects, thereby helping to enhance fundamental knowledge about very
important topics and issues. Through its capacity-building activities,
especially support for activities that education and involve more scientists
from developing nations, the IHDP also facilitates a strengthening and
diversification of the international scientific workforce.