* 0810313
* Relating Glacier-Generated Seismicity to Ice Motion, Basal Processes and Iceberg Calving
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2013
* Michael West, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 09/30/2013
* USD 733,639.00

Passive seismic methods form the core of this 3-year, multi-disciplinary
proposal designed to investigate temporal and spatial relationships between ice
motion, basal processes and iceberg calving at a rapidly changing tidewater
glacier. The proposed measurements will link glacier-generated seismic
signatures to physical glaciological processes. At present, glacier generated
waveforms are poorly understood. Understanding their source mechanisms could
advance knowledge of the dynamic mass balance of Earth?s cryosphere, as well as
improve models and understanding of glacier erosion and landscape evolution.
Preliminary results from a 1-year pilot study highlight the tidewater
glaciers&lt;br/&gt;of Icy Bay, Alaska as the regionally dominant source of
glacier-generated seismic energy. Icy Bay is the optimal study site because of
its highly dynamic glaciers, logistical simplicity and similarities with
disintegrating outlet glaciers in Greenland. Pilot study results show potential
to make use of long duration, high-resolution records of motion, seismicity and
changes in geometry in concert to develop quantitative proxies for glacier
erosion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will record seismic events
within a local network with dense&lt;br/&gt;station spacing, and simultaneously
observe 3-D ice displacement and glacier geometry changes. Iceberg calving and
basal processes are challenging to measure, and applying readily available and
highly developed seismic methods to these problems holds significant promise.
The proposal will support the collaboration of three early-career scientists
with multi-disciplinary backgrounds. Data from the experiments will be archived
at UNAVCO, IRIS, NSIDC and at the University of Alaska.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;and
iceberg calving flux