* 0810448
* The Southwest Archaeological Obsidian Project for the 21st Century
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2008,12/31/2009
* M. Steven Shackley, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2009
* USD 105,467.00

Professor Steven Shackley directs the Geoarchaeological XRF Laboratory at the
University of California, Berkeley, currently partly supported by National
Science Foundation funding. This is an extension of a project begun over 25
years ago, and has been constantly developing over that time. He, and his
graduate student colleagues use the laboratory's x-ray fluorescence (XRF)
facilities to train students in geoarchaeological science. For the last 18 years
Shackley and his students through fieldwork at sources of obsidian throughout
the North American Southwest have produced the most comprehensive database of
obsidian sources anywhere that is used by researchers worldwide (see
http://www.swxrflab.net/swobsrcs.htm). This is the most comprehensive obsidian
source database in the world. The team typically analyzes hundreds to thousands
of artifacts each year from academic, private sector, and government agencies.
Obsidian was such a valuable stone material it was traded from sources in Nevada
all the way to New Jersey in prehistory. The current project has two main foci:
1) to relocate and sample a number of sources that are important in
understanding Southwest prehistory, but were collected 20 to 25 years ago with
methods not as advanced as today, characterize their trace element signatures,
and add them to the database; and 2) develop an online searchable database for
all the hundreds of reports of the archaeological and geological obsidian
projects conducted since 1985. With this database and the current online
obsidian source database, anyone, anywhere will be able to compile and create
research on the obsidian sources and reports in the North American Southwest.

Students are currently analyzing obsidian artifacts from Paleoindian sites (ca.
10,000-15,000 years old) in the Middle Rio Grande Valley of New Mexico, late
period artifacts from Nebraska, obsidian from Costa Rican and Ethiopian sites
(the latter are up to 1 million years old), pottery and porcelain fragments from
historic sites on the Berkeley campus, and many more. Broader impacts, are part
and parcel of the lab's work