* 0810648
* SBIR Phase I:  Spray-on Biological Soil Crusts for Arid Land Restoration
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Steven Paulsen, Conservation Seeding and Restoration, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Walters
* 06/30/2009
* USD 98,215.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I research project will
develop a process for spraying site sourced biological soil crusts (BSC)
inoculants onto degraded arid lands in order to facilitate more efficient
restoration. Environmental degradation due to energy exploration, environmental
disturbances (e.g. fire), and various land use practices (e.g. grazing) have
created conditions in the arid west region of the United States that are
increasingly difficult and exceedingly costly to restore with any permanence. To
avoid ecosystem collapse and desertification, federal regulatory agencies and
private industry are willing and obligated to restore these degraded lands.
Despite their critical ecological role in arid ecosystems, there are no
available methods or products for efficiently and affordably inoculating BSC
onto disturbed lands. To gauge the feasibility of spray-on inoculant delivery,
ecotype specific BSC organisms will be isolated, ex situ culture of BSC
organisms will be optimized, and the restoration potential of inoculants will be
tested under field-like conditions.

In the West, the need for a sustainable one time application of a product that
promotes native diversity while achieving soil stabilization and weed abatement
are of immediate concern. Over the course of the next decade, 100,000 oil and
gas wells are slated for construction on public lands across western states, of
which 51,000 will be drilled in Wyoming. Invasion of annual weeds and non-native
perennial grasses such as cheatgrass and crested wheatgrass have severely
altered western fire regimes. Consequently millions of acres burn each year.
Unfortunately, current technology is not able to effectively restore these
damaged lands. California recently experienced some of the most costly fires on
record. In Wyoming, the energy industry will spend $300 million to reclaim wells
over the next 10 years. Similar sums will be spent in Colorado, Utah, and New
Mexico. In 2007, the western states BLM will purchase 1.4 million pounds of seed
for restoration at an estimated cost of $50 million. Spray-on BSC has great
potential to meet the western U.S. restoration market's demand for improved
restoration technology.