* 0810782
* STTR Phase I: Integrated Powered Knee-Ankle Prosthetic System
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Dylan Fairbanks, Ekso Bionics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ian M. Bennett
* 06/30/2009
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I research project proposes
the development of the design features, sensory system and the control algorithm
of an integrated powered knee-ankle power regenerative prosthesis. Despite
significant advances in lower limb prosthetics over the past decade, all
presently commercially available lower limb prostheses incorporate passive ankle
joints. That is, the joints of the prostheses can either store or dissipate
energy, but cannot provide any net power over a gait cycle. The inability to
deliver joint power significantly impairs the ability of these prostheses to
restore many locomotive functions, including level walking, walking up stairs,
walking up slopes, running, and jumping, all of which require significant net
positive power at the knee joint, ankle joint, or both. The objective of this
proposal is to investigate the use of integrated powered knee and ankle joints
in transfemoral prostheses that use sensory information from the ground and the
wearer. The hypothesis is that a prosthesis with actively powered knee and ankle
joints will significantly enhance the mobility of transfemoral amputees while
walking on level grounds, as well as stairs and slopes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed work will result in new theoretical frameworks for both the control,
sensory system, and design of such systems. Major intellectual contributions
will include the design of power systems; development of the sensory system to
obtain information from the ground and from the user; the development of a
control framework for the interactive control of prostheses; and the development
of adaptive and robust controllers for impedance modulation during locomotion.
This project intends to create principles that provide significantly greater
functional capabilities for above-knee amputees. Specifically, the proposed work
will enable more natural, stable, and adaptable prostheses. These research
elements in this proposal will also form a foundation for powered orthotic
systems. Additional significant benefits of this work include fostering a
broader awareness and increased sensitivity of young engineers and educational
institutions to disability issues. Limb loss also affects a growing number of
military personnel serving in recent conflicts, as well as a far larger number
of veterans from previous wars.