* 0810299
* SBIR Phase I:  Knowledge Management Framework For High Growth Startups
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2008,12/31/2008
* Marco Rubin, Exoventure Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 12/31/2008
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is to develop a
framework designed to assist high tech entrepreneurs and angel investors in the
early formative processes of a venture. The framework combines application
software and tools structured and unstructured experimental databases, and a
collaborative networking infrastructure - a social network of entrepreneurs and
investors. Starting up a rapid growth technology company is a risky proposition.
Entrepreneurs jump into a high-pressure, high-stakes realm where decisions are
made using dynamic, imperfect information while aiming at a moving target. If a
framework could be developed to increase the success rate of such ventures, it
may have significant impact. The proposed framework is based on a: 1. software
model garnered from observation of thousands of live startups; 2. collaborative
network of entrepreneurs and investors who use social networking technologies to
distinguish winners from losers; 3. suite of data mining tools to compare one
startup?s experience with historical data. The project intends to develop a
software implementation of that model, which must be tested and refined using
company data.

If high-growth entrepreneurship is an engine of economic growth, the project's
immediate aim is to fine-tune that engine's performance, removing friction where
it currently exists. The framework seeks to increase startup success rates by
empowering the entrepreneur to make informed decisions. The effort also offers
investors the power of its framework to select the best projects, and later
monitor their progress. The predictive models and collaborative decision making
could help savvy investors improve their average ROI significantly.