* 0810038
* Collaborative research: Linking scales of geomorphology and solute transport in river corridors
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Douglas Jerolmack, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 09/30/2011
* USD 138,713.00

PIs: Aaron Packman (Northwestern University), Douglas Jerolmack (University of
Pennsylvania), Jud Harvey (U.S. Geological Survey)&lt;br/&gt;Overview: Solute
transport in rivers is a complex problem influenced by both hydrologic and
geomorphic dynamics. It is important to be able to predict the interactions of
hydrologic dynamics, geomorphic dynamics, and solute transport in order to
improve assessment of long-term average biogeochemical processing rates in river
systems. Stream-subsurface hydrologic interactions are modulated by surface
morphology and strongly affect solute transport in both streams and pore waters,
thereby controlling a very wide range of biogeochemical processes. Here we
propose to obtain a unique new data set encompassing observations of both
fluvial morphodynamics and solute transport in a sand-bed river subject to
frequent high-flow and sediment-transport events. We also propose to develop new
theory to allow scaling relationships previously observed in both geomorphology
and surface-groundwater interactions to be incorporated into a model for long-
term average solute transport in rivers. The model will be applied to the study
site by incorporating observed statistics of stream flow variations and channel
morphology, and will be tested using direct observations of both solute
penetration into the subsurface and net downstream solute transport averaged
over a range of time scales.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The intellectual
merit of this work lies in advancing fundamental understanding of the linkage
between stream hydrology, fluvial morphodynamics, surface-groundwater
interactions, and solute transport in rivers. This is an exceedingly complex
problem as it involves not only turbulent flow-boundary interactions, but also
sediment transport and pore fluid flow in the highly heterogeneous near-stream
environment. Here we will synthesize numerous recent observations and hypotheses
developed separately in hydrology and geomorphology in order to ascertain how
the linkage between flow dynamics and morphodynamics in rivers controls solute
transport over various spatial and temporal scales. While it is now generally
recognized that such synthesis needs to be done in order to assess the behavior
of environmental systems in an integrated fashion, such integration has rarely
been achieved in practice. By developing new theory that takes advantage of
commonality in geomorphic and hydrologic scaling relationships, we enable
explicit evaluation of the integrated process that control solute transport
dynamics over a variety of spatial and temporal scales in river
corridors.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The proposed effort will contribute very
broadly to environmental science and the associated management of water
resources and aquatic ecosystems. Further, through a variety of synergistic
activities we will also realize numerous broader impacts in human resource
development and in the scientific community at large. The project results will
provide significant, necessary capability to evaluate the migration of a wide
range of important solutes in river systems. There is a critical need for tools
that can be used to predict the linkage of morphological variations (e.g., land-
use changes) and long-term average transport behavior under variable hydrologic
forcing (natural flow variability and alternative climate change scenarios).
Therefore the project results can be expected to not only contribute detailed
understanding of river dynamics, but also to have very broad impacts in
supporting analysis of the migration and processing of carbon, nutrients,
contaminants, and a range of other important substances in river systems.
Essentially, the project efforts provide a critical step towards scientifically
based sustainable management of freshwater resources. We will further enhance
these general contributions by supporting the broader scientific community
working on these problems. We will archive the unique field data set that we
will acquire, and make it publicly available to other theoreticians and modelers
to facilitate broader development and testing of models for flow and transport
in river corridors. We will also facilitate scientific discourse, and
particularly synthesis of scientific results to address policy and management
questions, by convening multiple, directed interdisciplinary sessions at major
technical conferences, and by translating project results directly into the
broader Hydrologic Synthesis activity currently sponsored by NSF. Finally, we
will realize broad contributions to human resource development by training
numerous young investigators through this work, by engaging in synergistic and
collaborative international activity, and by using project results to further
our ongoing efforts to encourage pre-college students, and particularly students
from under-represented minorities, to enter careers in science