* 0810530
* SBIR Phase I:Multi-functional, Programmable LADAR using Photonics Arbitrary Waveform Generation
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2008,07/31/2009
* Benjamin Dingel, Nasfine Photonics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 07/31/2009
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase 1 project will investigate
the feasibility of a potentially disruptive, new Laser Ranging and Detection
(LADAR) sensor system with programmable, multi-waveform capability using an
emerging technology of Time-lens Pulse Generator (TLPG)?based Photonics
Arbitrary Waveform Generator (P-AWG) or TLPG?based P-AWG for short. In complete
contrast to traditional P-AWG, the proposed TLPG?based P-AWG does not consider
the functions of Optical Pulse Generator (OPG) and Arbitrary Waveform Generator
(AWG) blocks as separate per se. In fact, it generates the arbitrary optical
waveforms during the pulse generation itself (or in OPG) by using the time-lens
concept. This new TLPG?based PAWG architecture is a cost-effective and robust
since it uses Continuous Wave (CW) laser instead of expensive mode-locked lasers
(MLL) and/or supercontinuum (SC) sources. This translates to (i) simple set-up,
(ii) low optical insertion loss, (iv) compact size, and (v) most importantly
overall low-cost. The proposed innovation is a significant yet simple
modification of existing PAWG that has far-reaching significance. Phase 1 will
be limited to (i) developing model & inverse algorithm for calculating the
required RF data signal to generate 4 waveform shapes namely; square, triangle,
and impulse waveform, in TLPG?based PAWG, (ii) performing proof-of-concept
experiment for TLPG?based PAWG, and (iii) developing preliminary engineering
design of the highly resonant optical/microwave ring resonator unit.

If successful the result of this project will have broad commercial,
scientific, homeland security, military impact. This new high performance P-AWG-
based LADAR addresses the needs for new capabilities above and beyond what
conventional LADAR solutions can offer. The commercial applications include high
resolution (1) remote aerial mapping, ground surveying, and 3D-modeling for
urban planning, (2) autonomous vehicle navigation, machinery guidance and
collision avoidance for transportation safety and preventive systems, (3)
automated process control, quality control, monitoring and ranging for mobile
robot in manufacturing and industrial sites. In the scientific and homeland
security arena, this superior P-AWG-based LADAR can be used for global
climatology monitoring, environmental sensing, geographic surveying, chemical
and biological weapon detection to detect additional target characteristics as
well as operate effectively under challenging environmental conditions.
Furthermore, its increased resolution from tailored waveforms will aid in the
identification of unknown materials or structures. In addition this new smart
LADAR is a key subsystem in military applications such as: laser munitions
seekers, airborne reconnaissance, active/passive surveillance, anti-ship missile
tracking, targeting systems, and imaging sensors for manned/unmanned autonomous
robotic ground/air vehicles to name a few.