* 0810470
* SBIR Phase I: GABA-Mediated Nitrogen Efficiency
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2008,12/31/2008
* Frank Turano, Plant Sensory Systems, LLC.
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 12/31/2008
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I research aims to increase the
efficiency in which plants use nitrogen (N) and to enhance their tolerance to
water stress. The proposed project will introduce into oilseed plants a novel
pathway that will increase production of the amino acid, gamma-amino butyric
acid (GABA). GABA has been implicated in both N uptake and stress tolerance.
Research objectives include testing how the novel pathway affects plant size and
yield, as well as effects on seed viability and quality under limited N and
water stress conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The broader impacts of this
research are economic growth and environmental relief. Crop yield is directly
related to N use. However, of the N fertilizer applied to the fields, plants use
only a portion. Unutilized N runs off into rivers, lakes, and streams. N-based
fertilizers are a major cost in crop production. Thus plants that can achieve
high yield with significantly less N (i.e., increased N-use efficiency; NUE)
could significantly reduce crop-production costs and help protect the
environment while accommodating the growing demand for food, feed, fiber, and
biofuel. A 20% (modest) increase in NUE is estimated to have a global annual
savings of nearly $5 billion in cereal production alone. Weather changes also
affect crop-production costs and yield. Droughts have incurred global annual
crop losses of 5% to 30%. Plants with increased tolerance to drought could help
sustain agricultural production. The proposed technology has great commercial
potential in a market that is actively seeking crops with increased NUE and
value-added traits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;