* 0810984
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Maya Marketplaces: A New Perspective on Interpreting a Classic Period Plaza at Buenavista del Cayo, Belize
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2008,04/30/2009
* Jason Yaeger, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2009
* USD 15,000.00

Supervised by Dr. Jason Yaeger, Bernadette Cap will conduct archaeological
investigations and analysis of artifacts and soil samples collected at the
ancient Maya site of Buenavista del Cayo, Belize. Buenavista is a major center
located in the upper Belize River valley near the present bank of the Mopan
River. Work conducted by Joseph Ball and Jennifer Taschek has documented that
the site was first occupied around 960 BC and grew in size and importance from
AD 240-950 while serving as a local venue for regal-ritual and administrative
activities geared towards large audiences. Ms. Cap's research will address the
economic function of Buenavista by investigating one of the largest plaza spaces
at the site to determine if it served as a marketplace.

A marketplace is a specific location where people agree to meet at pre-set times
to exchange material goods. Because archaeologists cannot directly observe the
actual action of exchange between individuals they look for material traces that
reflect these exchanges, such as stalls with associated concentrations of
material goods. Some researchers have begun to search for indications of
marketplaces among the Maya but there still is no scholarly consensus as to
whether marketplaces existed between AD 240 and 950 in the Maya lowlands. It is
also unclear what their archaeological manifestations might be. Early
marketplace research initially focused on lines of evidence such as
architectural patterns to identify their existence and location but more recent
studies have started to examine artifact and soil chemical patterns to make
interpretations. This study attempts to refine the archaeological study of
prehistoric marketplaces further by developing empirically testable correlates
and using data recovery techniques focused on fine-grained analysis, including
microartifacts (those less than 4 mm) and microstratigraphy, not used in
previous marketplace studies.

The successful identification of an ancient Maya marketplace will permit an
understanding of how marketplaces were spatially organized, including patterns
of traffic flow, the types of goods exchanged, the spatial arrangement of
vendors of different kinds of goods, and the degree of stability in organization
over time. This new data will be important for the discovery of marketplaces at
other Maya sites but will also contribute to the debate on the degree to which
Maya economic systems were centralized. The presence of a marketplace at
Buenavista would imply a more centralized exchange system and potentially more
elite involvement in the distribution of goods, especially every-day goods, than
assumed by most Maya scholars.

This project also will have several broader impacts beyond the scientific realm.
First, the local Belizean community around Buenavista will benefit from this
project through employment and training opportunities. Presentations made by the
author within these communities and at the Belize Archaeological Conference,
held annually in Belize and attended by local and foreign archaeologists,
students and the general public, will help to build further understandings of
Belize's ancient Maya past. The results of this research also will be
disseminated to a wider audience through online publication of field reports,
publications in journals, and presentations at professional conferences.
Finally, this project will be working in conjunction with the University of
Wisconsin archaeological field school, thus offering American undergraduates
archaeological training and the opportunity to experience a different culture.

