* 0810763
* SBIR Phase I:  Biosensor Compatible Polymers for Use in a Commercial 3D Microdevice Printer
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Aaron Young, Auma Laboratories, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Maria Josephine Yuen
* 06/30/2009
* USD 119,242.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project addresses the
commercialization of a 3D microdevice printer for biosensing applications
through the development of highly efficient two-photon initiators of
Poly(dimethysiloxane)s (PDMS). The microdevice printer developed by Auma
Laboratories, LLC is based on two-photon direct-writing. The Auma Printer
diverges from current (non-commercial) direct-writing machines because it is
designed to pattern bio-specific materials from PDMS over areas up to 1000 mm2,
depths up to 10mm, and translate at many tens of centimeters/second. This size
and rate is required by the biosensor community where microfabrication on petri-
dishes, slides, inside microfluidic channels, etc. with submicron resolution is
desired. The structures generated by this technique are tunable polymeric
solids, made by scanning a focal volume through an optically addressable monomer
precursor. The technique is used to achieve better than 50 nanometers volumetric
resolution, and is capable of realizing 3D, functionalized polymeric solids in a
single processing step.

Aside from the profoundly unique applications of Two-Photon Direct-Writing (sub-
surface and single-step three-dimensional patterning of sensor materials), there
is also great potential to flat-out replace far costlier, time consuming, and
chemically toxic technologies currently used in polymer microdevice fabrication.
However, the list of compatible materials is currently devoid of any PDMS
systems. PDMS material has become popular for microfluidic applications during
the last decade because of its numerous advantages over silicon and glass. PDMS
is inexpensive, is optically transparent down to 230 nm, has very low
fluorescence, is gas permeable, and is water impermeable (for cell culturing).
By coupling novel two-photon initiators to PDMS systems, this work will have
tremendous impact throughout the biological/chemical sensor and medical
microdevice manufacturing communities.