* 0810134
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Geodetic measurements and mechanical models of rifting in onshore segments of mid-ocean ridges
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Kurt Feigl, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 08/31/2012
* USD 252,456.00

The research supported by this proposal is an international collaboration
between U.S. scientists from the University of Wisconsin and the University of
Alabama-Tuscaloosa and their Icelandic colleagues that is aimed at quantifying
the role of magmatism in accommodating spreading at mid-oceanic ridges. The
investigators are performing an impulse-response experiment, in which the
impulse is the injection of magma at the rift, and the response is the
deformation recorded by geodesic and seismological methods. The research focuses
on extension related to an intrusive event from the northern volcanic zone of
Krafla in Iceland in 1975-1984, where the width of the axial valley was
increased by several meters due to the intrusion of dikes, resulting in a
century?s worth of spreading at the long-term average rate of about two
centimeters per year. After the magma supply diminishes, the extension continues
over years or decades, and finally slows as the stresses relax. The research is
addressing the following questions: (1) What is the geometry of the magmatic
plumbing? (2) How does the magmatic pressure in the plumbing evolve with time?
(3) What are the material properties of the rift structure? Providing
quantitative answers to these questions requires answering a more fundamental
question: which constitutive relation (rheology) best describes the rock below
the lithosphere? Accordingly, the primary goal of the research is determining
the constitutive relations and rheologic properties governing rifting. The
research is contributing to the understanding of the mechanics of rifting at
mid-ocean ridges, a fundamental process in plate tectonics. The research is
fostering the training of a doctoral graduate student and is supporting the
research efforts of an early career scientist. Research results and the modeling
protocols developed during this study will be disseminated among the geological
community. From a societal standpoint, the research is leading to a broader
understanding of magmatic and seismological hazards associated with rifting
events. The research is supported by the Geophysics Program and Marine Geology
and Geophysics Programs.