* 0810978
* ADVANCE Institutional Transformation Award:  RU-FAIR- Rutgers University for Faculty Advancement and Institutional Re-imagination
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* Joan Bennett, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jessie Dearo
* 08/31/2014
* USD 3,870,028.00

The Rutgers University for Faculty Advancement and Institutional Re-imagination
(RU FAIR) project at Rutgers University, the State University of New Jersey,
will promote the participation and advancement of women in science, engineering,
and mathematics (SEM) on all three campuses of Rutgers University (Camden,
Newark and New Brunswick) through five interrelated initiatives: &lt;br/&gt;-
Recruitment and retention initiatives: Implement a targeted strategy for
increasing the number of women in general, and minority women in particular, on
the SEM faculty of Rutgers University, including skills training for search
committees (RU-InSTRIDE), leadership training for established faculty, and a
coordinated mentorship program. &lt;br/&gt;- Communication Initiatives: Enhance
communication among faculty within a geographically and structurally complex
multi-campus university. We will build on existing initiatives to enhance our
web presence and establish RU FAIR professorships within different schools and
campuses. We will give SEM faculty from different campuses more opportunities to
network. RU-FAIR professors will be selected by competitive application. The RU-
FAIR professors will work on the Recruitment and Retention, Networking and
Liaisons, and Visibility Initiatives. &lt;br/&gt;- Networking and Liaisons with
Women?s Programs Initiatives: Encourage interdisciplinary research across
schools and campuses and to work closely with the nationally acclaimed Rutgers
Institute for Women?s Leadership (IWL) to deliver leadership training, to
encourage research, and to develop interdisciplinary courses. &lt;br/&gt;-
Visibility Initiatives: Achieve greater visibility for our women faculty by
creating a bigger web presence, instituting a lecture series, nominating our
faculty members and postdoctoral associates for prestigious awards, and working
with the Rutgers Media Relations to generate increased press coverage for their
research accomplishments. &lt;br/&gt;- Family Initiatives: Bolster the resources
available for dual career families, families with children, and families caring
for elderly members. We will institute a dialogue among administrators, faculty,
and staff concerning what changes in current campus structure, tenure
regulations, and other policies would best accommodate the needs of families.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The project outcomes include: increased
recruitment of female and minority faculty; reduced attrition of women and
minority faculty; increased numbers of women promoted to full professor and
professor II; increased numbers of women rising to leadership positions in
either academic administration or areas of scholarly leadership; increases
faculty satisfaction by encouraging collaborative projects and creating
opportunities for science faculty to become involved in such projects,
especially in collaboration with faculty in the Institute for Women?s Leadership
or Women?s and Gender Studies; and increases visibility of female Rutgers SEM
faculty as measured by press coverage and awards received.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The project activities are based on
activities which have been implemented in other sites and adapted to the Rutgers
University campuses. In addition, by collecting data on the proposed programs,
evaluating their impact and disseminating project information to the scientific
and women?s and gender studies communities, this project will make a significant
contribution to understanding techniques and tactics that promote advancement
and retention of women scientists at a multi-campus university which has
geographically disperse campuses. &lt;br/&gt;