* 0810682
* STTR Phase I:  Light-Weight Bio-Based Nano-Enhanced SMC Formulations
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2008,12/31/2009
* Larry Dickinson, 3F, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 12/31/2009
* USD 178,125.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project shall utilize a
multi-organizational team with uniquely experienced and multi-disciplinary
personnel to demonstrate the feasibility of a new family of innovative sheet
molding compounds (SMCs) that are partially bio-based and have lower density
while having similar performance and cost. Kenaf natural fiber will be blended
with glass fiber and combined with commercially available soy-oil based resin
and select nano-materials to produce new SMC formulations that will be
manufactured and validated experimentally. Innovations include 1) chemistry
approaches to address the known problems of moisture absorption and strength
retention in natural fiber composites and 2) fiber processing methods that will
enable the use of standard fiber processing machines and existing SMC
manufacturing equipment. The new lighter weight SMCs will find initial
application in off-road farm equipment, automotive trunk floors, wheel wells and
other non surface-critical components that currently use metal or heavier SMCs.
Multiple companies who currently make SMCs and/or SMC components will license
the new material technology through the National Composite Centers (NCC) newly
forming SMC consortium. The development team, innovative materials combinations
and processing approach have been carefully selected to enable rapid
commercialization of the new technology once
demonstrated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Innovative materials and combinations of
materials have potential to provide cost-effective engineered materials systems
that provide significant weight savings for automotive structures, thus leading
to higher vehicle fuel economy. Additionally, the full or partial use of bio-
based renewable materials will reduce the consumption of and dependence on
petroleum based products. The exciting "green" aspect to this program will
assist NCC's educational mission as students have great interest in
environmental issues and the use of renewable resources to make a sustainable
environment. NCC's cooperative education program may be utilized in support of
the proposed work. Positive R&amp;D results may serve as the basis of setting up
conferences with high schools through NCC's multi-source video and
videoconferencing center. As a lead agency for the effort, NSF's funding of this
program will also support President Bush's American Competitiveness Initiative
whose goal is to "increase investments in research and development, strengthen
education, and encourage entrepreneurship" and enable America to "remain a
leader in science and technology." A focus of this research proposal is to
develop technology that will enable cost-effective US manufacture of materials
and components; thus supporting other "Made in America" type Federal
initiatives.