* 0810544
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of Design and Operational Criteria of Continuous Culture Hatchery Techniques for the Production of Brachionus rotundiformis (s-type) rotifers
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2008,04/30/2009
* Douglas Drennan, Aquaculture Systems Technologies, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 04/30/2009
* USD 75,393.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I research will deveop and
commercialize a robust, continuous culture production system for rotifers
(Brachionus rotundiformis; s-type). The inability to supply microalgal,
zooplankton and rotifers feeds cost-effectively and consistently continues to be
a major technological "bottleneck" in the expansion of the marine aquaculture
industry in the United States. This project will focus on the development of the
fundamental engineering infrastructure required for a large-scale turnkey
continuous culture rotifer production system, and subsequent marketing/sales to
the marine aquaculture industry. This research has the potential to "jump-start"
the marine aquaculture industry by eliminating one of the key limiting factors
to increasing the production of many marine species, i.e. the unavailability and
the high cost of fry and fingerlings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts
of this research are simplification and cost reduction for the production of
marine fry and fingerling, which will lead to rapid expansion of marine
hatcheries and hence a dramatic increase in the availability of lower cost
marine fry and fingerlings for aquaculture grow-out in ponds, ocean cages and/or
indoor recirculating systems. Aquaculture production of popular marine finfish
will relieve the pressure on severely threatened or overfished commercial fish
stocks. Furthermore, aquacultural production will allow culture under highly
controlled, biosecure conditions with limited exposure to potentially harmful
elements and using commercially formulated diets maintain optimal nutritional
content. With the U.S. seafood trade deficit at close to $9 billion dollars,
there is a significant potential for expansion of marine aquaculture production
in the United States.