* 0810637
* STTR Phase I:  Designing Complex Internal Structures for Solid Freeform Fabrication
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Xiaoshu Xu, Solid Concepts Inc
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 06/30/2009
* USD 149,890.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will demonstrate
the feasibility of developing an internal structure design software system for
solid freeform fabrication (SFF) processes. The software system, if successful,
will serve as a simple and effective design tool to help designers to achieve
better design performance over a wide range of applications. SFF is a direct
manufacturing process that can fabricate complicated geometries cost-
effectively. Therefore, it provides designers with design freedom including
complex internal structures. However, designing a computer-aided design (CAD)
model with such internal structures is beyond the capability of current CAD
software. The project will address significant open research questions that
stand in the path of incorporating internal structures in our everyday products.
The primary innovation of the proposed research is (1) a general and effective
design method based on 3D texture mapping for various design requirements, (2)
an efficient computational approach based on hybrid geometrical representations
and calculations, and (3) a SLS fabrication feasibility study which will provide
important insights on the relations between process parameters and internal
structures material properties. If successful, this project will result in an
internal structure design method that is general and effective for a wide
variety of applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR project, if successful,
will give rise to a commercial software product which will enable designers to
use materials more efficiently in their designs. This will positively impact a
host of industries, such as aerospace, defense, and medical industries, where
using materials efficiently is critical. The internal structure design software
system will also help rapid prototyping and manufacturing companies to reduce
their material usages in the SFF processes. &lt;br/&gt;