* 0810855
* Flux Recovery, A Posteriori Error Estimation, and Adaptive Finite Element Method
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Zhiqiang Cai, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2012
* USD 270,980.00

The main purpose of this project is to develop, analyze, and test novel,
accurate a posteriori error estimators of the recovery type for various finite
element discretizations of a variety of elliptic equations and systems arising
from solid and fluid mechanics, including nonlinear problems. The investigator
and his colleagues plan to study two types of recovery procedures: one is
accurate only for the constitutive equation and the other is accurate for both
the constitutive and equilibrium equations. Based on these recovered fluxes (or
the stresses for solid and fluid mechanics), they will study three kinds of
estimators. In particular, they will study an exact estimator on any given mesh,
including an arbitrary initial mesh, with no regularity assumptions. Exactness
on any given mesh implies that the estimator is ideally perfect for error
control (or the so-called solution verification) on coarse (pre-asymptotic)
meshes. No regularity assumptions in this project mean that the only assumptions
on the existence of the underlying problem are required. This is weaker than
those required for approximation theory and much weaker than those required by
the current theory of the recovery-based estimators. Therefore, the estimators
can be applied to problems of practical interests such as interface
singularities, discontinuities in the form of shock-like fronts and of interior
or boundary layers. The second part of the project is to establish convergence
of adaptive finite element methods based on the recovery-based estimators and
the newly developed estimators of this project.

A major problem with computer simulations of physical phenomena is that all
computational results obtained involve numerical error. Discretization error can
be large, pervasive, unpredictable by classical heuristic means, and can
invalidate numerical predictions. A posteriori error estimation is a rigorous
mathematical theory for estimating and quantifying discretization error in terms
of the error's magnitude and distribution based on the current simulation and
given data of the underlying problem. This information provides bases for
solution verification and for adaptive control of simulation process: adaptive
mesh refinement, adaptive control of mathematical models and numerical
algorithms. Success in this project will provide accurate and reliable a
posteriori error estimators for a large class of elliptic equations/systems
arising from engineering, physics, aerodynamics, atmospheric sciences, geology,
biomechanics, material sciences, nano-technology, and industrial applications.
The development of the exact estimator will enable error control on pre-
asymptotic meshes and predictable computation analysis. Error control on pre-
asymptotic meshes is of paramount importance for simulating physical phenomena
in engineering applications and scientific predictions with limited computer
resources.

