* 0810231
* Causes and Consequences of Holocene Mafic Explosive Volcanism in Central OR
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2008,09/30/2010
* Alan Rempel, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 09/30/2010
* USD 243,940.00

Central Oregon has been the site of numerous volcanic eruptions in the past
10,000 years from both Newberry Volcano and vents distributed throughout the
central Oregon Cascades. Most of these eruptions have produced basaltic lava
flows and cinder cones and it is suspected that many of the eruptions also
created substantial eruption columns that could have distributed small amounts
of volcanic ash over large regions. As the population of the largest city in
central Oregon, Bend, has increased by 50% since 2000 (the population is
currently ~ 75,000) and as Bend lies east (downwind) of the Cascades and is
constructed on distal lava flows and scoria cones from Newberry Volcano
(designated a ?very high threat? volcano by the USGS), it is important to
understand the scope of potential future hazards posed by ash-producing
eruptions that could affect air traffic, recreation, and agriculture. To insure
that this work is available to local populations, they will coordinate with both
U.S. Geological Survey and U.S. Forest Service scientists and interpreters to
translate findings and improve outreach efforts related to all aspects of
volcanism in central Oregon. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To improve volcanic hazard
assessment in central Oregon, it is proposed to study deposits produced by
several different eruptions, many of which have occurred over the past 2000
years. Specifically, they will map and sample deposits from (1) young scoria
cones north of North Sister stratovolcano (Yapoah, Four-in-One, and Collier
Cone); (2) the young shield volcano Belknap Crater; and (3) the most recent
basaltic eruptions of Newberry Volcano, erupted along its northwest rift zone
about 7000 years ago. One of the goals is to determine both the thickness and
distribution of ash and scoria deposits, as these pose the primary hazard from
future eruptions in the region, and the volatile (water and carbon dioxide)
content of the magma, to determine the extent to which the volatile content of
the rising magma controls the eruptive style (explosive or effusive, that is,
dominated by ash deposits or lava flows). In particular, it is believed that
this work will provide insights into conditions that cause basaltic magma to
erupt explosively. Another goal will be to study more distal ash deposits using
sub-alpine lake cores; this work will be collaborative with colleagues from the
Geography department, as identification of ash deposits in these cores will
allow them to assess the vegetative response to eruptions over the past 2000
years. Taken as a whole, the proposed work is unique in its approach in that
they hope to combine methods from petrology (by studying magmatic volatiles and
tephra textures) and physical volcanology (by studying the nature of the tephra
deposits) to develop of comprehensive picture of the magmatic systems that drive
monogenetic or small polygenetic mafic eruptions. &lt;br/&gt;