* 0810967
* Getting a Clear Picture: An Institutional Ethnography of Women STEM Faculty at UAF
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Joy Morrison, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Beth Mitchneck
* 08/31/2010
* USD 145,137.00

The Office of Faculty Development (OFD) and a sociologist, working with an
external advisory board and an ad hoc internal advisory committee, will gather
data about the status of women faculty in the science, technology, engineering,
and math (STEM) disciplines at the University of Alaska Fairbanks (UAF). They
will conduct an institutional ethnography - a comprehensive research project on
women STEM faculty at UAF, focusing on how social institutions shape women's
experiences as STEM faculty. The project seeks to get a clear picture of women
STEM faculty so leaders among the faculty, staff, and administration can begin
to brainstorm institutional changes that will transform UAF into a model of
gender equity. UAF is unique; it is America's Arctic University, and is located
in an extreme climate and remote locale. A comparatively small university, UAF
has several internationally admired STEM programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will begin with a review of two previous studies of UAF, including the
University of Alaska Faculty Opinion Survey (2003), and the Study of Faculty
Work Life at the University of Alaska Fairbanks (2005). The latter was conducted
by the UAF Faculty Senate Committee on the Status of Women and contains
questions specific to women faculty. The second phase of the project is a
comprehensive review of national data and analyses of women in the STEM
disciplines and project reports of selected NSF ADVANCE projects. The third, and
most time-intensive and resource-intensive phase of the project will generate
new data specific to women STEM faculty at UAF. Both qualitative and
quantitative methods will be used to gather data. Qualitative methods include
focus groups with women STEM faculty, men STEM faculty, and assigned mentors of
STEM faculty. Confidential interviews will be conducted with deans in STEM-based
colleges, directors of STEM research units, women at UAF who were formerly STEM
faculty members but who are now members of UAF administration, and non-retained
women STEM faculty. Quantitative methods of gathering data on UAF women STEM
faculty include analysis of institutional data gathered by UA Statewide, data
kept by UAF's Office of Equal Employment Opportunity, and a climate survey of
all STEM faculty at UAF. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institutional merit: The proposed
project will allow the researchers to theorize how gender inequalities are
structural and institutional in nature. The cutting edge approach of examining
gender inequality as institutional will yield essential information for
concurrent planning for institutional transformation. &lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts: Getting a clear picture of the status of women STEM faculty at UAF will
allow planning for institutional transformation to take place. It is also
anticipated that women STEM faculty will be more likely to choose UAF, to stay
at UAF, and to become excellent teachers and researchers because the climate
will be more equitable as a result of the proposed study. The participation of
underrepresented groups, particularly women and Alaska Natives, will be
broadened. The project is expected to generate much local and regional attention
and interest.