* 0811170
* ADVANCE Institutional Transformation Award:  Advancing Women within Interdisciplinary and International Networks
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2015
* J. Murray Gibson, Northeastern University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jessie Dearo
* 08/31/2015
* USD 3,702,843.00

The Northeastern University ADVANCE Institutional Transformation project will
systematically integrate concerns about interdisciplinary and international
research into the project model for change. The Advancing Women within
Interdisciplinary and International Networks (AWIIN) model for change will
transform recruitment practices; strengthen professional networks for women; and
develop a forum for comprehensive engagement of leadership to increase
accountability and to instill long-lasting changes in institutional policies and
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific interventions target the isolation of
women due to their solo status and the challenge to succeed in interdisciplinary
and international research environments at Northeastern and beyond. Efforts to
improve retention include Interdisciplinary Recruitment Workshops integrated
with campus research center conferences and a new Dual Career Network Committee
through the New England Higher Education Recruitment Consortium (HERC). Women?s
mixed gender networks are strengthened with External Career Mentoring Teams, the
improved existing faculty mentoring program, grants to stimulate
interdisciplinary and international collaborations, campus-wide networks, and
Greater Boston Area Faculty Seminars. The new Leadership Academy is a forum to
engage institutional leaders, influential faculty, and rising women leaders in
changing institutional policy and organizational practices. The Academy will
also be a forum to enhance intercultural gender competence. A comprehensive
research and evaluation program will accompany the interventions to guide
design, possible modifications, and to disseminate findings and best practices.
The interdisciplinary AWIIN team includes social scientists, faculty, and
administrators from science and engineering. All activities are aligned in the
current changing environment guided by the new 2007 Academic
Plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The two original research
projects will provide new insights about the skills of individuals, the tools
and organizational practices and policies that allow women and men faculty to
succeed in and contribute to an increasing interdisciplinary, global enterprise
of science and technology. The project on gender and globalization of the
academy will identify gender-specific barriers and strategies to international
networks and collaboration. The project on gender and social networks will
provide insights into gender differences in the involvement of faculty in
professional, interdisciplinary, and international networks. These findings will
be of interest to individual faculty, researchers, and institutions that are
interested in promoting women scientists and engineers in interdisciplinary and
international universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AWINN?s broader impacts include
the entire institution as interventions will be rolled out to all colleges in
the long-term affecting the climate for all students and faculty at Northeastern
University. The Leadership Academy will result in a general improvement of
management practices and skills across the institution. Regional workshops will
be held to disseminate best practices into colleges and universities in New
England. A national conference on gender and internationalization of science in
academia will raise national awareness. In addition, Northeastern University
will create a Dual Career Network committee as part of the New England Higher
Education Recruitment Consortium (HERC) that facilitates dual career needs in
the broader Boston academic community. The AWIIN website will provide guides and
tools for individuals and other institutions.&lt;br/&gt;