* 0811804
* CPA-ACR: Parallel Algorithms and Software for Large Scale Microarry Data Analysis and Gene Network Inference
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Srinivas Aluru, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 07/31/2012
* USD 383,000.00

High-throughput gene expression profile measurements enabled by microarrays have
spawned significant advances in functional genomics and systems biology. The
vast numbers of cumulative microarray experiments conducted over the past decade
have generated a wealth of expression data available from several public
repositories. While algorithms for microarray data analysis and gene network
inference have been well studied, most available methods and programs are
sequential and cannot scale up to analyzing large number of experiments due to
both memory and time constraints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the
investigators will develop high performance, parallel computational methods for
large-scale gene expression analysis and gene network inference utilizing tens
of thousands of microarray experiments available in public repositories. The
primary research goal is to develop capability to simultaneously analyze the
entire gamut of gene expression data available for an organism, and make
biological discoveries and build robust, accurate networks which would not be
possible through limited, compartmentalized analysis. The research will be
carried out using gene expression profiles of the plant Arabidopsis thaliana, a
well-studied model organism and the focus of the decade-long NSF Arabidopsis
2010 initiative. The investigators will develop 1) parallel algorithms for
biclustering large gene expression matrices, 2) parallel algorithms for
inferring gene networks using Mutual Information and Bayesian approaches, and 3)
methods for querying and analyzing large-scale biological networks. The project
will be led by an interdisciplinary team of investigators whose expertise spans
parallel algorithms, scalable computing and software development, bioinformatics
and systems biology, statistical analysis, microarray experimental techniques
and analysis, and organism specific knowledge of Arabidopsis. &lt;br/&gt;It will
lead to the development of advanced computational methods and open source
software programs in systems biology.&lt;br/&gt;