* 0811748
* CPA-SEL: Collaborative Research - Continuing Progress Toward Verified Software
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Murali Sitaraman, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2013
* USD 195,889.00

Most engineered artifacts, such as bridges and nuclear power plants, are tested
by subjecting them to operating conditions and observing
results.&lt;br/&gt;Software is different. It manifests dynamic behavior when
running on computers, and software quality (with respect to achieving
specified&lt;br/&gt;behavior) is normally tested that way. But software also can
be considered purely symbolic -- a sequence of instructions -- and hence can be
subjected to mathematical proof of correctness. Achieving such "verified
software" has been identified as a "grand challenge" for computing research. The
work of this project's interdisciplinary team of software engineers and
logicians focuses on the thesis that practical, scalable, automated software
verification is feasible, one component at a time, by combining careful language
design with recent advances in automated theorem proving. The plan is to
evaluate this thesis empirically by generating the logical verification
conditions for a benchmark suite of software components like those used in
computing courses and commercial software, and proving them automatically. The
project's significance will derive from its proof of concept that the verified
software grand challenge can be conquered, and from a better understanding of
what the next generation of software engineers need to be taught to produce
verified software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;