* 0811140
* CPA-SEL-T:   Collaborative Research: Traceability+:   a Service Oriented Framework to Support Value-Added Software Traceability
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2013
* Jane Hayes, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2013
* USD 281,700.00

Proposals: P0811140/P0810924/P0811021&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Traceability+:
a Service Oriented Framework to Support Value-Added Software
Traceability&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PIs: Jane Hayes, Jane Huang, and Jonathan
Maletic&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traceability plays an important role in the
development and assurance of software systems that permeate our society. It
helps to assure that an as-built system correctly implements all requirements by
supporting change impact assessment, re-engineering of applications, and other
critical software engineering activities. Although previous work has focused on
delivering point solutions that address specific traceability issues, this
research will develop a new, powerful traceability model, Traceability+, that
will deliver value-added traceability services designed to support diverse
stakeholders as they perform critical software engineering activities. To
accomplish this, the investigators will develop a new traceability query
language and associated query mechanism, identify stakeholders' traceability-
related needs, develop traceability services to meet those needs, build a
knowledge base of traceability tasks and related queries, and handle varied data
formats. If successful, the research could transform the community?s
understanding of traceability and its benefits across the software engineering
lifecycle. The evaluation of the proposed framework and dissemination of results
is enhanced by having industry personnel actively participate as senior staff on
the project and by an already-established Center of Excellence for Software
Traceability.