* 0811852
* CPA-CPL:   The Reduction Simplification Engine
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Sanjay Rajopadhye, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2010
* USD 72,000.00

Improving programmer productivity is a crucial challenge, especially with the
emergence of multi- and many-core processors. High level mathematical equations
serve as declarative specifications for a large class of compute- and data-
intensive parts of programs. The expressivity of such equations is greatly
enhanced when users are allowed to specify collective operations called
"reductions:" associative and commutative operators applied to sets of values.
Another common feature of such equational programs is "reuse:" at different
points in a set, the same intermediate value is (re)- computed or used. Certain
extremely effective program optimizations are possible when equational programs
have both reductions and reuse. These optimizations yield new equations with
lower computational complexity (e.g., a quadratic time equation can be
transformed into one with linear complexity). This project investigates how to
perform these simplifications automatically and optimally. The PIs will develop
and deploy a tool called Reduction Simplification Engine (RSE) that implements
such optimizations techniques. Traditional compiler optimizations simply seek a
few percentage points of performance gains, at best a small, constant factor. On
the other hand, the optimizations performed by the RSE have significantly more
benefits since they reduce the asymptotic complexity of the program.