* 0811504
* CPA-DA-T:  Design and Tools for Easy-to-Program Massively Parallel On-Chip Systems:  Deriving Scalability through Asynchrony
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2008,01/31/2014
* Uzi Vishkin, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 01/31/2014
* USD 921,686.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;NSF Proposal #0811504, CPA-DA-T: ?Design and Tools for Easy-
to-Program Massively Parallel On-Chip Systems: Deriving Scalability Through
Asynchrony? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Prof. S. Nowick (Columbia University), co-
PI: Prof. U. Vishkin (U. of Maryland)&lt;br/&gt;Contact: Steven Nowick (Columbia
University) ? nowick@cs.columbia.edu&lt;br/&gt;June 30,
2008&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the current reality is that the jury is still
out on how the processor-of-the-future will look, one clear certainty is that it
will be parallel. All major commercial processor vendors are now committed to
increasing the number of processors (i.e. ?cores?) that fit on a single chip.
However, there are major obstacles of power consumption, performance and
scalability in existing synchronous design methodologies. This proposal focuses
on a particular existing easy-to-program and easy-to-teach multi-core
architecture. It then identifies the interconnection network, connecting
multiples cores and memories, as the critical bottleneck to achieving lower
overall power consumption. The target is to substantially improve the power,
robustness and scalability of the system by designing and fabricating a high-
speed asynchronous communication mesh. The resulting parallel architecture will
be globally-asynchronous locally-synchronous (i.e. GALS-style), that gracefully
accommodates synchronous cores and memories operating at arbitrary unrelated
clock rates, while providing robustness to timing variability and support for
?plug-and-play? (i.e. scalable) system design. Unlike most prior GALS
architectures, this one will have significant performance and power requirements
in a complex pipelined topology. In addition, computer-aided design (i.e. CAD)
tools will be developed to support the design of this new mesh, as well as
simulation, timing verification and performance analysis tools to be applied to
the entire parallel architecture. This work will be performed in collaboration
with a separate NSF CPA proposal under Prof. Ken Stevens (University of Utah).
The two proposals will be linked together into a larger framework: the Utah
group will coordinate to provide and refine their commercial-based physical
design tool development and support, while the Columbia/Maryland group will
provide a new substantial test case for their asynchronous tool
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work is expected to have broad impact.
First, while it is targeted to one parallel architecture, several other
architectures will benefit from this work, since the interconnection network can
be applied to them as well. Second, the work is expected to demonstrate the
benefits and role of asynchronous design for complex high-performance systems.
Finally, the outcome of the work could make a step in the paradigm shift from
serial to parallel that the field is now undergoing; the resulting first-of-its-
kind partly-asynchronous high-end massively-parallel on-chip computer could push
the level of scalability beyond what it currently possible and have a broad
impact in supporting parallel applications in much of computer science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;