* 0811052
* Mixed finite elements and smooth approximations for partial differential equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Gerard Awanou, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2012
* USD 137,940.00

The project is directed towards the development, analysis and improvement of
numerical methods for the elasticity equations and Monge-Ampere type
equations.&lt;br/&gt;The research in methods for the linear elasticity equations
will focus on improvement of mixed finite element methods. Very simple elements
with weakly imposed symmetry have been recently developed on triangular and
tetrahedral meshes but these elements have yet to be extended to quadrilateral,
2D and 3D rectangular and hexahedral meshes which are often favored by
practitioners. This proposal will use the technique of constructing piecewise
polynomial exact sequences for the development of stable mixed finite elements
on the above mentioned meshes. The second area of study is the construction and
analysis of smooth approximations to Monge-Ampere type equations and the
application of the methods developed to the solution of problems from science
and engineering involving Monge-Ampere type equations. Several approaches will
be followed, including global optimization ones. As it is well known the Monge-
Ampere type equations, like other fully nonlinear partial differential equations
do not possess in general smooth solutions but several of the approximation
schemes, e.g. the vanishing moment methodology, require to work in spaces of
smooth functions. The focus will be on the implementation and improvement of the
spline element method, developed by the investigator and others, which uses
multivariate splines for the solution of higher order partial differential
equations. It leads to flexible, robust, efficient and accurate approximations
allowing easy implementation, the flexibility of using polynomials of different
degrees on different elements and the simplicity of a posteriori error estimates
since the method is conforming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical
modeling of physical phenomena have become the standard tool for the
investigation of numerous problems in science and engineering. But often the
resulting equations do not have solutions that can be represented by simple
mathematical formulas. Hence the development of numerical methods and their
analysis is essential to this process. This project adresses two types of
equations which appear in fundamental problems but the impact of the methods
developed here goes well beyond the particular applications being considered.
The elasticity equations appear in many industrial, biological and engineering
applications. The Monge-Ampere type equations appear in various geometric and
variational problems, e.g.&lt;br/&gt;the Monge-Kantorovich problem. They also
appear in applied fields such as meteorology, fluid mechanics, nonlinear
elasticity, material sciences and mathematical finance. The development of the
new methods from this project have the potential to put more competitive tools
in the hands of the nation's scientists and engineers. The educational component
of the project is that it will introduce a new generation of students to
computational mathematics involving practical problems. Therefore this also
contributes to national security and helps maintain the global scientific
leadership position of the nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;