* 0811370
* Dynamics at a fixed resolution
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2013
* Sarah Day, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2013
* USD 128,281.00

This project focuses on extending and optimizing existing techniques for
computational studies of dynamical systems. Recognizing the need for
discretizations and truncations of dynamical systems as a first step towards
making a numerical study, the investigator and her collaborators focus on
techniques that can overcome the corresponding loss of information. In
particular, in constructing the finite representation of the system used for
numerical computations, they incorporate explicit bounds for discretization,
truncation, and other errors accumulated during this process. The finite
representation is the dynamical system viewed at a fixed resolution --
information about the precise location of individual points and their
trajectories is lost, but coarse, topological structures remain. The
investigator will incorporate topological tools, such as algebraic topology and
Conley index theory, in computations on the finite representation to detect and
prove the existence of dynamics for the original
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dynamical systems models are being used
throughout society. Some examples include weather models used for hurricane
prediction and population models used to study environmental effects on
population size and persistence. Currently, many researchers study dynamical
systems like these using high powered computer simulations and statistical
techniques. On the other end of the spectrum, mathematicians have been able to
decipher highly complicated dynamics in more abstract mathematical models. The
work described in this proposal aims to serve as a bridge between these two
approaches. More specifically, the investigator and her collaborators focus on
the development of computational techniques that use sophisticated mathematical
tools and yield mathematically rigorous results. The mathematical tools come
from the fields of algebraic topology, analysis, numerical analysis, and
dynamical systems theory and may be used to decipher some of the phenomena of
interest in the studied systems. Prior progress in studying complicated dynamics
in models from population ecology and heat convection motivates these continued
studies.&lt;br/&gt;