* 0811123
* ADVANCE Institutional Transformation Award:  Comprehensive Equity at Ohio State (CEOS)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2015
* Joan Herbers, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jessie Dearo
* 08/31/2015
* USD 3,968,147.00

The Ohio State University has highly progressive policies that allow for time
off the tenure clock, part-time appointments on the tenure track, dual career
placement and on-campus child care. We also have an infrastructure of support
offices that promote gender equity (notably the President's Council on Women and
the Women's Place) and extensive training in leadership (through Human Resources
and the Women's Place). Yet the institution is highly decentralized, with
individual colleges being responsible for implementing policies locally.
Departmental culture is the single most important factor affecting recruitment
and retention for women at Ohio State, and our decentralized system therefore
requires active participation of deans and department chairs to effect
institutional change. The Comprehensive Equity at Ohio State (CEOS) project
involves four colleges that span the breadth of science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM): Biological Sciences, Engineering,
Mathematical &amp; Physical Sciences, and Veterinary Medicine. Based upon a
framework of transformational leadership, our interventions include structured
workshops for administrative leaders in those four colleges that will culminate
in formation of action project learning teams. Another program will focus on
structured peer mentoring for women leaders in the four colleges. We will
provide a two-year workshop on entrepreneurship for women interested in
commercializing their intellectual property. Both formative and summative
evaluation research will occur throughout the project, including analysis of
quantitative metrics and qualitative data from structured interviews and
portfolio development. An Internal Advisory Team and an External Advisory
Committee will provide additional guidance as the project unfolds.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The CEOS project addresses entrenched,
cultural barriers to equity for women and minorities. Research indicates that
organizational culture, and especially deeply embedded cultural assumptions and
taken-for-granted practices, support inequalities in the workplace. Higher
education organizational research has shown that department chairs and college
deans can play a crucial role facilitating culture change. The CEOS project at
Ohio State, based on a transformational leadership model, will involve deans,
chairs and women and men faculty in workshops, women leaders' circles, and
action learning project teams. Analysis of data from these interventions will
contribute to an understanding of how transformational leadership affects
organizational change to remove cultural barriers for women and members of
historically underrepresented groups in STEM. Research from this project will be
presented at numerous conferences and will be submitted to scholarly journals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Successfully transforming the culture in
four colleges at Ohio State will nucleate further change in other STEM (and non-
STEM) colleges. We will share our successes and challenges with the broader
university community through regular communication with the President's Council
on Women, the Provost's office, and in campus forums. We will share our research
results on interventions and the utility of the transformational leadership
model via an active website, presentations at conferences, publications in peer-
refereed journals, and other academic outlets. We also will offer a 3-day
workshop on entrepreneurship to a national audience as an outgrowth of our
internal workshop.