* 0811029
* Analysis of Algorithms for Simulating Complex Materials
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Noel Walkington, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2011
* USD 400,556.00

The focus of this project is the development and analysis of
numerical&lt;br/&gt;algorithms to simulate materials which exhibit intricate
rheological&lt;br/&gt;behavior or mechanical response due to their
microstructural&lt;br/&gt;makeup. For example, elastic properties of
particulates, molecules, or&lt;br/&gt;cells of a material frequently influence
the macroscopic properties.&lt;br/&gt;These materials are modeled by formidable
systems of partial&lt;br/&gt;differential equations, and it is important to
develop numerical&lt;br/&gt;schemes to faithfully represent the mathematical
structure of these&lt;br/&gt;models. Tools from partial differential equations,
continuum&lt;br/&gt;mechanics, and numerical analysis, will be used to analyze
numerical&lt;br/&gt;schemes to simulate these systems. Past experience has shown
that new&lt;br/&gt;mathematical tools can lead to numerical schemes which
inherit&lt;br/&gt;important structural properties of these models, and that a
deeper&lt;br/&gt;understanding of the current schemes frequently leads to
improved and&lt;br/&gt;simpler
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Essentially all biological and
manufactured materials exhibit complex&lt;br/&gt;macroscopic behavior due to
their fine scale makeup. Examples include&lt;br/&gt;micro electromechanical
systems (MEMS); biological fluids; ink for ink&lt;br/&gt;jet devices;
semiconductors; liquid crystals; and metals undergoing&lt;br/&gt;plastic
deformation. Predicting material response is an essential&lt;br/&gt;technology
needed to determine biological or physiological function;&lt;br/&gt;or to design
and manufacture these materials; or for the design of the&lt;br/&gt;multitudes
of devices which use their special properties. This&lt;br/&gt;research will
improve our understanding of the mathematical models and&lt;br/&gt;the
computational tools used to accomplish these tasks. The equations&lt;br/&gt;used
to model such phenomena are complex and poorly understood, and&lt;br/&gt;much of
the research is directed to revealing the theoretical&lt;br/&gt;(mathematical)
properties of these models. This work complements the&lt;br/&gt;more practical
approaches undertaken in the engineering community and&lt;br/&gt;at the national
laboratories.