* 0811293
* Science, Mathematics and Research Training
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2014
* james goodwin, Jarvis Christian College
* Continuing Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,960,961.00

Jarvis Christian College, a small, four year, liberal arts, Historically Black
College in Hawkins, Texas, is funded for a five year project that is expected to
significantly improve the quality of mathematics, biology and chemistry
education at the institution. The project, Science, Mathematics and Research
Training (SMaRT), will impact all students majoring in STEM areas at Jarvis
through a series of curriculum development, student development and faculty
development activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed program
will:&lt;br/&gt;1. develop and incorporate a structured 2-year, undergraduate
research component into the degree requirements for all STEM
students;&lt;br/&gt;2. improve STEM classrooms and laboratories, including
developing an outdoor classroom which includes a nature trail;&lt;br/&gt;3.
revise and enrich courses and degree requirements for all STEM majors and
minors&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The structured undergraduate research component will
include undergraduate research credits that will be applied toward the students'
requirement for the major, and will occur in the final four semesters. In
semester 1, students will receive training in pre-research topics, including
library and other resources, preparation of research protocols, and research
topic selection. In the second through fourth semester, students will conduct
the research, and prepare oral and written reports on the topic. In addition to
the research integration for all students, those students that are directly
supported by the program will each have an undergraduate teaching experience,
working with faculty supervision.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;STEM classroom and
laboratory improvements will include curriculum development in mathematics,
biology, chemistry and physics. As an integral part of the curriculum
development, faculty will incorporate a Nature Trail and an Outdoor Classroom
that are concurrently being developed on the Jarvis property. The trail will
support undergraduate research and curriculum and laboratory in Environmental
and Analytical Chemistry, Microbiology, General Biology and Ecology. Other
classes and laboratories will incorporate computational
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a result of the five year project, Jarvis
Christian College expects to increase the number of STEM majors enrolled and
graduating from the institution, and better prepare their STEM graduates for
post-baccalaureate careers in graduate school or the STEM work force.