* 0811706
* A New Approach to Design-for-Testability (DFT) Using Ultra Wideband and Wireless Communication Techniques
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Dong Ha, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2012
* USD 294,000.00

Proposal No.: 811706&lt;br/&gt;PI: Ha, Dong S.&lt;br/&gt;Title: A New Approach
to Design-for-Testability (DFT) Using Ultra Wideband and Wireless Communication
Techniques&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;A power distribution network
in an IC is ubiquitous as seen by the internal logic, i.e., a power line is
accessible to any internal node. This suggests the possibility of monitoring or
controlling the logic value of any internal node through a power line by
attaching a simple and nearly all-digital sensing/control circuit to the node.
In other words, power line communications (PLC) in an IC provides designers with
an inexpensive means to access to internal nodes, which can be useful for
various applications, including test application time reduction for scan design,
system debugging, fault diagnosis, monitoring transient logic values during
built-in self test, and on-line testing. The research investigates the
feasibility and practicality of PLC in ICs with circuit testing as the major
target application. Upon successful execution of the project, the major
technical accomplishments are as follows. (1) it suggests a new approach to
address VLSI testing problems; (2) it investigates a new area, PLC at the IC
level; and (3) it develops the necessary building blocks for PLC at the IC
level. The use of power lines at the IC level has not been explored before, and
it offers vast new applications in VLSI testing and other areas such as
intra-/inter- chip level communications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes of
this research will be published in journals and proceedings and will be
presented at technical conferences. The proposed research will also foster the
integration of research and education and will be used to enhance the curriculum
at the PI?s institution. This project provides an excellent opportunity to train
undergraduate and underrepresented students in various electrical engineering
fields, including VLSI testing, analog and mixed signal design, RFIC design, and
circuit and system level simulation. An initial feasibility study for the
proposed research has been conducted in close collaboration with a major US
semiconductor company, and several other US semiconductor companies also have
committed to collaborate in the proposed research. Close collaboration with
those companies will provide a direct path to commercialization of the research
at the successful conclusion of the project.&lt;br/&gt;