* 0811082
* CPA-DA:   Robust Performance Characterization in Complex VLSI Design Under Variations
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Azadeh Davoodi, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2011
* USD 206,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No: 811082&lt;br/&gt;Title: Robust Performance
Characterization in Complex VLSI Design Under Variations &lt;br/&gt;PI name:
Davoodi, Azadeh &lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Wisconsin-
Madison&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;Design of Integrated Circuits
is highly impacted by the imperfections of the nano-scale manufacturing process.
These imperfections translate into variations in the characteristics of devices
and their interconnections. These variations tend to become more random and less
systematic as technology further scales down into sub-45nm domain. Only partial
statistical information might be known about these variations, such as their
average, variance and range. Furthermore, depending on the stage in the
hierarchical design flow, correlations in the variability of the components on
the chip may be partially known. Given this partial information, robust
performance estimation is required to obtain more predictability during the
design process. A robust prediction should include all scenarios that match with
the partially available variability data. The PI proposes to investigate the
novel applications of two statistical and optimization-based approaches for
robust modeling of the performance of VLSI circuits. The PI suggests
investigating the applicability of these approaches for large circuit sizes and
large number of die-to-die and within-die variations at different stages of the
design flow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful implementation of the proposed
research allows a more predictable design flow which can make a significant
contribution in the development of next generation Integrated Circuits by
shortening design cycles, thereby allowing a faster time-to-market. Reducing the
time-to-market can prevent losses of 5-10% magnitude per month in major
manufacturing industries. In addition, the PI plans development of a graduate-
level course which will likely appeal to the students outside the Computer
Engineering area towards meeting their secondary and minor area requirements, at
the University of Wisconsin-Madison. This research will catalyze the PI?s
efforts to increase the diversity in engineering by encouraging women to study
computer engineering and choose it as a career, either at industry or
academia.&lt;br/&gt;