* 0811744
* Targeted Infusion Grant: Computational Sciences and Robotics Education at North Carolina Central University
* EHR,HRD
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2010
* Ravanasamudram Uma, North Carolina Central University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2010
* USD 148,930.00

ABSTRACT HRD 0811744&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, based at North Carolina
Central University (NCCU), is developing a Robotics concentration within an
interdisciplinary program in Computational Sciences. Four courses are being
developed in this concentration, one of which will serve as an introductory
course designed to motivate students about computer science and engineering.
Students enrolled in the Early College High School at NCCU are able to enroll in
this course. In addition we are conducting summer workshops in Robotics for area
high schools. In conjunction with faculty from the STEM disciplines, students
have opportunities undertake research projects in areas of Computational
Science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program at NCCU will accomplish three
objectives: (i) it will establish a computational science program grounded in
research to influence undergraduates, minorities in particular, to consider
graduate education in mathematics, computer science and engineering; (ii) it
will establish a pipeline of students into graduate education at outstanding
research universities, located in the area and beyond; (iii) it will enable the
training of students who appreciate the problems inherent in these disciplines
and who can contribute to the future of these areas. The program is creating
long-term interdisciplinary training in the Computational Sciences, as well as
collaborative projects and curriculum development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
STEM departments at North Carolina Central University (NCCU) are committed to
increasing the opportunities for underrepresented minorities in the sciences. We
seek to broaden participation in new degree programs and concentrations through
revision of curricula and development of new courses.&lt;br/&gt;