* 0811582
* CPA-DA: Nanocrystal Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Paul Franzon, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2012
* USD 406,250.00

Proposal No: CCF-0811582 &lt;br/&gt;Title: Nanocrystal Computing &lt;br/&gt;PI
name: Franzon, Paul D. &lt;br/&gt;North Carolina State University
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;Semiconductor technology must continue
to scale even when ?Moore?s Law? ends sometime next decade. One approach to
continue scaling is to work out approaches to extend and enhance the underlying
CMOS technology that serves as the cornerstone of Moore?s Law. It is CMOS
technology that is used to build the computer and other chips that drive the
electronics revolution. In this effort, we propose to extend CMOS technology by
including nanocrystal films in the transistors. This enables new types of
functions to be designed. We will investigate how to design the computer
circuits that would be enabled by this new device.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As well
as pursuing appropriate involvement with Undergraduates, and integration with
coursework, this activity will also help us continue to support the NCSU
Physical Design Kit ( www.eda.ncsu.edu ). This kit enables the design of ICs in
the MOSIS processes using popular commercial design tools. This kit has been
downloaded by over 2,000 organizations, including most major Universities. We
are constantly upgrading this kit as new processes become available and other
improvements are deemed necessary. Currently, we (with Davis and others) are
adding a notional 45 nm kit for classroom use.&lt;br/&gt;