* 0811232
* Recovery Type a Posteriori Estimation and Mesh Refinement for the Finite Element Method on Anisotropic Meshes
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Weiming Cao, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2012
* USD 121,793.00

For problems exhibiting strong anisotropic features the finite element method
(FEM) based on anisotropic meshes can be much more efficient than the one based
on isotropic meshes, provided the meshes are properly aligned and the right
aspect ratios are maintained. However, there has been little rigorous analysis
about it, and most computational work has been restricted to linear elements,
based on heuristic justification and ad-hoc treatments. The aim of this project
is to provide the numerical analysis for the FEM on anisotropic meshes and
develop effective controls for the adaptive mesh refinement. The main objectives
of this project include: (i) Analyze various recovery type error estimators for
the FEM on anisotropic meshes; (ii) Develop reliable mesh metrics and mesh
quality measures to control the anisotropic mesh refinement process; (iii)
Develop a software tool box for the post-processing of the finite element
solutions, including error estimation, mesh metrics construction, and mesh
quality evaluation. (iv) Provide research training to graduate students on
adaptive finite element computation in science and engineering.

Error estimation and adaptive mesh refinement are two major components in
practical finite element simulations. The former assesses the accuracy of the
solution and provides the quality assurance when it is delivered. The latter is
an indispensable tool for improving the solution when the desired accuracy has
not been reached. For anisotropic FEM, the elements are allowed to be long and
narrow to fit the underlining problems more effectively. They may vary in sizes,
orientations, and aspect ratios. This project is aimed at providing better
understanding of the behavior of anisotropic FEM and developing more efficient
techniques for the FE simulations. Since the recovery type error estimation
techniques are simple, extraordinary robust, and most commonly used in
engineering, it will be the main focus of this research. Successful completion
of this project will provide rigorous mathematical theory and more efficient
algorithms for practical FE modeling and simulations in aerospace engineering,
material processing, and biomedical researches.