* 0811450
* Exploring the Uncanny Valley
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Kevin Pelphrey, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Rosenblum
* 07/31/2012
* USD 362,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Exploring the Uncanny Valley&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 1970, an eminent
Japanese roboticist, Masahiro Mori, proposed the "uncanny valley" curve to
describe the emotional response of humans to nonhuman agents. His hypothesis was
that as an agent is made more humanlike, the observer's familiarity does not
increase as one would intuit, but falls into a ``valley of eeriness,'' when the
agent closely yet imperfectly impersonates a human being. With progress in
computer graphics allowing increasingly realistic rendering of forms and motion,
the uncanny valley has become a high-stakes concern of the entertainment
industry. The uncanny valley hypothesis also poses a fundamental scientific
question: What do people perceive when they view human motion and how are those
perceptions affected by realistic, nearly realistic, or caricatured human
motion? With the growing accuracy of functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) measurement and analysis techniques, there is a new tool with which to
answer these questions. The PIs are using fMRI, eye tracking, and traditional
perceptual metrics to explore the existence of and causes of the uncanny valley.
Motion capture data (including skin and muscle deformation), keyframed
animations, high speed video, and clips from feature films are used to construct
a set of stimuli with which to answer these questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
outcomes of this research is a greater understanding of the perception of
animated human motion which will inform practitioners and researchers in
computer graphics and allow them to focus on the aspects of human animation that
will have the greatest impact. The research has broad impacts on science and
society. For example, the work conducted here has applicability to the
scientific understanding of autism, a devastating neurodevelopmental disorder
that effects social functioning in multiple domains including the perception of
other people's actions and intentions.&lt;br/&gt;