* 0811998
* III-COR-Small: Towards Ubiquitous Location Services: Scalability and Privacy of Location-based Continuous Queries
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Mohamed Mokbel, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Frank Olken
* 08/31/2012
* USD 465,976.00

Location-based continuous queries are the backbone for monitoring, alerting, and
notification location-based services. The current technologies and software
infrastructure behind existing location-based continuous queries are not
designed to handle their formidable rise in usage nor to maintain the location
privacy of their users. The goal of this project is to conduct research, develop
requisite knowledge, and build software infrastructure to (1) scale up location-
based continuous queries to deal with very large number of users, and (2) inject
privacy-awareness in location-based continuous queries where a high quality real
time answer can be provided without the explicit knowledge of user locations.
The project achieves its goals using the following approaches: (1) employ a
built-in approach in which location-based queries are realized as query
operators inside a database engine, (2) develop adaptive location-aware query
optimization techniques, (3) exploit shared execution and load shedding
techniques for location-based continuous queries(4) exploit the trade-off
between user privacy and quality of service, and (5) develop efficient privacy-
preserving continuous query processing techniques. Applications will benefit
from this project include location-based emergency response, intelligent
transportation systems, traffic control, fleet management, and location-based
advertising. The project supports PhD students to pursue research in the areas
of location-based services and database systems. Related tutorials and workshops
are organized. A new graduate-level course integrating the research results from
this project is introduced. Publications, technical reports, software, and
experimental data from this research are disseminated via the project web
site(http://www.cs.umn.edu/~mokbel/LocationBasedQueries).