* 0811104
* Absolutely Stable Time Domain Integral Equation Methods in Computational Electromagnetism
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Peter Monk, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2011
* USD 200,000.00

Despite decades of advances in computational electromagnetics (CEM), some
problems still elude efficient and accurate solutions. Problems occurring in the
analysis of microelectromechanial systems, electromagnetic compatibility, and
ultra wide band antenna design involve complex geometry, small structures, and
large propagation distances across homogeneous regions. Solutions to problems
with these characteristics are most efficiently computed (in principle) by time-
domain integral equation (TDIE) techniques. Unfortunately, while TDIEs have been
researched for more than thirty years, there is still no TDIE scheme for CEM
that can efficiently model curvilinear geometry while ensuring stability. Thus,
current techniques are either of low order of convergence or unreliable
stability. Mathematical error analysis, work estimates and computer programs
created under this proposal will demonstrate a new method, based on convolution
quadrature, that promises to deliver both superlinear accuracy and unconditional
stability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electromagnetic theory governs the behavior of
light, radio waves, and microwaves. Understanding the behavior of
electromagnetic waves is of the utmost concern to national security (in the
design of radar and surveillance systems and protecting them from interference),
energy systems (in the collection and distribution of electric power), and the
economy (in cell phones and television broadcasts). Unfortunately, as
electromagnetic systems become more complicated and powerful, they become harder
to simulate and therefore design. For instance, modern problems in shielding
devices from electromagnetic interference involve broad bandwidths, long
propagation distances, and small features. While it has been known for decades
that this combination of difficulties can be mitigated using time domain
integral equation formulations, no such formulation has been produced that can
accurately model arbitrary geometry without producing a solution with
exponentially increasing error. This proposal produces such a scheme by
introducing a new method for modeling the time dependence of the solution.