* 0811257
* ADVANCE IT Start Award:  Women of Western Washington University
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Arlan Norman, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Beth Mitchneck
* 07/31/2012
* USD 199,194.00

The College of Sciences and Technology at Western Washington University will
undertake a comprehensive assessment of systemic institutional factors affecting
recruitment, retention, and advancement of women in STEM disciplines. The
project will conduct: a campus climate assessment; an analysis of hiring trends
for women and minorities; a detailed retention study; an analysis of tenure and
promotion outcomes; an examination of offers, including start-up packages; and a
review of workload. After reviewing ?best practices? (including those at ADVANCE
institutions) and policies, it will identify those that would lead to the most
effective outcomes for this institution. Partnerships will be developed with
institutions graduating large numbers of women and minority students who could
be potential Western applicants, and pilot programs will be conducted including
dissemination of information collected by the project. This work will inform
Western?s subsequent development of an institutional transformation plan.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Much of the current data and knowledge
on effective institutional ?best practices? to enhance retention, recruitment
and advancement of women in STEM disciplines has emanated from Research 1
institutions. However, comprehensive institutions also employ a large number of
faculty in these disciplines and play a critical role in this endeavor. Western,
positioned well for such a project, has undertaken significant initiatives in
promoting equity and advancement for women. With its Start award, Western will
focus on precisely understanding institutional needs at and best practices
appropriate for comprehensive universities. This will ?add value? to the body of
knowledge that has already been produced by ADVANCE
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This undertaking will have a
positive impact on the greater university. Results from the two-year project may
serve as a model for other comprehensives or even community colleges that share
some of the same characteristics. Most importantly, institutional transformation
that will eventually result from this project will enhance women?s
representation and advancement in STEM disciplines at comprehensives.