* 0811169
* Computational Harmonic Analysis in Information Theory, Signal Processing, and Data Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Thomas Strohmer, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2012
* USD 419,984.00

In this research effort the investigator creates mathematical concepts and
numerical methods for information technology, communications engineering, and
data analysis. The investigator uses tools from pseudodifferential operator
theory, time-frequency analysis, random matrix theory, and Banach algebra
theory, yielding efficient numerical algorithms with rigorously-established
properties under carefully stated conditions.&lt;br/&gt;Some concrete topics of
this research effort are: (i) Development of a theoretical framework for key
problems in classical and quantum information theory. Specifically, the
investigator considers the channel capacity problem in time-varying
communications and quantum communications;&lt;br/&gt;(ii) Sparse representations
and compressed sensing in X-ray crystallography, communications, and radar.
Initial steps toward building a framework for nonlinear compressed sensing;
(iii) Noncommutative harmonic analysis and pseudodifferential operators from the
point of view of computational efficiency and the development of fast
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;Particular attention is paid to spectral factorization for
operators in a noncommutative setting, and their application in signal
processing and wireless communications.&lt;br/&gt;Strong expectation for success
of this project can be based on existing solid achievements by the investigator
in each of the described areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
proposed in this effort is a marriage of several areas of cutting edge
mathematics with state-of-the-art engineering, seeking to bring advanced
techniques from abstract and applied harmonic analysis to communications
engineering, signal processing, and data analysis in form of fast and efficient
computational methods.&lt;br/&gt;By taking the modern harmonic analysis
methodology into the engineering community this research activity will enable
further advances and breakthroughs in important applications.&lt;br/&gt;At the
same time it will stimulate new research areas in applied mathematics and pave
the road for further interactions between applied mathematicians and
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;The payoffs of this research effort for society at large
are many, ranging from new information technology capabilities and sophisticated
tools to deal with today's massive volumes of data.&lt;br/&gt;There are
financial efficiencies to be gained by communications providers which will be
accompanied by better and increased communications services for the public.
Other potential benefits include improved methods for medical imaging and
biomedical engineering.&lt;br/&gt;Beyond the project's broad technological
impact, it serves as a model for the kind of cross-disciplinary activity
critical for research and education at the mathematics/engineering frontier.
Hence this research effort helps to train graduate students in mathematics to
develop and enhance skills that are crucial and urgently needed in a high-tech
oriented society.&lt;br/&gt;