* 0811427
* CPA-CPL:   Feedback-Directed Resource Management in Virtual Private Machines
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,12/31/2010
* Steven Carr, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 12/31/2010
* USD 60,000.00

In modern computers with multiple CPUs per chip, multiple levels
of&lt;br/&gt;computer memory are shared among the CPUs. This sharing may
cause&lt;br/&gt;varying response times for computer applications,
potentially&lt;br/&gt;affecting their usability. For instance, a video
streaming&lt;br/&gt;application that has unpredictable response times due to
interference&lt;br/&gt;from other applications may be essentially unusable.
Thus, the&lt;br/&gt;computer system must attempt to allocate shared memory
resources&lt;br/&gt;equitably to increase response consistency. Virtual Private
Machines&lt;br/&gt;(VPMs), in which shared computer resources are partitioned to
give&lt;br/&gt;the illusion that a program is running on a single physical
CPU&lt;br/&gt;running in isolation, are one method to provide
response&lt;br/&gt;consistency. This research involves the development of
software&lt;br/&gt;modeling techniques to predict the memory requirements of
applications&lt;br/&gt;run on modern computers and using those predictions to
guide memory&lt;br/&gt;resource allocation to provide consistent, predictable
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this research consists of the
development of&lt;br/&gt;reuse-distance-based memory locality analysis for
multi-threaded&lt;br/&gt;applications to predict the resource requirements of
those&lt;br/&gt;applications. This research will apply the new memory locality
models&lt;br/&gt;to manage the cache and bandwidth requirements for multi-
threaded&lt;br/&gt;applications run on a VPM within a multi-
programmed&lt;br/&gt;environment. Specifically, this research will examine reuse
distance&lt;br/&gt;for Partitioned Global Address Space (PGAS) applications
written in&lt;br/&gt;Unified Parallel C (UPC). The research will investigate the
effects of&lt;br/&gt;the number of threads used per application on per-thread
data size and&lt;br/&gt;the effect on reuse distance of shared data caused by
thread&lt;br/&gt;interaction. The result will be novel solutions to memory
locality&lt;br/&gt;analysis for multi-threaded applications while allowing the
compiler&lt;br/&gt;to predict and specify the resources needed to give multi-
threaded&lt;br/&gt;applications targeted performance.