* 0811239
* ADVANCE Institutional Transformation Award:  NDSU ADVANCE FORWARD - Transforming a Gendered Institution
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2008,07/31/2016
* Gary Smith, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jessie Dearo
* 07/31/2016
* USD 3,867,120.00

North Dakota State University is a land-grant institution that, since 1999 and
under the leadership of President Joseph Chapman, has undergone tremendous
growth in student enrollment (over 12,500 total students, a 2-fold increase in
graduate students, and a 3-fold increase in international students), doctoral
programs (41), and research expenditures (over $100 million/year). Despite these
significant successes, our progress in diversity has been modest and has not yet
reached the level needed to meet President Chapman's goal of becoming "globally
recognized as a contemporary metropolitan land-grant university." This ADVANCE
FORWARD proposal marshals energies and resources to meet this important
challenge. NDSU will set in place a formally recognized structure, the
Commission on the Status of Women Faculty, headed by the Provost and linked to
key administrative authority, with strategies that reach across the university
to achieve institutional climate change and advance women, particularly in the
STEM disciplines. The FORWARD team will implement these transformational efforts
with a three-prong focus:&lt;br/&gt;1. Campus Climate: Our goal is to create a
respectful and supportive environment that fosters women's success. We will
create new policies and practices through our Commission on the Status of Women
and will add an assistant in the Office for Equity and Diversity to strengthen
recruitment. We will provide incentives in the form of grants to encourage
research on gender and will hire consultants to help departments address gender
issues. Additionally, the program will set up workshops and training for groups
of administrators and faculty, including deans, chairs/heads, faculty, and male
allies.&lt;br/&gt;2. Advancement and Leadership: Our aim is to ensure that women
faculty, through mentoring and professional development, receive the knowledge,
skills, support, and resources needed for successful teaching, research, and
leadership. The program establishes and supports mid-career and cohort mentoring
groups, and offers grants for course release, grant-writing support, leadership
training, and individual travel.&lt;br/&gt;3. Research: Our goal is to discover
if, how, and why our programs work to transform the University. Throughout the
project, we will examine our processes and evaluate the reasons for their
relative effectiveness. We will disseminate our results broadly through
workshops at other universities, professional conferences, and refereed
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project will
contribute knowledge and understanding of how to stimulate, implement, and
sustain institutional change that leads to a more diverse institution, evidenced
by 1) increased women faculty; 2) increased women competitive researchers; 3)
increased women in leadership positions; and 4) an overall environment that
permits women to flourish. Our research to uncover the processes that link
women's performance to organizational factors will contribute to an
understanding of how gendered institutional cultures and structures may be
changed to facilitate the achievement of women faculty's full
potential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: ADVANCE FORWARD programs for
institutional transformation will be merged with broader NDSU diversity efforts
to create a more inclusive campus community, including people of color and
people with disabilities. We will develop programs, conduct research, and widely
disseminate information so that similar campuses can emulate our successes. Our
results will provide templates for peer institutions with similar issues on
recruitment, retention, and advancement of women faculty. We fully expect that
the methods proposed and the outcomes described in the evaluation program will
aid other institutions to tap into the full faculty potential by developing
positive environments in which women researchers can excel. Most importantly, as
a result of this grant, women faculty at NDSU will contribute to the scientific
and technical knowledge base of the nation.