* 0811876
* CPA-DA: Design Techniques and Tools to Enable and Enhance Coarse-Grain Power Gating in ASIC Designs
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Massoud Pedram, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2011
* USD 299,998.00

PI: Pedram, Massoud&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No: 0811876&lt;br/&gt;Title: CPA-DA:
Design Techniques and Tools to Enable and Enhance Coarse-Grain Power Gating in
ASIC Designs&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Southern
California&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on coarse-grain
power gating in ASIC designs, which switches entire blocks/rows of standard
cells. This choice is due to lower cost and greater leakage savings of coarse-
grain power gating compared to its fine-grain counterpart, which inserts the
header or footer in each standard cell in the ASIC design library. The project
results are expected to include the following: (i) Distributed sleep transistor
placement and sizing; (ii) Sleep signal scheduling to minimize the peak current
demand on wakeup; (iii) Mode transition energy minimization to enable more
frequent mode transitions; (iv) Local sleep signal generation for autonomous
power gating; and (v) Power gating to enable multiple power modes. This proposal
aims to address each of these tasks by developing algorithmic or mathematical
programming solutions to solving each step and by developing a design flow and
prototype software tools that enable widespread adoption of this very
interesting and important technology in the ASIC design.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The semiconductor industry?s $261 B in 2006 revenue does
not accurately reflect its crucial role in enabling a $47 T ($61 T on a PPP
basis) world economy to thrive and grow. This industry underpins the systems and
technologies on which the people and governments of the world rely on for future
prosperity. This industry is currently facing some extraordinary challenges,
including variability of nano devices as well as excessive power dissipation in
circuits and systems. In order for the industry to continue to expand and
prosper, it is critical to address these challenges heads on. The proposed
research takes on one of these two fundamental challenges, i.e., the ?power
crisis?. The decisive impact of the proposed research will be the enablement of
the CMOS scaling to continue unabated for the next 10-15 years. Moreover, the
project will actively engage students both at graduate and undergraduate levels.
For graduate students, active participation in the research work will enhance
their creative and multidisciplinary thinking and prepare them for future
independent work. The PI?s commitment of involving undergraduate students in
carefully designed projects will help foster their long lasting enthusiasm in
scientific research activities. Integration of research into curriculum
development and classroom teaching will provide a powerful venue for the
dissemination of research results that greatly compliments the traditional
venues of conferences and archival journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;