* 0811003
* Shape and Topology Optimization on Elliptic Eigenvalue Problems in Inhomogeneous Media
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Chiu-Yen Kao, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2011
* USD 152,125.00

The frequencies at which a drumhead can vibrate depend on its shape and
topology. We can then ask what kind of shape and topology of a drumhead with a
specific weight provide the smallest bass tone (fundamental frequency). If the
drumhead is made of a single material, the answer for the shape is a disk.
However, if the drumhead is made of composite material, it is difficult to find
the optimal shape and topology. This is one of the questions that can be
formulated as shape and topology optimization on elliptic eigenvalue problems in
inhomogeneous media.

The goal of this work is to develop efficient numerical approaches to find the
optimal shape and topology by using gradient calculation and a thresholding
technique. The common numerical approach for these problems is to start with an
initial guess for the shape and then gradually evolve it, until it morphs into
the optimal shape. One of the difficulties is that the topology of the optimal
shape is unknown. Developing numerical techniques that can automatically handle
topology changes becomes essential for shape and topology optimization problems.
The level-set approach based on both shape derivatives and topological
derivatives has been well-known for its ability to handle topology changes.
Instead of using shape derivatives and topological derivatives, we develop a new
binary approach, which is based on the projection gradient method combined with
a thresholding process that can potentially change the topology.

The proposed research will result in a new binary approach to find the optimal
geometry for elliptic eigenvalue problems. These problems have many applications
including resonant frequency control, photonic devices design, and population
biology. Specifically, the proposed numerical approach will be applied to four
different types of problems: (1) Design a vibrating composite membrane with
extremal resonant frequency; (2) Find the composite material with maximal or
desired spectrum gap; (3) Design optical and electromagnetic resonators that
have high quality factor (low loss of energy); (4) Find the best spatial
environment for the maintenance of alleles in population genetics.

This research will also provide dissertation topics and research projects for
some undergraduate students, graduate students, and postdocs. The PI plans to
release the code for public usage. It will enhance general research study on
shape optimization for elliptic eigenvalue problems. More numerical optimal
configurations will be found, and this will produce new insight into theoretical
discovery.