* 0811205
* ADVANCE Institutional Transformation Award:  Advancing Diversity Through Alignment of Policies and Practices (ADAPP)
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2014
* Clare Luz, Michigan State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jessie Dearo
* 08/31/2014
* USD 4,160,705.00

The goals of the institutional transformation initiative at Michigan State
University (MSU), Advancing Diversity through Alignment of Policies and
Procedures (ADAPP), are to increase the number of women recruited in the
Colleges of Natural Science, Social Science and Engineering, improve their
retention and advancement, and improve the climate for women in these three
Colleges. These goals address issues that have been identified as barriers for
women in STEM disciplines both nationally and by women at MSU. We will
accomplish these goals by implementing specific structures and practices that
are components of a strategic human resource management (SHRM) methodology. The
initiatives will focus on aligning strategic goals of units and colleges with
the university-wide value of diversity and on implementing objective evaluation
criteria for recruitment, advancement and retention in order to reduce bias
related to informal and subjective processes. Practically, this involves
integrating goals, policies and practices so that critical behaviors, attitudes,
and outcomes that promote diversity are consistently reinforced and rewarded.
Research supports the effectiveness of the SHRM approach, and it is widely
viewed as a "best practice" for promoting desired behavior and attitudes,
increasing accountability, and reducing bias in faculty employment decisions.
Yet, no previous NSF Institutional Transformation ADVANCE grant has adopted a
SHRM model as the operational framework to advance project goals. Thus, MSU will
adopt this approach for implementing initiatives designed to advance women in
STEM disciplines. The overall goals will be achieved by integrating the
following policies and practices: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- developing and clearly
communicating strategic goals at the department- and college-levels in
recruiting and supporting a diverse faculty; &lt;br/&gt;- defining and clearly
communicating objective criteria to be used during recruitment, annual reviews,
promotion and tenure processes and retention negotiations that reflect these
strategic goals; &lt;br/&gt;- providing workshops to assist faculty and
department chairs in developing and implementing goals and objective criteria;
&lt;br/&gt;- monitoring and evaluating the application of these criteria to the
processes of faculty recruitment and advancement, in part by implementing an
electronic human resource information system and by appointing trained diversity
officers to monitor progress; &lt;br/&gt;- providing assistance to units in
designing mentoring programs that reflect such criteria; &lt;br/&gt;-
determining the overall impact of these processes on the stated goals by
measuring the level of recruitment, retention and advancement of women faculty
and by surveying faculty in STEM disciplines to determine the perceived impact
of these processes on faculty recruitment and advancement and on faculty
climate; and finally &lt;br/&gt;- recognizing and acknowledging successful units
in tangible ways, such as supporting nominations for the annual MSU Excellence
in Diversity award. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Our project will
implement and test a unique conceptual model addressing how increased structure
of employment practices and their alignment with the diversity value, will
effect change in the recruitment, retention and advancement of women and create
a sustainable positive for women. The project outcomes will indicate if specific
increases in structure will bring about changes in the work environment and
perceived climate by improving communication, increasing transparency, providing
consistency and adding measures of accountability in the employment processes.
The methods are novel, and such an ADVANCE project has not been carried out at a
large research university. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impact can occur
when these improved structures and policies are applied to all steps in the STEM
academic career ladder, to other academic positions and to other disciplinary
areas. This model is proposed to result in an improved climate for women at all
levels and, if successful, will be disseminated for adoption by other
institutions.