* 0811192
* ADVANCE IT Start Award:  Research, Reflect, Plan - IT Start at New York City College of Technology
* EHR,HRD
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Pamela Brown, CUNY New York City College of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Beth Mitchneck
* 07/31/2011
* USD 195,704.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;City Tech will research, reflect upon, and plan a
transformational initiative for women STEM faculty that will improve the
professional climate and enable women to realize their full professional
potential unimpeded by either structural barriers posed by the institution or
more subtle forms of self-limitation that arise from gender stereotyping and
societal expectations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. In the first
year City Tech will conduct research and perform quantitative and qualitative
analyses that enable the college to consider the professional standing of women
in STEM fields, both within the college and comparatively across institutions,
using perspectives of history, psychology, and sociology as lenses through which
to view data and testimony. In the second year City Tech will disseminate
research findings, reflect upon their meaning, build consensus for a plan of
action, learn as much as we can about how other ADVANCE-funded institutions have
put programs into action that redress gender inequities, and come up with a plan
based upon our unique institutional needs and context.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project brings together expertise from a wide variety
of sources: in addition to the in-house expertise of a research active STEM
faculty and a well-qualified project staff, the proposed STEM self-study will
engage nationally recognized researchers and equity consultants such as the
Collaborative for Academic Careers in Higher Education (COACHE) and the
Commission on Professionals in Science and Technology. Our Advisory Board will
draw on the expertise of nationally known leaders in the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. This IT START project has the
potential for extremely broad impact. While the target population is first and
foremost the female faculty in STEM departments, the ultimate beneficiaries will
be the entire faculty of over 1000 members who will benefit from a more
transparent and more enabling climate for success. In addition, the college
administration will be aware of the structural and subjective factors that
mitigate against women?s professional advancement in order to engage in
redressing them. While the achievement of gender equity in the professional
lives of female STEM faculty is of absolute value in and of itself, it also has
profound implications for future generations of students. Underrepresented
minority students, the college's primary student demographic, are critical to
the future of STEM in America. They deserve models of successful women
scientists, engineers, and mathematicians of many races and ethnicities, in whom
they can see their own nascent dreams embodied.