* 0811693
* CPA-CSA-T:  Low Cost and Comprehensive Hardware Reliability
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Sarita Adve, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Hong Jiang
* 08/31/2013
* USD 500,000.00

Hardware reliability is becoming an increasing concern in the late CMOS era.
Components in shipped chips will fail for many reasons, requiring mechanisms to
detect, diagnose, recover from, and repair/reconfigure around these failed
components so that the system can provide reliable operation. The pervasiveness
of the problem across a broad market demands low-cost and general reliability
solutions that can be deployed in general-purpose, commodity systems running
applications with varying reliability requirements. Traditional reliability
solutions involving excessive redundancy are too expensive, as are piecemeal
solutions that address individual failure modes. This work proposes a full
system solution that aims to provide a common framework for error detection,
diagnosis, recovery, and repair/reconfiguration for a variety of hardware
failure modes, with a customizable reliability vs. overhead
tradeoff.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two key high-level observations motivate the
approach. First, the hardware reliability solutions need handle only the device
faults that propagate through higher levels of the system and become observable
to software. Second, in spite of the reliability threat, fault-free operation
remains the common case and must be optimized, possibly at the cost of increased
overhead once a fault is detected. The proposed system therefore detects faults
by watching for anomalous software behavior (or symptoms of faults), using novel
zero to low-cost hardware and software monitors. After a fault is detected, it
invokes an innovative, but potentially expensive, procedure for diagnosing the
fault source to enable reconfiguration/repair (in the case of hard faults). For
recovery, it relies on a checkpoint/replay mechanism, including pure hardware
and hybrid software assisted recovery depending on detection latency.
Coordinating all of the above is a thin firmware layer that provides flexibility
and customizability. A major component of the work is a much needed formulation
and validation of microarchitecture level fault models, required to drive high-
level reliability solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;