* 0811167
* Discontinuous Galerkin Methods for Optimal Control Problems Governed by Advection-Diffusion Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Dmitriy Leykekhman, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Dalin Tang
* 06/30/2012
* USD 106,836.00

There are several methods to approach real-life problems. An attractive and
relatively cheap approach is to design a mathematical model that describes some
physical phenomena and to use this model to make predictions. To validate the
model it is important that the predictions agree with real observations. Usually
mathematical models have several parameters that are unknown or uncertain. Given
some observations, these parameters can be tuned in order to reduce the
discrepancy between the predicted and the observed values. In other words, by
refining a model we want to minimize certain objective quantities produced by
the model. Mathematically these types of problems can be classified as optimal
control problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal we are interested in
optimal control problems with constraints given by systems of partial
differential equations (PDEs). In particular, we are interested in models that
describe an evolution of a flow. The corresponding PDEs for such problems are
called advection-diffusion equations. These equations are fundamental and
solutions to such equations often exhibit "nonsmooth behavior", like shocks,
boundary and interior layers, and interface discontinuities. Such phenomena are
often observed in reality and possess serious computational and analytical
challenges in order to solve such problems numerically. In designing a numerical
method it is very important to know how the method behaves in the neighborhood
of such discontinuities, and whether or not the resulting effects are global or
local. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the years many competitive methods have been
designed. In this proposal we intend to incorporate a family of Discontinuous
Galerkin (DG) methods. These methods have received a lot of attention lately.
The main attractive feature is that DG methods use discontinuous functions to
approximate the unknown solutions and in principle are well suited for problems
with sharp changes in function values.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal we
intend to develop new analytical tools that will enable us to analyze such
methods in the context of optimal control problems. We also plan to demonstrate
computationally the advantages of the DG methods for estimating important
physical quantities, such as bottom drag coefficient and eddy viscosity, over
other commonly used methods for real-life geophysical flow problems.