* 0811076
* ADVANCE IT Start Award:  Establishing the Foundation for Future Organizational Reform and Transformation (EFFORT@RIT)
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Margaret Bailey, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Beth Mitchneck
* 07/31/2012
* USD 199,770.00

The ADVANCE IT-Start proposed project, ?Establishing the Foundation for
Future&lt;br/&gt;Organizational Reform and Transformation @ RIT? (EFFORT@RIT) is
a two-year study across RIT?s four Science, Technology, Engineering and
Mathematics (STEM) colleges. engineering and science at Rochester Institute of
Technology. In order to achieve our mission, the goal of our institutional
transformation start-up project is to develop an evidence-based approach
toaddress factors resulting in the under-representation of women in STEM faculty
positions at RIT. Objectives supporting achievement of this goal include: 1)
Identify barriers for current women faculty in regards to rank, tenure and
leadership role progression, 2) Examine faculty recruitment patterns in terms of
gender equity, and 3) Establish how well RIT does in addressing these factors
when compared with the competition. Through initiatives currently underway, from
the Women in Engineering Program?s tremendous growth to the President?s
launching of an Equity Scorecard program, RIT has gathered momentum to position
itself for institutional change in regards to gender inclusiveness and equity
within faculty ranks. The proposed NSF project will allow RIT to build upon this
energy and accelerate the transformation process through careful data driven
studies of our current position.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our proposed activities
fall into assessment and evaluation general categories using: a) current climate
with respect to gender inclusiveness, and b) benchmark data comparing RIT
against peer institutions in regards to policies, hiring/retention/promotion
patterns. The project team is a blend of dynamic leaders from the four STEM
colleges, who share an active&lt;br/&gt;interest and agenda related to women in
STEM. Together, the group creates a strong, well-integrated core with high
levels of synergy who will work with the Advisory Board in overseeing all
aspects of the EFFORT@RIT project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EFFORT@RIT assessment
and evaluation results will be disseminated broadly.&lt;br/&gt;Firmly grounded
with clear organization, innovative assessment tools, and seasoned leadership,
EFFORT@RIT will inform RIT of necessary institutional transformation
activities.&lt;br/&gt;