* 0811826
* Langston's Integrated Network College Featuring The STEM Digital Village (LINC, Phase II)
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* John Coleman, Langston University
* Continuing Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2014
* USD 2,543,000.00

Langston's Integrated Network College (LINC) is a five year, HBCU-UP
implementation project aimed at creating a 21st century Digital Village. The
overall goals of the project are to 1) increase the number of underserved
students who enter college, receive undergraduate and advanced degrees in STEM
disciplines, and choose STEM careers and 2) expand the diversity of participants
in the Langston University STEM program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LINC project
aims to realize the goals through the implementation of the following
activities:&lt;br/&gt;1. Institution of a STEM Digital Village that will support
recruitment and retention through the dissemination of information, tracking of
Langston's STEM students, and supporting collaboration through
dialog;&lt;br/&gt;2. Use of Competency Performance Recordings for Learning
(CPR-L) which involves learning by teaching methods where students create
recording of themselves doing problems utilizing tablet PCs, forcing students
toward solitude and focus, and producing a Competence Performance recording of
the students grasp of the subject matter;&lt;br/&gt;3. Implementation of a
summer bridge program, aimed at incoming freshmen, with an emphasis on
Chemistry, Biology and Calculus;&lt;br/&gt;4. Implementation of developmental
internships and master tutors, lab assistants and research internships aimed at
undergraduate STEM majors;&lt;br/&gt;5. Implementation of online tutorial
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A cornerstone of the project, the STEM Digital
Village, is an online community designed to support retention by creating a
vehicle that encourages on-demand dialog between cohorts, or between cohorts and
STEM graduates, among other things. The Village will assist in tracking students
post graduation through the use of their expertise as mentors for current
Langston students. The Digital Village will also be a conduit for the
dissemination of information and findings related to the program.