* 0811132
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Artistic Production and Oral Tradition in a Yup'ik Community: The Scammon Bay "Fireball Story"
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2010
* Katrin Simon, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 01/31/2010
* USD 12,000.00

The focus of this research is on expressions of contemporary Yup'ik culture as
they occur through varied tellings of an ominous narrative of a natural
phenomenon, the "fireball story." While recording interviews during previous
fieldwork (summers of 2006 and 2007) in Scammon Bay, a Central Yup'ik community
of 450 people, located on the southwestern shore of the Bering Sea in Alaska,
the CoPI Katrin Simon noted an emergent theme in oral accounts, that of the
"fireballs." These are a form of dangerous sea creatures who visit the village
in the form of fiery balls or burning hands and kill ill-mannered community
members. Contemporary Scammon Bay residents fear attacks by these sinister
ancestral beings and employ the fireball story to explain bad luck, social
malaise, conflict and death. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; By researching the history
of this tale and recording its contemporary range of expressions, Simon will
investigate how narrative and artistic production reflects and shapes the social
realities of contemporary Yup'ik life. The history of contact in southwestern
Alaska has been one of acute disruption brought on by the introduction of
Western belief and political-economic systems. It is hypothesized that the
"fireball phenomenon" acts as a central metaphor, articulating for the people of
Scammon Bay modern-day social ills in a non-disruptive fashion; thus
strengthening Yup'ik peoples? resilience in circumstances of rapid social
change. The "fireball story" is said to provide healing for the community,
offering a way to articulate societal tensions. By analyzing the connection
between creative activities, colonial history and conflict resolution, this
project explores the way Yup'ik people use art and storytelling to renew
relationships to their traditional culture and redefine both past and present.