* 0811638
* Enabling Tomorrow's Research Scientists--The Next Level
* EHR,HRD
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2014
* Abdul Turay, Tougaloo College
* Continuing Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 09/30/2014
* USD 2,462,874.00

Tougaloo College, a small HBCU in Mississippi, through the HBCU-UP progam, will
implement activities aimed at the following objectives: 1) to improve retention
in gate-keeping courses in biology, chemistry and mathematics; 2) to strengthen
STEM curricula through incorporation of new pedagogic approaches aimed at
promoting a greater depth of knowledge of STEM; 3) to promote more faculty and
student research in the sciences with the aim at increasing student enrollment
in graduate and professional schools in STEM; and

Supplemental Instruction (SI), based on the classic SI model, will be
implemented in gatekeeper courses as a retention strategy. This activity builds
on work done during the Tougaloo?s first five year HBCU-UP project. Other
retention activities will include attention to co-curricular STEM activities,
including support of STEM clubs on campus, and the development of a new one-
credit freshman course for STEM majors.

New pedagogy based on NSF funded Process Oriented Guided Inquiry Learning
(POGIL) will be implemented in various courses, beginning with chemistry. In
addition to the focus on gatekeeper courses, the curriculum development will
include the use of web-based laboratories and development of new upper level
courses to prepare students use of current scientific tools. Some courses
proposed will incorporate informatics (including data mining tools), nano
chemistry and biology, and in-silico biology and drug discovery.

Activities aimed at recruitment, as well as ensuring better preparation of
incoming students, are the summer pre-matriculation program that will impact 40
high school students per year, and coordinating with surrounding secondary
schools to offer Physics. Tougaloo College is among US top 20 producers of
female, undergraduate physics majors. The proposal points to an acute shortage
of persons qualified to teach physics in the surrounding schools. In order to
address this, the Tougaloo physics department will direct the offering of
physics for high school students, which will be taught on weekends and evenings.

Faculty and student research will be supported both on campus through the
availability of faculty research grants, and off campus through collaborations
with other institutions and laboratories.