* 0811882
* CPA-CPL: Cache-Aware Synchronization and Scheduling of Data-Parallel Programs for Multi-Core Processors
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Alexander Veidenbaum, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2012
* USD 355,717.00

Project Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multi-core (parallel) processors are
becoming ubiquitous. The use of such systems is key to science, engineering,
finance, and other major areas of the economy. However, increased applications
performance on such systems can only be achieved with advances in mapping such
applications to multi-core machines. This task is made more difficult by the
presence of complex memory organizations which is perhaps the key bottleneck to
efficient execution, and which was not previously addressed effectively. This
research involves making the mapping of the program to the machine aware of the
complexities of the memory-hierarchy in all phases of the compilation process.
This will ensure a good fit between the application code and the actual machine
and thereby guarantee much more effective utilization of the hardware (and thus
efficient/fast execution) than was previously possible.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern processors (multi-cores) employ increasingly
complex memory hierarchies. Management of such hierarchies is becoming critical
to the overall success of the compilation process since effective utilization of
the memory hierarchy dominates overall performance. This research develops a new
cache-hierarchy-aware compilation and runtime system (i.e., including
compilation, scheduling, and static/dynamic processor mapping of parallel
programs). These tasks have one thing in common: they all need accurate
estimates of data element (iteration, task) computation and memory access times
which are currently beyond the (cache-oblivious) state-of-the-art. This research
thus develops new techniques for iteration space partitioning, scheduling, and
synchronization which capture the variability due to cache, memory, and
conditional statement behavior and their interaction. This research will have a
broad impact on the computer industry as it will allow the ubiquitous multi-core
systems of the future to be efficiently exploited by parallel programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;