* 0811108
* Mechanisms and effectiveness of predator detection by capuchin monkeys
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2007,06/30/2009
* Charles Janson, University of Montana
* Continuing Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 06/30/2009
* USD 64,064.00

This study is designed to fill in critical gaps in our understanding of primate-
predator relationships. One of the most widely quoted reasons that primates live
in groups is to reduce the risk of predation. However, some primates that suffer
high predation rates nevertheless forage alone or in very small groups. This
observation and the predictions of several theoretical models suggest that high
predation risk can favor either very small or very large groups. Which outcome
occurs depends on 1) the method and effectiveness of detection of the predator
by the primate prey in groups of different sizes, and 2) the relative ability of
prey and predator to detect each other. Despite many studies of vigilance
behavior in primates, there is only fragmentary knowledge for any species on how
effective vigilance is in detecting predators, at what average distance
detection occurs, and the variables that affect the chance of detection. Even
less is known about the hunting behavior and detection ability of the predators
of primates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To measure the important variables that
explain group size in animals as a function of predation risk, five different-
sized groups of wild brown capuchin monkeys in Argentina will have live
(tethered) and model predators placed in their home ranges. Observers will
follow individual monkeys and record a set of context variables (individual's
sex and age, distance to the 'predator', monkey's height in the forest,
direction the monkey is looking, etc.), along with whether or not the monkey
detects the predator, as signaled by alarm calls or a sudden prolonged and fixed
stare directly at the predator. Each live tethered bird of prey will be video-
taped as a group of monkeys approaches; the distance at which it detects the
group and whether the detection is by sight or sound will be determined from the
video tape and associated verbal commentary. The detail and sample size of
observations will improve greatly on prior studies because the use of model and
captive predators permits greater control of the detection process, including
systematic variation of detection conditions and recording observations both
before and after detection occurs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this
study will address an important question about the origins of social living in
human ancestors, and thus may help to explain the form of current human
societies. The project will also contribute to biodiversity conservation by: 1)
continuing the long-term presence of researchers in the study site to discourage
poachers, 2) contributing to the long-term database on group demography of this
long-lived species, 3) continued monitoring of long-term changes in local
ecology due to invasive species and climate change. The research will help train
at least one U.S. graduate student, several college undergraduates, and one or
more Argentine biologists. Data from this project will be contributed to a
large-scale meta-database for animal behavior, to allow easy online access to
current and future researchers. Genetic material sampled from the monkey
population will be placed in a public biomaterials repository for future access.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;