* 0811157
* Broadening Participation in Science and Mathematics: The Next Level
* EHR,HRD
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2013
* Arthur Bacon, Talladega College
* Continuing Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 07/31/2013
* USD 2,503,247.00

Talladega College, a small, private HBCU in Alabama, will implement activities
funded by the HBCU-UP aimed at the following goals: 1. To enhance teaching
skills of the faculty and improve and broaden undergraduate research activities
across STEM disciplines, including biology, chemistry, computer science,
mathematics, physics and psychology; 2. To establish a computerized mathematics
laboratory to help improve teaching and learning in lower level mathematics
courses; 3. To develop a test-taking skills course to aid students in preparing
to achieve competitive scores on graduate school entrance exams; and 4. To
provide STEM activities for middle school students and initiate a high school-
to-college bridge program.

The project aims to institutionalize practices aimed at increasing the number of
students involved in research. Students in all STEM disciplines will be
encouraged to participate in research activities, including presentation of
scientific articles, and participation in faculty mentored research projects.
Faculty will be supported in research activities across STEM fields.

Student success in mathematics will be addressed in two ways. Successful
strategies for the teaching of mathematics will be adapted from University of
Alabama, Tuscaloosa, Universidad Interamericana, and Virginia Tech in order to
increase success in mathematics courses. This will involve incorporation of the
use of technology, and the use of other teaching strategies. In addition to
teaching strategies in the classroom, a computerized mathematics laboratory will
be established to improve teaching and learning in lower level mathematics
courses.

In order to increase the number of student matriculating into graduate and
professional schools, all students will be required to take a course that
strengthens test taking abilities. This course should increase student knowledge
of the GRE examination, thus indirectly encouraging students to apply to
graduate schools.

The project aims to increase retention through outreach activities including
school-to-college bridge programs for students, and collaboration with middle
school teachers to develop inquiry based science activities. Faculty and
students from Talladega will also work with middle school teachers and students
in designing science fair projects, and for in class demonstrations.