* 0811287
* CPA-SEL: Collaborative Research: Trace-Driven Verification of Multithreaded Software
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Zijiang Yang, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2012
* USD 176,000.00

CCF-0811287/CCF-0810865&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Research: Trace-Driven
Verification of Multithreaded Software&lt;br/&gt;Zijiang Yang and Karem
Sakallah&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ever increasing use of hyper-threading and the
availability of inexpensive multiprocessor hardware present tremendous
opportunities as well as serious challenges for software developers. In order
for software applications to benefit from the continued exponential throughput
advances in multicore processors, the applications must be well-written
multithreaded software programs. Unfortunately, writing multithreaded software
programs that can unleash the full potential of present and future hardware
systems remains as challenging today as it was thirty years ago. This research
aims to develop practical tools and methodologies that can bring down the
complexity of testing/debugging multithreaded programs to a level comparable to
that of testing/debugging sequential programs. To this end, existing debugging
tools have to be enhanced with powerful reasoning engines that allow them to
implicitly analyze all possible thread interleavings under the specified test
inputs. During the course of this project a variety of approaches to achieve
this objective will be investigated, including some novel ideas that seem
particularly promising from a preliminary analysis: (1) efficient symbolic
encoding of multithreaded programs, (2) trace-driven abstraction and refinement
of their execution, and (3) performance enhancement techniques that allow this
approach to scale to realistic program sizes.