* 0811038
* III-COR-Small: Beyond Keyword Search: Enabling Diverse Structured Query Paradigms over Text Databases
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Luis Gravano, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2013
* USD 448,976.00

The text available on the Web and beyond embeds unprecedented volumes of
valuable structured data, "hidden" in natural language. For example, a news
article might discuss an outbreak of an infectious disease, reporting the name
of the disease, the number of people affected, and the geographical regions
involved. Keyword search, the prevalent query paradigm for text, is often
insufficiently expressive for complex information needs that require structured
data embedded in text. For such needs, users (e.g., an epidemiologist compiling
statistics, as reported in the media, on recent foodborne disease outbreaks in a
remote country) are forced to embark in labor-intensive cycles of keyword-based
document retrieval and manual document filtering, until they locate the
appropriate (structured) information. To move beyond keyword search, this
project exploits information extraction technology, which identifies structured
data in text, to enable structured querying. To capture diverse user information
needs and depart from a "one-size-fits-all" querying approach, which is
inappropriate for this extraction-based scenario, this project explores a wealth
of structured query paradigms: sometimes users (e.g., a high-school student in
need of some quick examples and statistics for a report on recent salmonella
outbreaks in developing countries) are after a few exploratory results, which
should be returned fast; some other times, users (e.g., the above epidemiologist
investigating foodborne diseases) are after comprehensive results, for which
waiting a longer time is acceptable. The project develops specialized cost-based
query optimizers for each query paradigm, accounting for the efficiency and,
critically, the result quality of the query execution plans. The technology
produced will assist a vast range of users and information needs, by enabling
efficient, diverse interactions with text databases -- for sophisticated
searching and data mining -- that are cumbersome or impossible with today's
technology. The research and educational components of the project will rely on
-- and encourage -- a tight integration of three complementary Computer Science
disciplines, namely, natural language processing, information retrieval, and
databases. The project will also provide data sets and source code, for
experimentation and evaluation, to the community at large over the Web
(http://extraction.cs.columbia.edu/).