* 0811724
* CPA-CSA-T:  ATAC:  Enhancing Multicore Programmability through All-to-All Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Anant Agarwal, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Hong Jiang
* 07/31/2012
* USD 1,000,000.00

The computing world has made a generational shift to multicore as a way of
addressing ?Moore?s Gap,? (the growing disparity between the performance offered
by sequential processors and the scaling expections set by Moore?s law.) Two-
and four-core multicores are commonplace today, with scaling to thousands of
cores expected by the middle of the next decade. Unfortunately, because even
two- and four-core multicores (let alone thousand-core multicores) are extremely
hard to program, the widespread acceptance of multicore architectures is
threatened. The multicore programming challenge is a serious issue that requires
us to think about bold new approaches to architecture, programming, and
software.

The ATAC project is based on one simple idea: that a low-latency, low-energy
broadcast mechanism from any core to all other cores can yield a big step
forward in multicore programmability. The broadcast mechanism is enabled by a
novel CMOS-integrated chip-level optical interconnection using WDM (wave-
division multiplexing) with multiple add/drop points. The optical interconnect
augments a traditional electrical-mesh interconnect in a tiled multicore
processor. Although point-to-point electrical interconnect is capable of
delivering performance that is competitive with on-chip optical interconnect, it
does not solve the programmability issue. Thus, in ATAC, the optical broadcast
capability does not replace basic electrical interconnect, it simply augments it
for programmability. Accordingly, to drastically ease programming for
multicores, this project will design the ATAC computer architecture that
augments an on-chip mesh network with an on-chip optical broadcast network. Such
a network enables blazingly fast broadcast communication that will allow
programmers to take full advantage of the multicore opportunity, even as
multicores scale to thousands of cores. One way it can accomplish this is by
enabling novel, distributed coherent-shared-memory architectures that provide
efficient support for current programming models. Although this broadcast
capability has the potential to greatly speed-up existing algorithms, its
greatest appeal lies in its ability to facilitate new, easy-to-use programming
models. Therefore, this project will also develop programming models and APIs
(application programming interfaces) facilitated by a cheap broadcast, and
evaluate the resulting impact on both performance and programming ease. The ATAC
project will collaborate with UCSD's Arsenal project, which is developing
massively heterogeneous multicores that drive the demand for efficient on-chip
interconnects.