* 0811063
* HCC-Small:   The End of Pointing and Clicking:   Improving Computer Access with Goal Crossing
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Jacob Wobbrock, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2012
* USD 464,905.00

Many people with motor impairments still find it difficult to use desktop
computers despite earnest efforts in accessibility research. The literature
continues to show that specialized assistive technologies are often abandoned or
never acquired due to cost, complexity, configuration, maintenance,
unavailability, and the need for training. Instead, commodity devices like
everyday mice and trackballs are widely used by many people with motor
impairments, but current graphical user interfaces are not well matched to the
abilities of these users. In this project, rather than attempting the tired
approach of adapting special users to standard point-and-click interfaces, the
PI's goal is to radically change user interfaces to be better suited to users,
by removing the two major obstacles to successful human-computer interaction for
people with motor impairments: the need to point to confined areas, and the need
to click within them. The PI will accomplish these objectives with goal
crossing, an interaction technique in which people only need to move their mouse
across a threshold without acquiring an area or executing a stable click.
Although goal crossing has been studied and employed in pen-based interfaces, it
has not been employed in mouse-based interfaces or for improving computer
access. Goal crossing in mouse-based interfaces is challenging because of the
occlusion problem, where an unwanted goal lies in front of a desired one
(although the mouse button could be used to disambiguate, people with motor
impairments cannot reliably drag). Nevertheless, a preliminary study conducted
by the PI found that goal crossing has higher throughput, is faster, and
exhibits more path and submovement accuracy than area pointing for people with
motor impairments. The PI will leverage these performance findings in the
current project, in the creation of accessible goal crossing user interfaces. He
will do this through the following four steps: Development and evaluation of
crossing widgets (this step will employ a highly iterative process to create
interactive prototypes and testing them with people with motor impairments);
Creation and evaluation of exemplar crossing applications (this step will build
three exemplar applications for text editing, drawing, and photos that will
explore crossing widget layout, grouping, and interaction); Development of a
programmers' toolbox for crossing widgets (this step will create and deploy a
crossing widget toolbox to enable developers to create crossing-based
applications); Creation of the SUPPLE-X automatic user interface generator (an
automatic user interface generator based on SUPPLE++ that is capable of creating
ability-based goal crossing interfaces by measuring users' functional
capabilities). This research will be conducted as a collaboration between the
Information School, the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, and the
Department of Rehabilitation Medicine at the University of
Washington.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This work will lead to
greater awareness of how software can be tailored to meet the needs of users
with motor impairments, and to increased accessibility to information technology
for this user community. The research will establish a new paradigm of
accessible computing that may be transferable to other platforms, such as mobile
touch screens, information kiosks, and continuous voice-based mouse control.
Project outcomes will include deployed applications and programming tools that
can be downloaded free of charge.