* 0811275
* Collaborative Research:  Enhanced Least-Squares Methods for PIV Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2008,12/31/2011
* Steve McCormick, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 12/31/2011
* USD 156,122.00

Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV) is a method for obtaining a fluid velocity
field based on the translation of particles between images with a known time
span between them. A potential limitation of PIV is that only two-dimensional
velocity field along a single plane can be obtained from a two-dimensional
image. This limitation is normally overcome by designing the experimental flow
system so that the third velocity component is either zero or unimportant. In
many applications, however, it is not possible to simplify the fully three-
dimensional velocity field (e.g., in the left ventricle of the heart), and the
two-dimensional limitations associated with PIV analysis are a significant
problem that must be overcome. Would it be possible, however, to combine the
two-dimensional PIV data together with a fully three-dimensional numerical
approximation to the Navier-Stokes equations and obtain a sufficiently accurate
three-dimensional velocity field in a domain such as the left ventricle of the
heart? The use of least-squares finite element methods (LSFEMs) is proposed here
to approximately solve the Navier-Stokes equations, and, significantly, to
weakly constrain the solution along the PIV plane to match the experimental
data. The PIV data would basically act as an internal boundary, and the
numerical solution would weakly match the data with a variable weighting that
determines the strength of the coupling between the data and numerical solution.
LSFEMs are uniquely well suited for solving an over-constrained problem like
this in a computationally efficient
manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Echocardiologists have developed methods for
introducing microbubbles into circulating blood that can be resolved using
ultrasound. The location of the microbubbles combined with the high temporal
resolution of ultrasound allows the local blood velocity to be determined using
Particle Image Velocimetry, but the high temporal resolution requirement also
limits the ultrasound scans (and, hence, the velocity field data) to two
dimensions. One goal of using the FDA approved microbubbles is to use the blood
velocity data to calculate physiologically important information such as
pressure gradients and energy loss for the blood flow, but these calculations
require a full three-dimensional velocity field. The goal of the proposed
research is to develop mathematical techniques that combine computational fluid
dynamics with experimental velocity data, such as that from microbubbles, to
obtain a full, three-dimensional velocity field, thus providing greater insight
into the dynamics of the flow.&lt;br/&gt;