* 0811632
* CPA-DA:   Dealing with Voltage Variations and Supply Noise During Performance Verification in Nanometer Tehcnology Designs
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Mark Tehranipoor, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2012
* USD 250,000.00

Proposal ID: 0811632, &lt;br/&gt;PI Name: Mohammad Tehranipoor, &lt;br/&gt;PI
Institution: University of Connecticut, &lt;br/&gt;Title: CPA-DA: Dealing with
Voltage Variations and Supply Noise During Performance Verification in Nanometer
Technology Designs&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT: &lt;br/&gt;Power supply noise
(PSN) will be a serious issue in nanometer technology designs especially during
post-silicon performance verification and speed binning. Such effect must be
efficiently taken into consideration, as it poses design, test and reliability
challenges for the chip manufacturers/foundries. This situation has grown more
complicated with reducing supply voltage and the limitation of further reduction
of threshold voltage leading to reduced noise margin and increased circuit
sensitivity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the necessity of new
comprehensive and efficient PSN analysis, power model, pattern generation, and
design for testability (DFT) methods to alleviate the above issues during
performance verification and speed binning in new technology generations. This
project will also address the practical issues of power analysis and proposes
new power model, statistical PSN analysis, and efficient measurement procedure
for measuring performance degradation due to excessive voltage, process and
environmental variations. The Intellectual Merit of the research is that it will
significantly increase the quality and reliability of chips and reduce the
manufacturing costs. The broader impact is (i) the contribution to debugging and
diagnostic groups of EDA and semiconductor industry to assess and verify the
performance of design prototypes, (ii) the education of undergraduate and
graduate students, and (iii) the development of new courses, and (iv) the
dissemination of data and methodologies to researchers in academia and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;