* 0811738
* Parallel-on-Demand  --- A Broad Purpose 3D-Integrated Performance Acceleration Layer for General Purpose Processors
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Hsien-Hsin Lee, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Hong Jiang
* 07/31/2012
* USD 255,000.00

With the continuing trend of shrinking feature size and advances in process
technology, it would be feasible to integrate 10 to 100 billion transistors on a
chip in near future. Nevertheless, one fundamental physical limit, power
consumption, must be addressed to enable such trend. Power is no longer a
desirable feature but an actual design constraint in making future many-core
processor systems practical. On the other hand, emerging process technologies
such as 3D die stacking enables a new dimension of integration and provides new
opportunities for improving bandwidth, latency, and power. Given such design
constraints and new opportunities, the current symmetric, homogeneous multi-core
processors integrated in a MIMD manner will be inappropriate as a scalable
solution from power- and area-efficiency standpoints despite their reduced
implementation effort. In particular, for applications with inherently high
data-level parallelism, it is possible to design new architectures that exploit
the 3D stacking. In this research, a new many-core architecture, called
Parallel-On-Demand (POD), will be investigated to exploit the maximum
performance for a given die area and energy budget. Instead of using
conventional, special-purpose ASIC accelerators, POD integrates a performance
acceleration layer (PAL), which is tightly coupled as a separate die layer using
3D die stacking. PAL leverages many ideas learned from massively parallel
processors but focuses on modern multi-faceted challenges such as power and area
efficiency, on-chip wire delay issues, on-chip interconnects, integration with
out-of-order cores, backward/forward compatibility, virtualized resource
mapping, and extensibility. A 3D-integrated performance acceleration layer
applied as a snap-on feature also makes the entire system flexible, reducing
non-recurring engineering cost for different target markets. Moreover, new
programming models will be investigated to simplify the interaction between
programmers and POD, overall hardware complexity and its ensuing power
implications. The success of such 3D on-die many-core architecture will provide
a foundation to enable highly scalable computation with substantial energy
efficiency, paving the road to Peta-FLOPS computing with minimal resources.