* 0811773
* Targeted Infusion Grant: Development of an Experimental Psychology Teaching &amp; Research Laboratory at Tennessee State University
* EHR,HRD
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2010
* Kiesa Kelly, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Caesar R. Jackson
* 12/31/2010
* USD 148,555.00

[HRD 0811773] The Tennessee State University (TSU) is working to enhance the
experimental psychology curriculum and increases mentored research opportunities
for undergraduate students. This HBCU-UP Targeted Infusion Project supports
further development of the TSU state-of-the-art Experimental Psychology Teaching
and Research Laboratory. Unpublished institutional data from recent TSU alumni
(1999-2005) reveal no graduates applied to graduate programs in experimental
psychology. Standardized tests administered by the University show that mastery
of experimental subfields of psychology (e.g., cognitive, sensation and
physiology, developmental) is weaker than clinical subfields. This pattern
contributes to the under-representation of minorities in experimental psychology
and in Psychology Departments in academia. This under-representation leads to a
paucity of human subjects? research using African American participants or
examining issues particularly relevant to African Americans (e.g., stereotype
threat).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development of the Experimental Psychology
Teaching and Research Laboratory modernizes and elevates the Psychology
Department?s curriculum by providing students enrolled in new and reinstated
experimental courses with experiential learning opportunities. Through
coursework and research experiences in the Lab, students gain experience using
professional grade instruments and methodologies including a neuro-imaging tool
(EEG), instruments that objectively measure sleep quality, standardized tests of
brain functioning, observation equipment for conducting social psychology
research, and various software programs (e.g., E-prime) for conducting original
psychological research. Consequently, students show greater mastery of
experimental psychology subfields as measured by a standardized test, increased
interest in pursuing careers in experimental psychology as measured by a survey,
and greater enrollment in rigorous experimental courses.&lt;br/&gt;