* 0811888
* Theoretical, Numerical and Experimental Studies of an Intermediate-Layer Lithography Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2007,05/31/2011
* Cheng Luo, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 05/31/2011
* USD 280,680.00

This project will establish a theoretical model and a numerical program for
rationally patterning conducting polymers using a so-called intermediate-layer
lithography (ILL) method. Preliminary experimental results, obtained through the
support of a nano exploratory research grant, have demonstrated the feasibility
of applying the ILL to pattern conducting polymers. On the other hand, a
theoretical model, as well as a corresponding numerical program to solve the
theoretical model, is needed to address experimental phenomena and direct
experimental conduction. Fluorescent particles and quantum dots will be
distributed on the substrates to find in-situ deformations of polymer patterns
in the ranges of 2.5 microns to 1 millimeter and 50 nanometers to 2.5 microns,
respectively. This deformation information will be used to verify and modify the
theoretical and numerical models. In addition to conducting polymers, the ILL
approach can also be applied to pattern metals as well as other types of
polymers. In this sense, it is believed that if successful the ILL will become
one of the major non-photolithographic approaches in generating polymer-based
micro/nanosystems, and the systematic investigation of the ILL in this project
will be a critical move to achieve this goal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will contribute to micro/nanotechnology education through new teaching modules,
a new course, seminar presentations, and talks and forums at Grambling State
University (a neighboring HBCU). This project will also focus on an effort to
help K-12, undergraduate, and graduate students visualize micro/nanotechnology
concepts, including establishment of a website which will have a database of
rich visualization materials. &lt;br/&gt;