* 0811137
* SGER: Novel Ultra Fast Heating Platform for In-Situ Study of Nanoparticle Based Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2008,02/28/2009
* Veena Misra, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 02/28/2009
* USD 67,409.00

Abstract-Veena Misra-SGER The objective of this proposal is to investigate a
highly innovative route in the real-time formation and characterization of
nanoparticle based electronic devices via a revolutionary ultra thin SiC
membrane platform that provides ultra-fast temperature rates (1200degree
centigrade/msec). This approach can revolutionize nanostructure formation which
can substantially increase the commercialization potential of nanodevices.

Intellectual Merit: In recent years, nanoparticles have gained tremendous
interest for their potential use in memory devices, chem-bio sensors and
spintronics. However, one of the biggest challenges facing nanoparticle
commercialization is the formation of dense, uniform and mono-disperse films.
The inability to control kinetics of the anneal conditions, such as
temperatures, ramp rates and cool down rates, typically used to form
nanoparticles can lead to uncontrolled process leading to undesired sizes and
variations. The study of kinetics at the millisecond range affords novel insight
into nanostructure formation which will directly influence the device
characteristics. Fully fabricated nanoscale devices will be integrated directly
on the semiconductor membrane heating while undergoing simultaneous electrical
characterization. Nanoscale MOSFETs and two-terminal coulomb blockade devices
will be fabricated. The features of C-V and I-V curves, such as periodicity of
steps, sharpness of steps, degree of charge storage and coulomb blockade window
will be measured. With this system, over a hundred anneal/measurement steps can
ultimately be achieved in a matter of seconds. Multiple discrete heaters,
fabricated on a single wafer, can further expedite cycles of learning.

Broader Impact: This knowledge will impact the fields of memories, sensors,
photonics and bioelectronics. The system being proposed here is highly amenable
to enhance education modules due to its small footprint and ease of access. We
will use this system as a visualization tool for undergraduates to correlate
dynamic changes in size and shape of nanostructures to device characteristics in
real-time. Broader use of controlled and organized nanostructures will result in
commercialization opportunities and give high return on investment in
nanotechnology.



