* 0811707
* CPA-CSA:   FabScalar:   A Standard Superscalar Library for Fabricating Heterogeneous Chip Multiprocessors
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Eric Rotenberg, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Ahmed Louri
* 06/30/2012
* USD 300,000.00

Microprocessor designers have been able to periodically roll out new processors
that double the performance of their predecessors, by leveraging underlying
technology improvements and fundamentally redesigning the processor?s internal
organization. This trend is abating. It is increasingly difficult to tap
additional performance from a general-purpose processor by traditional
technology and pipeline scaling. Researchers have begun rethinking the notion of
general-purpose processor to mean many different processors on a single chip,
each processor tailored to an individual application or a class of applications.
Such a Heterogeneous Chip Multiprocessor (HCMP) can deliver higher overall
performance with lower power consumption by exploiting customization and
diversity: customizing processors to specific applications for higher
performance and lower power, meanwhile providing enough different processors to
broadly cover arbitrary applications.

The HCMP concept has great potential but it is currently very impractical.
Designing, verifying, and fabricating just one processor takes hundreds of
engineers with highly specialized expertise up to five years to develop. An HCMP
multiplies this effort by the number of different processor designs.

The project addresses this overlooked challenge of HCMP research. The project
explores a new approach to designing, verifying, and fabricating arbitrary
superscalar processors, called FabScalar. The key idea is to develop a library
of prefabricated canonical superscalar pipeline stages, in a wide variety of
dimensions and features, enabling the automatic composition of arbitrary
superscalar processors at the natural pipeline stage level. FabScalar is a first
step for the practical development of true HCMPs. These HCMPs will provide a
more efficient bridge between diverse applications and the underlying silicon.