* 0811130
* An Optimal Time Stepping Method for Computational Science Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Jingfang Huang, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2012
* USD 277,789.00

The focus of this proposal is on the mathematical analysis and efficient
&lt;br/&gt;implementation of a new class of Krylov deferred correction
accelerated &lt;br/&gt;"method of lines transpose" for time dependent PDE's. The
method first &lt;br/&gt;discretizes the temporal direction using Gaussian type
nodes and spectral &lt;br/&gt;integration, and the resulting coupled elliptic
equations are preconditioned &lt;br/&gt;using deferred corrections, in which
each correction procedure only &lt;br/&gt;requires the solution of a decoupled
system using available fast elliptic &lt;br/&gt;equation solvers. The
preconditioned nonlinear system is then solved &lt;br/&gt;efficiently using
iterative Newton-Krylov techniques. Preliminary numerical &lt;br/&gt;experiments
show that this method is unconditionally stable, very efficient, &lt;br/&gt;and
can achieve arbitrary order of accuracy in both time and space. In
&lt;br/&gt;particular, no CFL constraints have been observed and the time step
size &lt;br/&gt;only depends on the smoothness of the solution and hence is
"optimal". &lt;br/&gt;Highlights of the PI's preliminary results include (a) a
time domain &lt;br/&gt;Maxwell equation solver which provides accurate results
for a long-time &lt;br/&gt;electromagnetic wave simulation problem for which
most existing time &lt;br/&gt;integration schemes fail; and (b) a symplectic
Schrodinger equation solver &lt;br/&gt;which preserves the structure of a
Hamiltonian system with singular &lt;br/&gt;potential while most existing
numerical techniques quickly blow up. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is well known
that inaccurate numerical algorithms have caused many &lt;br/&gt;costly project
failures, examples include the sinking of the Sleipner A &lt;br/&gt;offshore
platform in Gandsfjorden near Stavanger, Norway, on August &lt;br/&gt;23, 1991,
which was due to inaccurate finite element analysis and resulted &lt;br/&gt;in a
loss of nearly one billion dollars. The purpose of this proposal is to
&lt;br/&gt;use advanced mathematical analysis and develop numerical techniques
that&lt;br/&gt;can efficiently provide accurate and stable numerical simulation
results &lt;br/&gt;to important science and engineering problems. In particular,
the PI &lt;br/&gt;will study and implement a novel class of numerical algorithms
for &lt;br/&gt;time dependent problems modeled by partial differential
equations.&lt;br/&gt;The success of this project will bring new tools and
techniques to a &lt;br/&gt;wide class of applications in science and engineering
that are impossible&lt;br/&gt;to solve efficiently and accurately using existing
techniques, examples &lt;br/&gt;including the design of optimal drug structures
in biochemistry, the study&lt;br/&gt;of cosmos structure in astrophysics, and
improved understanding of the &lt;br/&gt;physics that govern hydrologic
processes in Earth system science. &lt;br/&gt;This project also focuses on the
training of a new generation of scientists &lt;br/&gt;capable of developing
advanced numerical tools using sophisticated &lt;br/&gt;mathematical
theory.&lt;br/&gt;