* 0811942
* HCC-Small: Engagement and Collaboration in Human-Robot Interaction
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Charles Rich, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2012
* USD 463,321.00

Other than the PI's prior work, the current state of the art in human-robot
interaction does not include algorithms which closely tie engagement behaviors
with a sophisticated model of task-oriented collaboration. Thus the most
"engaging" current humanoid robots typically lack the ability to collaborate on
complex tasks. Conversely, current robots with sophisticated task skills are
typically stilted and unnatural to interact with. The PI's ultimate goal in this
research is to develop new fundamental computational principles and algorithms
which will significantly improve the ability of autonomous robots to collaborate
with humans in a broad range of situations in the home, in commercial functions,
and in hazardous environments. The specific focus of this project is on
engagement, the process by which two (or more) participants in a collaboration
initiate, maintain and terminate their perceived connection. Examples of
generally applicable engagement behaviors include looking, nodding, pointing and
body stance. The PI's working hypothesis, supported by his prior work, is that
the proper interpretation and generation of these engagement behaviors by a
robot is crucial to the overall effectiveness of its collaboration with humans.
The research method will combine the study of engagement in human-human
collaboration with the implementation and evaluation of algorithms for human-
robot engagement and collaboration using an experimental humanoid robot. In the
evaluation, a human will first teach the robot a new procedural skill and then
the robot will teach the same skill to a different human. The main scientific
output of the project will be a broadly applicable algorithm for initiating,
maintaining and terminating engagement in the context of human-robot
collaboration. For example, this algorithm will include rules which specify,
relative to the state of the collaboration, when and where the robot should
look, nod, point and face, and how to interpret the corresponding behaviors by
humans. A secondary contribution of the project will be to demonstrate a
collaboration-based approach to naturally instructing a
robot.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Better engagement and collaboration
abilities will make it easier for robots to assist the handicapped and the
elderly, will make robots more effective in search and rescue operations, and
will open up new markets for robots in sales and entertainment. The results of
this project will be widely disseminated both through scientific publication and
free distribution of the implementation code. The experimental humanoid robot
designed by the PI for this work is also commercially available at a reasonable
cost. This dissemination will facilitate the results being applied by the
designers and builders of future human-robot systems.