* 0811317
* CPA-DA: Integrated Methodology for Managing Noise in Next Generation Multi-Core SoCs
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Eby Friedman, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2012
* USD 248,934.00

CPA-DA: Integrated Methodology for Managing Noise &lt;br/&gt;in Next Generation
Multi-Core SoCs&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No.
0811317&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Eby G. Friedman&lt;br/&gt;University of
Rochester&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this
project is the development of an integrated methodology for managing noise that
addresses the multiple interactions among different noise sources to support the
design of next generation multi-core mixed-signal systems-on-chips (SoCs).
Accurate, yet computationally efficient noise models will be developed and
combined with noise reduction techniques to effectively control the signal
characteristics within a system. Leveraging the classical noise propagation
model from communications, a novel unified approach will be applied to model
noise generation, propagation, and reception among diverse system components,
supporting the development of aggregate noise cancellation techniques. Design
tradeoffs to alleviate the effects of multiple noise sources will be
investigated and design guidelines will be developed. The interdependence among
diverse noise effects at the device, circuit, and multi-core levels will be
investigated and design strategies that minimize noise across mixed-signal
components will be developed. Emphasis will be placed on the global features
responsible for generating and propagating noise among different system
components, such as the power distribution networks, the global interconnect
lines, the inter-core synchronization schemes, and the silicon substrate. The
sensitivity of the noise models and reduction techniques to process and
environmental variations will also be investigated. The ultimate objective is
that upon completion of this project, signal uncertainty in analog circuits and
delay uncertainty in digital circuits due to multiple noise effects in multi-
core SoCs will be better understood and accurately modeled in a computationally
efficient manner, while integrated noise reduction methodologies will be
developed to design the next generation of high complexity, high performance
integrated circuits. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These research results will provide
new directions for educational initiatives targeting both university teaching
and research activities in the broader academic community. Undergraduate
projects demonstrating the practical aspects of the research results will be
devised in collaboration with graduate students. A course related to the
research will be developed and offered to graduate and senior undergraduate
students with disparate backgrounds. A tutorial will be prepared for
presentation at major conferences. The PI will also participate in a University
program intended to enhance minority enrollment in graduate engineering and
science programs. The intellectual and social objectives of this project are
intended to greatly surpass existing limitations in the system-on-chip design
process, enabling the development of future generations of multi-core, mixed-
signal SoCs, while contributing towards the advancement and diversity of the
science and engineering workforce. &lt;br/&gt;