* 0811337
* Research Starter Grant:  Conservation of Biodiversity in the Big Bend Transboundary Ecoregion - An Umbrella Species Approach
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2008,01/31/2011
* Patricia Harveson, Sul Ross State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 01/31/2011
* USD 50,000.00

The Chihuahuan Desert is one of the most biologically diverse ecosystems of the
world and was once rich in megacarnivores. Due to extensive predator control,
jaguars, grizzly bears, and Mexican wolves were extirpated with only mountain
lion and black bear remaining in the Big Bend Transboundary Ecoregion. This
research will evaluate the effectiveness of using black bear and mountain lion
as umbrella species for biodiversity conservation. Specific objectives are to
(1) evaluate movement of individual mountain lions and black bears across the
border between Texas and Mexico, (2) evaluate the metapopulation dynamics of
black bear and mountain lion in Texas, and (3) identify international corridors
and priority areas for conservation of these species and all biodiversity in the
area using an umbrella species approach.

Conservation of biodiversity across political boundaries poses many social,
economic, and political difficulties. Wildlife have no political affiliation and
movement from source populations in Mexico are necessary to sustain many
exploited wildlife populations. However, increased efforts by the U.S. to
control immigration could significantly reduce species ability to move freely
across the border. This study will illustrate the need for increased bi-national
collaboration and the potential impacts of border closings in the Big Bend
Transboundary Ecoregion.