* 0811272
* Theory and Algorithm of Adaptive Methods for Numerical Methods
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Long Chen, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2011
* USD 149,999.00

This proposal is on the study of advanced numerical methods for partial
differential equations (PDEs) that arise from scientific and engineering
applications. The theme of research is on the development, application and
analysis of multilevel adaptive finite element methods. Comparing with the
uniform refinement of the computational grid, adaptive finite element methods
through mesh adaptation are more preferred to locally increase mesh densities in
the regions of interest, thus saving the computer resources. The strategies of
mesh adaptation can fall into two categories: h-method and r-method. The PI
proposes to study several novel ideas in both methods and combine them to
develop a more efficient, integrated, and flexible method for a large class of
PDEs. More precisely, for r-method, the PI proposes a new energy using the
concept of Optimal Delaunay Triangulation (ODT) and will develop related fast
optimization methods and apply to the numerical solution of PDEs. For h-method,
the PI will design and analyze multigrid methods, gradient recovery schemes, and
refinement and coarsening algorithms based on a novel decomposition of bisection
grids. Furthermore, these two methods will be naturally incorporated to result a
more multilevel mesh adaptation strategy, in which h-method will be mainly used
as a local smoother while the coarse mesh will be moved using the information
from fine grids to severs as a coarse grid correction. The PI hopes to develop a
more complete theoretical foundation and modern techniques for the combined use
of adaptivity and multilevel solvers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
multilevel adaptive methods developed and studied in this work are expected to
have a broader impact on the numerical solutions of a large class of practical
problems. Special target applications for this work are the convection-dominated
problems and numerical simulation of pattern formation. The convection-dominated
convection diffusion problems are particularly important to several flow
problems in the real applications, for example, automotive industry (flow in
combustion engines), plating industry (electro-chemically reacting flows with
mass transfer at the electrode boundaries), and aerospace (high Reynolds number
flow) among many others. Pattern formation occurs in diverse physical, chemical,
and biological systems, from Drosophila embryo to the large-scale structure of
the universe. By developing improved multilevel numerical techniques to reduce
the computer time required to solve the underlying equations, and at the same
time producing more accurate solutions through the use of adaptive finite
element methods, this project will provide powerful tools for the exploration of
models in physics and biology. In addition, a fully integrated involvement in
undergraduate and graduate computational mathematics education is an integral
part of the project. By developing a MATLAB package (iFEM), the PI will be able
to design a new project-oriented course on multilevel adaptive finite element
methods.&lt;br/&gt;