* 0811042
* International Symposium at the UCSD on Frontiers in Biomechanics: Cell, Tissue, and Organ; held  at Univ. of Calif., San Diego, September 14-15, 2008
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Pin Tong, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Jorn Larsen-Basse
* 06/30/2009
* USD 10,000.00

International workshop on Frontiers in Biomechanics: Cells, Tissues and
Organs&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
award is to support an international workshop on Frontiers in Biomechanics. The
purpose of the symposium is to create an international forum for researchers and
industrial practitioners from all over the world to: review, disseminate and
discuss the state-of-the-art research developments on the mechanobiology of
genes, proteins, cells, tissues, and organs, and identify the important academic
problems that research can be aimed in relevant directions in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This meeting will cover research areas of vital
interest to our well-being. The focus is on the most recent advances in the
mechanics of biomolecules (including proteins, genes, cytoskeletons, etc.),
cells (and their interactions with extracellular matrix), tissues and organs,
the development of relevant advanced mathematical methods, and the discovery of
biological secrets. The workshop will also provide a linkage between the
conventional mechanics and the emerging bio- and nano-mechanics. The deliverable
will be a report summarizing the result of the
workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will promote and strengthen
collaboration among scholars and researchers on one of the fastest growing field
mechanobiology/chemistry. One emphasis of the workshop is to encourage the
participation of woman, minority and young researchers in the expected excellent
professional gathering. Graduate and undergraduate engineering students will
also be encouraged to attend. This will expose them to the diversity of
perceptions and interests in the global research community. This will allow them
to establish personal contact with people sharing their research interests all
over the world.