* 0811866
* CPA-DA Collaborative Research: Research on Benchmarking and Robustness of VLSI Sizing Optimizations
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Andrew Kahng, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2011
* USD 150,000.00

Proposal IDs: 0811832 &amp; 0811866&lt;br/&gt;PI names: Andrew Kahng &amp;
Puneet Gupta&lt;br/&gt;Title: Collaborative Research: Research on Benchmarking
and Robustness of VLSI Sizing Optimizations&lt;br/&gt;Inst: UCSD &amp;
UCLA&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
will investigate the ?sizing? optimizations that underlie all practical
tradeoffs of integrated-circuit area, delay and power metrics. The intellectual
merit of our proposed research stems from its broad and multi-pronged attack on
a fundamental type of design optimization. The PIs will investigate core aspects
of optimization including technology strategy based on fast estimation of
achievable solution quality, benchmarking of optimization heuristics and
strengthening of iterative optimization heuristics by use of stronger move
?operators?. The PIs will also address fundamental changes to the optimization
context such as the potential need for statistical optimization in a regime of
uncontrollable manufacturing variability and the need for incremental
optimization under the regime of evolving process
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the proposed research lies in
helping chip designers and manufacturers reduce design turnaround time in
addition to IC area, delay and power metrics. This will enable the design of
more complex and functional products within a given cost and power envelope; as
such, our proposed research will have very substantial research and commercial
impact. Other impacts will include open-source tools that will establish a
baseline and foundation for further work by other research groups, preventing
the wasted effort of reinventing the wheel that is endemic to experimental
research today.&lt;br/&gt;