* 0811048
* ADVANCE IT Start Award:  ADVANCEment Towards Institutional Transformation at Towson University
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Jay Zimmerman, Towson University
* Standard Grant
* Beth Mitchneck
* 07/31/2012
* USD 191,709.00

The Towson University (TU) IT-Start program will collect historical and baseline
information needed to develop a strategy to proceed with institutional
transformation related to women faculty in the Science, Technology, Engineering
and Mathematics (STEM) disciplines. The overall goal will be to identify
roadblocks for female faculty members and major issues involved in their
recruitment, retention, and advancement. It is anticipated that the problem will
show itself to be some combination of small obstacles related to institutional,
career, and family issues and that these issues may differ across important
individual and family characteristics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
Before an institutional transformation program targeting women faculty in STEM
disciplines can be initiated, data must be collected and analyzed, the campus
climate determined, and a review of current institutional policies and practices
must be performed. The data collected will serve to inform policies and
practices affecting the recruitment, selection, retention, scholarship, tenure,
promotion and advancement to university leadership positions of female and
minority faculty at TU. Data collection will include indicators such as
salaries, faculty recruitment and retention, faculty applicant pools, tenure and
promotion outcomes; identification of policies and resources for recruitment,
review of institutional policies regarding promotion, tenure, and work and life
issues, and a climate survey to determine the institution?s current environment.
The long term goal is to develop a data driven approach to addressing factors
that result in the under-representation of women and minorities at all faculty
and administrative levels. The PI and Co-PIs combine expertise and experience of
faculty from both the Fisher College of Science and Mathematics (FCSM) and the
College of Liberal Arts (CLA). The addition of CLA faculty allows us to utilize
a social science approach in the development of surveys and interview strategies
to establish a baseline of data to create a strategic plan for institutional
transformation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The broader impacts of
the project will inform TU policies and practices involved in the recruitment,
retention and advancement of women and minority faculty in FCSM. In addition,
graduate students from the CLA M.S. program in Women?s Studies and Psychology
will be trained in qualitative interview techniques and will participate in data
collection. The analyzed data will be combined with input from site visits to
local recipients of ADVANCE IT grants to develop an appropriate institutional
transformation plan for TU. Dissemination will include workshop presentations to
TU administrators and faculty, networking at annual ADVANCE grants meetings,
integration of data into a ?Women, Gender and Science? course (team-taught by PI
and Co-PI Galupo). Ultimately, the development of an institutional
transformation plan will increase the number of women and minority faculty that
are successful in attaining full professor status and increase the pool of
potential applicants who may be considered for administrative leadership
roles.&lt;br/&gt;