* 0811770
* CPA-DA: A 3D CMP-aware Nanoscale IC Design Methodology using Physics-based Modeling with Silicon Validation via Test and Diagnosis
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2008,08/31/2014
* Ronald Blanton, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2014
* USD 328,000.00

PROPOSAL ID: 0811770&lt;br/&gt;PI: HIGGS, CECIL F.&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION:
CARNEGIE-MELLON UNIVERSITY&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: A 3D CMP-AWARE NANOSCALE IC DESIGN
METHODOLOGY USING PHYSICS-BASED MODELING WITH SILICON VALIDATION VIA TEST AND
DIAGNOSIS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;It is well known
that ?Moore?s Law? states that computer chips will double their speed nearly
every two years due to technological advancement. This advancement is typically
due to the size of the transistors on the chip which are rapidly becoming as
small as a nanometer (which is 1000 times thinner than a human hair). Since the
transistors are smaller, more of them can be put on a chip which leads to faster
computational times. Unfortunately, the processes needed to manufacturing these
computer chips are highly complex and the final product often comes out
defective or with lower performance than the original design. One particular
manufacturing process, chemical mechanical polishing (CMP), is a major
contributor to performance degradation and manufacturing costs. By combining
chip defect testing models with advanced CMP computer models, the principal
investigators (PIs) propose to research and develop a breakthrough computational
methodology for predicting the impact of the CMP manufacturing process on the
chip at the design stage. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CMP is a complex process in
which the wafer surface that contains the chips is polished by pressing it
against a rotating pad that is flooded with a slurry consisting of a fluid with
abrasive nanoparticles. In order to accurately model this process, sophisticated
computer models must be developed through collaborative research at the
interface of electrical and computer engineering, applied physics, and
mechanical engineering. A predictive computational tool resulting from this
research would lead to radically improved concurrent engineering where chip
designers are enabled to create bolder designs since they would be aware of the
ramifications of CMP on their layouts. The resulting impact would be more
sophisticated computer chip designs that exploit the most advanced materials
which might normally be avoided due to the uncertainty of the effect of CMP on
the materials. Due to the PIs on-going involvements with the recruitment and
education of minority students, this work will also provide numerous
opportunities to expose America?s next generation of engineering students at the
pre-college and college levels to cutting-edge research in semiconductor
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;