* 0811147
* STEM Institute at Shelton State Community College
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2008,03/31/2010
* Karen Rose, Shelton State Community College
* Continuing grant
* Caesar R. Jackson
* 03/31/2010
* USD 453,130.00

The C.A. Fredd Campus of Shelton State Community College, founded in 1963, is a
small Historically Black College with a strong presence in West Alabama. This
HBCU-UP program is designed as a result of a thorough needs assessment that was
supported through the use of an HBCU-UP planning grant.

The proposed HBCU-UP project will establish a STEM institute on the C.A. Fredd
campus of Shelton State Community College, which has an overall aim of
strengthening current STEM programs. Six components comprise the Institute: i)
high school component; ii) undergraduate student activities; iii) infusion of
technology; iv) curricular enhancement; v) faculty development activities and
vi) transition to four year college, and subsequently to graduate school. The
implementation project is a continuum that begins with the high school
component, strengthens the 2-year STEM curriculum at the college, and then
encourage and facilitate entrance into 4-year STEM programs.

Activities that will be a part of the STEM Institute include: a six week,
intensive High School Summer Institute for rising seniors, and incoming college
freshmen; professional development for high school STEM teachers; well defined
faculty-student mentoring supported by professional development activities for
faculty; implementation of undergraduate student research and summer
internships; technology enhancement in STEM courses; and course restructuring
aimed at gatekeeper courses. The transition to four year institutions will be
encouraged and enhanced by student participation in research with faculty from
four year colleges and Ph.D. granting institutions. This is further facilitated
by a statewide transfer articulation agreement within Alabama.

This comprehensive project is aimed at increasing the number of C.A. Fredd
campus students successfully completing introductory and advanced DTEM courses,
increase academic performance in these courses; increase the number of students
participating in research and internship activities, and increase the number of
students gaining admission to 4-year STEM degree programs.