* 0811067
* CPA-DA:  From Informal Specifications to RTL Assertions for Bus Protocols
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Kathryn Fisler, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2012
* USD 305,625.00

Proposal No: 0811067&lt;br/&gt;PI name: Fisler, Kathi&lt;br/&gt;Title: CPA-DA:
From Informal Specifications to RTL Assertions for Bus
Protocols&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Worcester Polytechnic
Institute&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hardware-verification engineers routinely use
informal specification documents to develop formal behavioral descriptions (such
as RTL assertions) for validating designs. Informal specification documents
present protocols through both descriptions and examples using a combination of
diagrams, tables and carefully-written prose. Validation artifacts, in contrast,
are consumed by tools and require precise behavioral details. Generating
validation artifacts from informal documentation is a laborious manual task.
Automating it, however, is challenging given the inherent gap between the
informal and formal representations. This proposal aims to partially automate
the extraction of RTL assertions from informal bus protocol specifications. The
PI will develop a novel intermediate language for describing these protocols
that reflects the structure and notations of informal specifications. The
software tools envisioned will produce (1) a partial yet executable formal model
from an informal specification and (2) a set of details that a human engineer
needs to check or provide. After the engineer modifies the model to clarify
these details, the tools will generate validation artifacts from the refined
formal model. This process focuses the engineer's effort on closing the gap
between the informal and formal specification, the task that actually requires
human intervention, rather than on the more mundane transcription tasks in the
current manual process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If this project is successful, it
will yield a much lighter-weight process for creating needed validation
artifacts from informal specifications. This in turn will simplify the
validation process itself, an increasingly time-consuming yet critical part of
hardware design. As validation has become a bottleneck in hardware design, the
project has the potential to improve modern hardware development practice.
Additionally, the students involved in this project will gain skills in working
at the boundary between informal and formal representations of designs. Such
skills are increasingly valuable for researchers as users of information
technologies diversify beyond those with graduate training in the
field.&lt;br/&gt;