* 0811373
* Collaborative Research:   CPA-G&amp;V:   Eigengeometry: Geometric Spectral Computing for Computer Graphics and Computational Science
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Mathieu Desbrun, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Rosenblum
* 06/30/2011
* USD 187,724.00

&lt;br/&gt;Tong, Yiying (0811313)&lt;br/&gt;Desbrun, Mathieu (0811373)
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Basic computational tools to
process digital geometry in computer graphics and computational science are
crucially needed for a wide range of applications including medical
visualizations, atmospheric data analysis, and shape segmentation. Previous
attempts to apply signal processing foundations such as the Fast Fourier
Transform in order to fulfill these needs have only led to limited success:
geometry has distinctive properties such as irregular sampling, topology, and
metric, making it not just another signal, but a new challenge that computer
scientists must face. Independently of these advances, spectral graph theory has
shown surprisingly simple and powerful properties of the Laplacian matrices of
arbitrary graphs, demonstrating that eigenvalue problems can robustly handle
graph irregularity and help in the development of Internet search engines.
Moreover, connections between spectral graph theory and differential geometry
have started to appear as not only relevant, but quite insightful in their own
rights.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF-funded project on ``Eigengeometry??
involves bringing these spectral theoretical developments into the realm of
computing. More precisely, the investigators study and develop novel tools for
the analysis and processing of not only signals defined over discrete geometric
shapes, but of the shapes themselves via spectral theory. These novel tools,
naturally robust to non-uniform sampling and irregular connectivity that meshes
inherently contain, are tested on a few selected applications (covering CAGD,
brain imaging, and analysis of atmospherical features). This research is a truly
multidisciplinary and innovative effort drawing upon techniques from graph
theory, graphics, numerical linear algebra, applied geometry, and signal
processing. Finally, the importance of eigenstructures in mathematical and
physical fields promises that the computing tools developed in this project are
likely to have a broad impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;