* 0811012
* CPA-CSA:   Photonic Interconnection Networks for Chip-Multiprocessor Computing Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Luca Carloni, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Hong Jiang
* 06/30/2012
* USD 400,000.00

The impact of communication on the performance of computer systems continues
to&lt;br/&gt;grow both at the macro-level for blade servers and clusters of
computers, and&lt;br/&gt;at the micro-level in multi-core processors. Meanwhile
the tight on-chip power&lt;br/&gt;dissipation constraints have forced
practically all major semiconductor&lt;br/&gt;companies to move to multi-core or
chip multiprocessor (CMP) architectures. &lt;br/&gt;The emergence of CMPs has in
turn placed increased challenges on the&lt;br/&gt;communications infrastructure
as the growing number of processing cores&lt;br/&gt;integrated on each chip
exacerbates the bandwidth requirements for both&lt;br/&gt;intra-chip and inter-
chip communication. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to harness the
recent extraordinary advances in&lt;br/&gt;nanoscale silicon photonic
technologies for developing optical interconnection &lt;br/&gt;networks that
address the critical bandwidth and power challenges of future&lt;br/&gt;CMP-
based system. The insertion of photonic interconnection networks essentially
changes the power scaling rules: once a photonic path is established, the data
are transmitted end-to-end without the need for repeating, regeneration or
buffering. This means that the energy for generating and receiving the data is
only expended once per communication transaction anywhere across the computing
system. The PIs will investigate the complete cohesive design of an on-chip
optical interconnection network that employs nanoscale CMOS photonic devices and
enables seamless off-chip communications to other CMP computing nodes and to
external memory. System-wide optical interconnection network architectures will
be specifically studied in the context of stream processing models of
computation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;