* 0811453
* Education Research Grant: A Multi-Metric Approach to Assess the Impact of STEM Instructional Multimedia on Undergraduate Teaching and Learning Outcomes
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Victor Mbarika, Southern University
* Continuing Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2011
* USD 500,000.00

Experts predict that 50% of personnel training in the coming decade will be
delivered via multimedia-based instructional systems. Multimedia case studies
have been hypothesized to help develop critical skills that employers expect
graduates to have in order to become good applied problem solvers, effective
decision makers, proficient technical analysts and collaborative team players in
real-world situations. The LITEE group, an NSF-sponsored project, has pioneered
efforts in designing quality multimedia case studies for use in engineering
classes. Success with these efforts was further enhanced through an NSF grant
the PI received in Summer 2003 to adapt and implement LITEE multimedia case
studies in information technology (IT) classrooms. In the past seven years, this
collaborative effort has concentrated on adopting multimedia technology for use
in IT classrooms and diffusing the technology among partnering universities and
across various disciplines, a trend that is evidenced by the growing use of
multimedia case studies in the classrooms. Notwithstanding this growth,
assessment research on the impact of multimedia case studies is rare and
knowledge on best practices for implementing the technology and students?
learning outcomes are still lacking. The proposed three-year research and
education plan aims to identify and validate a battery of measures to analyze
how the teaching and learning of real-world technical issues through the use of
multimedia case studies can enhance learning outcomes. The planned research will
be an integral part of a doctoral dissertation that will be co-chaired by the
PIs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Combining the multidisciplinary
team of two PIs who are extensively published in STEM multimedia technologies,
as well as a Senior Investigator who is a cognitive and behavioral
scientist/expert, a key intellectual merit of this project is to standardize a
battery of assessment instruments to evaluate the impact of instructors?
teaching and students? higher order cognitive skills with use of multimedia case
studies. More specifically, these assessment tools will examine whether students
acquire an adequate portfolio of skills that include an improved ability to
identify, integrate, evaluate, and inter-relate concepts within the multimedia
case study and execute the appropriate decision(s) in a given problem-solving
context. The assessment matrices will also be used to measure the benefits to
instructors and designers using it as a form of training in academic
institutions, industries, and government
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: In addition to the lead
institution, Southern University (SUBR), three other partnering universities
will serve as the primary test-beds on this project. A total of 2300
undergraduate engineering and IT students will be impacted by the project. The
PIs plan to implement faculty development programs to train over 100
multidisciplinary faculty members from the partnering university and conference
workshops. In collaboration with the LITEE group, the matrices will be further
disseminated at engineering classrooms in 20 different institutions where LITEE
materials will be implemented. Furthermore, the PIs? strong affiliation with
Multimedia Educational Resources for Learning and Online Teaching, (MERLOT) an
NSF funded project, will provide a platform for even more dissemination
opportunities across multiple discipline communities of the organization. Also,
the MERLOT online repository hosts a multitude of high quality peer-reviewed
cases studies in the Science Mathematics Engineering and Technology (SMET)
disciplines, it is expected that the results from this research will promote the
integration of these resources in support of SMET education. Finally, the
project?s findings and best practices will be disseminated through a Ph.D.
dissertation in the department of science/mathematics education at SUBR and a
master thesis in the SUBR College of Education.&lt;br/&gt;