* 0811807
* TIG: Establishment of New Electrical Engineering Program at Jackson State University
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* William Blair, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2011
* USD 140,611.00

Abstract HRD 0811807&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project,
which is based at Jackson State University (JSU), is to increase enrollment of
minority students in engineering to contribute to the NSF HBCU-UP target of
increasing the number of minority students in STEM education. The focus of this
project is, therefore, to establish a new undergraduate Electrical Engineering
program at JSU, in an effort to attract more minority students in STEM
education. An initial curriculum for the new Electrical Engineering program has
already been developed by the JSU Department of Computer Engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has four very specific objectives to implement
the curriculum in order to attain its goal. The objectives of the project are:
development of new courses and have them approved by University committees,
design of experiments for new laboratories, acquisition of laboratory equipment,
and teaching the five new courses in Spring 2009. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Jackson
State University has an active NSF-HBCU-UP supported implementation project to
establish several new programs including an Electrical Engineering program. Our
new project complements the overall goals of the ongoing implementation project
at JSU. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Department of Computer Engineering is part of
the newly established School of Engineering at Jackson State University (JSU).
The University is committed to engineering education and is constructing, at a
cost of over $22 million, Phase I (90,000 square feet) of a new building for the
School of Engineering, with a completion date of July 2008. Starting with modest
beginning in the year 2000, the Department has shown remarkable growth in the
last few years and now has 11 faculty members. The Department offers two
undergraduate programs: Computer Engineering and Telecommunications Engineering.