* 0811023
* CPA-DA:   A Statistical Regression Framework for Large-Scale Modeling and Optimization of Mixed-Signal Nano Circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Xin Li, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2011
* USD 268,432.00

Project ID: 0811023&lt;br/&gt;Title: A Statistical Regression Framework for
Large-Scale Modeling and Optimization of Mixed-Signal Nano
Circuits&lt;br/&gt;PI: Xin Li&lt;br/&gt;Instt : Carnegie Mellon
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project aims to automatically synthesize robust high-performance circuits built
upon unreliable nano devices and, eventually, to facilitate a bold move from
silicon-chip towards nano-chip. To this end, the PI proposes to develop an
efficient statistical regression (STAR) framework that facilitates large-scale
modeling and optimization of integrated circuits containing 104~105 variables.
STAR is derived from a new augmented maximum likelihood estimation (AMLE)
scheme. Compared to the traditional least-squares fitting, STAR is expected to
achieve 100~1000?e runtime speedup, thereby offering a fundamental
infrastructure that enables large-scale statistical modeling and optimization.
Both the theoretical aspects (e.g., optimality, convergence, etc.) and the
practical implementations (e.g., fast solver, numerical stability, etc.) of STAR
will be studied. In addition, the proposed framework will be applied to explore
the trade-offs between performance, yield and cost for multiple circuit
topologies and device structures of nano electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project aims to initialize a paradigm shift in today¡¦s large-scale
mixed-signal design and is expected to yield 2~5x performance improvement for
advanced electrical circuits in a broad range of applications, from consumer
electronics to aerospace controllers. It would also enable the circuit design
community to efficiently and accurately explore the performance trade-offs of
nano circuits built upon new devices (e.g., carbon nanotube) and, hence,
provides the valuable information to guide future nano electronics research. For
this reason, the proposed project would have an immediate impact on today¡¦s
semiconductor industry and play an important role to enable American¡¦s leading
position. Furthermore, the proposed statistical regression addresses a unique
mathematical problem, and it would have fundamental impacts on applied
statistics and machine learning. Finally, given the broad coverage over multiple
science and engineering fields such as statistical learning, nonlinear
optimization, nano electronics, etc., the proposed project offers an excellent
opportunity to train the young generation of American researchers. It would
substantially improve the American competitiveness by generating high-quality
scientists and engineers in multiple areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;