* 0811460
* III-CXT-Small: Collaborative Research: REGNET - Information Management and Compliance Assistance for Patent Laws and Regulations
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2014
* Gio Wiederhold, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2014
* USD 258,000.00

The REGNET research project proposes to develop an information infrastructure to
enhance the access, retrieval and transparency of government regulations, in
particular in the area of patents. Almost all manufacturing and engineered
products as well as the processes involved in inventing and producing such
products need to comply with regulatory requirements. Patent laws and related
issues are complex and voluminous, and can be disproportionately burdensome,
hindering technological and business innovations, particularly to small
businesses. Information technology (IT) has the potential to mitigate and help
solve many of these complicated issues and enhance public
understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Government regulations are now available online.
However, most of current online portals are primarily designed for displaying
the information and are difficult to be used for further processing. The
information service infrastructure proposed for REGNET includes repositories as
a base and, more importantly, tools to locate, merge, compare, and analyze the
information. This service infrastructure will exploit in an intelligent way the
communication and computational resources that are now widely available to the
public. Seven tasks are planned: (1) textual parsing and storage, (2) semi-
structured, indexed storage, (3) means to resolve semantic ambiguities, (4)
cross-referencing appropriate for automated retrieval of relevant documents, (5)
comparative analysis of related regulatory documents, (6) on-line compliance
assistance and checking of governmental regulations, and (7) needs assessment
and impact analysis. New and innovative search and analysis techniques will be
developed to help disseminate regulatory data and allow finding and comparing
multiple sources of related legal and regulatory
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IT systems
for legal and regulatory purposes are being rapidly developed. The social and
legal impacts of such online regulation systems and compliance assistance tools
as well as their effects on the regulatory process will be studied.