* 0811314
* Analysis and Applications of the Discontinuous Galerkin Method
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Ohannes Karakashian, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2012
* USD 169,629.00

In its broad outlines, the research program of the P.I. aims at
the&lt;br/&gt;development, analysis and computer implementation of numerical
methods designed&lt;br/&gt;to approximate the solutions of some partial
differential equations (pde's)&lt;br/&gt;that have important applications in the
fields of engineering and physics. The&lt;br/&gt;Discontinuous Galerkin method
constitutes the core methodology of this&lt;br/&gt;effort. The ultimate goal of
the research is to make full use of this method&lt;br/&gt;to develop convergent
and efficient adaptive methods designed to reduce the&lt;br/&gt;run time of the
algorithms by finding optimal or quasi-optimal meshes. Other&lt;br/&gt;efforts
will be directed towards the development of domain decomposition
and&lt;br/&gt;multigrid algorithm for the fast solution of the resulting systems
of equations&lt;br/&gt;on single as well as multiprocessor
computers.&lt;br/&gt;The P.I. will develop methods and adaptive algorithms for
second and fourth&lt;br/&gt;order elliptic problems, the incompressible Navier-
Stokes equations and the&lt;br/&gt;Cahn-Hilliard equations and use them to
simulate phenomena&lt;br/&gt;modeled by these equations. Adaptive methods will
also be used to simulate&lt;br/&gt;finite-time blowup of nonlinear evolution
equations. Some areas of&lt;br/&gt;applications are chemical reactions where the
geometry of the domain plays an&lt;br/&gt;important role and the simulation of
tumor growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific computing is playing an
increasingly important role in the progress&lt;br/&gt;of Science as a cost
effective alternative to "real life" experiments which&lt;br/&gt;could be very
costly, say wind tunnel experiments in aircraft design, or
even&lt;br/&gt;impossible to duplicate, such as supernova explosions and other
astrophysical&lt;br/&gt;phenomena. It is worth mention that numerical
simulations are playing a crucial&lt;br/&gt;role in the identification of the
potential effects of global warming. The U.S.&lt;br/&gt;government, through its
various funding agencies, has made important investments&lt;br/&gt;by the
creation of supercomputing centers equipped with the latest&lt;br/&gt;generation
of massively parallel computers. To extract the full power of
these&lt;br/&gt;machines, with some having tens of thousands of individual
processors, efficient&lt;br/&gt;and "scalable" methods and algorithms must be
developed to keep pace with the&lt;br/&gt;advances in hardware. Indeed, most
current algorithms fall short of harnessing&lt;br/&gt;the full power of these
computers especially when the number of processors&lt;br/&gt;exceeds a few
thousand. The Discontinuous Galerkin method is a recently&lt;br/&gt;introduced
methodology with great potential and wide applicability. Its
many&lt;br/&gt;attributes include flexibility, ability to handle complex
geometries and&lt;br/&gt;scalability. Further understanding of this approach and
the development of&lt;br/&gt;efficient and parallel computer codes will have a
positive impact on the&lt;br/&gt;ever increasing areas of Science that make
essential use of numerical&lt;br/&gt;simulations. Finally, two graduate students
are actively participating in this&lt;br/&gt;project as partial fulfillment of
their Ph.D. degree requirements. This will&lt;br/&gt;achieve another goal of
this project which is to contribute to the training of&lt;br/&gt;the next
generation of researchers.