* 0811022
* Collaborative Research: Algebraic Multigrid Methods: Multilevel Theory and Practice
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Scott MacLachlan, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 09/30/2012
* USD 201,042.00

The primary goal of this collaborative proposal is to
develop&lt;br/&gt;theoretically based algebraic multigrid (AMG) solvers for
Hermitian&lt;br/&gt;(and, where possible, non-Hermitian) positive-definite
problems. The&lt;br/&gt;team aims to improve understanding of the performance of
the family of&lt;br/&gt;AMG algorithms and, with this improved knowledge, to
develop AMG&lt;br/&gt;methods that offer provable, computable, a priori
information on the&lt;br/&gt;algorithm's performance. The project team
represents a close&lt;br/&gt;collaboration of experts in this area, each of whom
has made&lt;br/&gt;contributions in the field. Over the past several years, the
team has&lt;br/&gt;begun to work collectively on developing new multilevel
solvers and&lt;br/&gt;rigorous theoretical results for the convergence and
complexity&lt;br/&gt;analysis thereof. Together, the team will have the
capability to take&lt;br/&gt;a step toward answering some of the fundamental
research questions&lt;br/&gt;associated with these two essential aspects of the
analysis and design&lt;br/&gt;of efficient algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We
expect the work proposed here to: (1) directly impact
computational&lt;br/&gt;simulation codes currently employing multi-level
solvers, by providing&lt;br/&gt;faster and more reliable computational tools for
the numerical&lt;br/&gt;computations at the core of physical simulations; and
(2) allow for&lt;br/&gt;simulation of phenomena for which suitable solvers are
currently&lt;br/&gt;unavailable. The results from the proposed research will,
thus, have&lt;br/&gt;a direct impact on scientific and engineering problems,
including&lt;br/&gt;those from energy, through both the simulation of particle
physics and&lt;br/&gt;processing of data from oil reservoir models, biophysics,
in surgical&lt;br/&gt;simulation, and the environment, in climate prediction and
contaminant&lt;br/&gt;remediation models. The algorithms to be investigated here
are&lt;br/&gt;already in use in many of these fields, but are often considered
to be&lt;br/&gt;"expert-only" tools. The goal of this proposal is to develop
more&lt;br/&gt;reliable and robust versions of these tools. The proposed
research&lt;br/&gt;will have a strong educational impact as well, as it provides
for a&lt;br/&gt;solid base for training of graduate students in the modern
theoretical&lt;br/&gt;and practical aspects of numerical methods for modeling
of&lt;br/&gt;applications arising in science and engineering.