* 0811611
* CPA-CSA: Exploring Synergetic and Process Technology Aware Approaches to Effectively Enhance Processor Microarchitecture Soft Error Reliability
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Tao Li, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Hong Jiang
* 08/31/2012
* USD 200,000.00

Techniques that can cost-effectively tolerate transient faults, also known as
soft errors, play an essential role in enhancing the reliability of future
billion-transistor microprocessors, built using nano-scale devices and advanced
integration technologies. Today's design methodologies optimize microprocessor
soft-error reliability using approaches within a single-layer (e.g. device,
circuit, architecture). Moreover, existing soft-error tolerant mechanisms
largely ignore the impact and effect of emerging process technologies (e.g.
design parameter variation, 3D vertical integration). An important and urgent
research task is to explore novel, cross-layer approaches that will allow
microarchitects and circuit designers to cost-effectively mitigate the
deleterious impact of soft errors in light of rapidly increasing design
complexity and continuously advancing process technologies. This research
addresses the above challenge by (1) investigating combined circuit and
microarchitecture techniques to cost-effectively mitigate microprocessor soft
error susceptibility; (2) studying the impact of process variation on soft error
robustness and exploring techniques that can significantly enhance
microarchitecture soft error reliability under design parameter variation; and
(3) characterizing soft-error behavior in 3D die stacked chips and developing
methods to effectively mitigate soft error vulnerability hot-spots in 3D
microarchitecture designs, while maintaining desirable reliability/thermal
tradeoffs. The outcome of this research will provide a cross-layer solution to
tolerate soft erros in future microprocessors. The PI will use the concepts,
tools, techniques and other results of this research to introduce graduate and
undergraduate students to the nature of soft errors, their impact on software
execution and methods to mitigate their impact under emerging process
technologies. The developed tools will be used to expose students to
quantitative research methods and introduce them to fundamental techniques in
reliability evaluation. The PI will actively recruit graduate and undergraduate
students from minorities and under-represented groups for this project.