* 0811214
* Student Support for 2007 Conference on Decision and Control  Held in New Orleans, LA
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2008,12/31/2008
* David Castanon, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 12/31/2008
* USD 10,000.00



Intellectual Merit:

System theory plays a critical role in technological advancements in a wide
array of applications: from new flight control or guidance systems for airplanes
and other aerospace vehicles to advanced manufacturing techniques and high-speed
communication networks. By providing a better understanding of the underlying
models, their limitations as well as their potential, different branches of
system theory are emerging as instrumental tools in dealing with new challenges
that have emerged especially in the areas of modeling and control of large
complex systems. For example, large-scale networked systems and power systems
are particularly vulnerable to both deliberate and accidental disturbances.
Their interconnected structure implies that isolated events can cascade
throughout the network with disastrous effects. The "systems" view also shows
tremendous potential in other important fields such as biology, quantum
computing, robotics, and security and safety systems. This will be a three-day
CDC and we are planning to have eighteen parallel sessions plus ten interactive
afternoon. There will be morning sessions, mid afternoon sessions and afternoon
sessions. Conference Proceedings will be published on CD-ROM containing all the
accepted papers.

Broader Impact:

The IEEE CDC has for the last forty years provided perhaps the best scientific
forum for such deliberations as it brings researchers from all over the world
and facilitates their interaction in a conducive setting. This year, CDC is
being held in New Orleans, LA with the objective to contribute to the local
economy and education that is devastated by Katrina disaster. We anticipate that
CDC?07 will draw approximately 1,200 participants. Many of them will be
distinguished members of the scientific community, others will be seasoned
researches and practitioners, while others will be graduate students who are
about to launch their careers. We are particularly concerned about these younger
participants as they constitute our future. Recognizing the importance of this
group, the Operating Committee of CDC?07, and the leadership of the Control
Systems Society (CSS) would like to support and encourage the participation of
graduate students. We have already instituted a special graduate student
Registration Fee that is one half that of regular attendees. In this proposal we
are asking that NSF continue its long tradition of support of this Conference by
providing funds that can be used for graduate student travel support. Beyond
dissemination of research result by members of the control research community,
the close international collaboration at the organizing committee will afford
unique opportunity for selected grantees to exchange ideas, visit a historic
city like New Orleans and exchange ideas at a much broader level than before.
The large number of workshops before the conference and the interactive format
allows additional opportunity for training and learning beyond the traditional
CDC conferences. More critically, the Control System Society (CSS) has provided
substantial support for Student Travel Program of CDC?07, far beyond previous
levels. The support of NSF will validate this commitment and will help the
development of similar initiatives for future generations of students.

