* 0811855
* Algorithms for Simultaneous Exploration of Multi-Domain Transforms  for Design Closure in Emerging Technologies
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2014
* Shantanu Dutt, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2014
* USD 250,000.00

Proposal No: 0811855&lt;br/&gt;PI name: Dutt, Shantanu S&lt;br/&gt;Title:
Algorithms for Simultaneous Exploration of Multi-Domain Transforms for Design
Closure in Emerging Technologies&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Illinois
at Chicago&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;In this project
the PIs plan to accomplish the following goals. (a) develop network-flow based
meta-structures and algorithms that simultaneously consider multiple physical
synthesis and physical design transformations, and does so simultaneously across
all problem parts of a placed circuit, in order to produce a near-optimal
constraint-satisfying transformation on the circuit so that design closure is
quickly achieved; (b) The physical design transformations will include
replacement and global rerouting performed together - an important consideration
with little work on it so far; (c) the algorithms developed will address
constraint metrics like performance, power, signal integrity, routability, wire
length, power density and temperature; (d) the PI will develop discretized
network flow techniques (network flow is a continuous optimization method) in
order to achieve the twin benefits of near-optimal solutions and fast run-times
for discrete optimization problems of the above type.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
successful completion of this research project will result in tools that will
enable VLSI designers to achieve high-quality large SOC designs for emerging
technologies in tractable times. This will contribute significantly to making
these new technologies viable, and in turn will positively impact a myriad of
new applications of these advanced technologies in areas ranging from medicine
to sensor-based environmental monitoring. Graduate and undergraduate students
will be trained in this area via research participation and a course in VLSI CAD
which will include topics on logic and physical synthesis. Graduate student
training will include Ph.D. students whose theses will be based on the topics in
this project.&lt;br/&gt;