* 0811153
* Optimal Matching of 3D Movies by "Time/Space" Deformations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Roland Glowinski, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2012
* USD 583,922.00

This project focuses on the optimal diffeomorphic matching for pairs of 3D
movies of dynamic deformable shapes. This includes the development and analysis
of adequate mathematical classes of 4D-deformations in time-space, as well as
the implementation of efficient algorithmic tools to determine an approximately
optimal diffeomorphic matching. Such problems are of significant relevance in
medical imaging, for instance to compare echographic movies of soft organs such
as beating hearts, and the investigators will collaborate with cardiologists at
The Methodist Hospital (Houston) to test their numerical and mathematical
approaches on real patients data. The results of this project will thus
contribute to a very active field in medical research.&lt;br/&gt;Extending
remarkable results of Trouve, Younes, Miller, Glaunes for optimal diffeomorphic
matching of static 3D- shapes, the investigators consider the unknown time-space
diffeomorphism as the endpoint of the flow of time-space diffeomorphisms
generated by an unknown flow of vector field V . Their strategy is then to
minimize a suitable cost functional over admissible vector field flows V in a
suitable Hilbert space. The cost functional combines a disparity functional,
measuring the distance between a deformed movie and the target movie, and an
energy functional , namely the kinetic energy of V. The existence of solutions
will be studied as well as approximate cost functionals whose minimization is
computationally feasible by gradient-descent methods. These techniques require
the solution of high dimensional systems of ODEs whose efficient integration
will be one of the numerical challenges. An optimal control approach featuring
operator-valued controls will be intensively explored. The models and numerical
tools will be validated by selected medical case studies on echocardiographic
movies, in collaboration with cardiology
specialists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Echographic movies of patients hearts are now
part of numerous clinical protocols in cardiology. Visual comparison of
echocardiographic movies by medical doctors is frequent, to evaluate the effect
of treatment on a patient, or to compare the cases of different patients. In
these comparisons, biological heart cycles are not identical in time and can
only be matched by a mental time warping. The hearts of distinct patients are
dissimilar in detailed shape and volume , and are in constant elastic
deformation. To compare them visually requires a geometric distortion of their
shapes which is implicitly realized by the vision system of expert
cardiologists.&lt;br/&gt;In this project, mathematicians seek to emulate these
comparison tasks, in a very generic context, by computing the time warping and
the frame by frame geometric distortions which achieve the best matching of two
movies. The size of these distortions is then quantified by the imaginary energy
which would be needed to physically deform one beating heart to match the
other.&lt;br/&gt;The solution of this problem requires sophisticated
mathematical theory and presents a serious challenges to reach an efficient
numerical computation on standard computers.&lt;br/&gt;The results of this
project impact comparative medical diagnosis, for instance in cardiology and
foetus development, with new tools to specify and visualize key differences
between the time dynamics of soft deformable organs. They will also provide
generic tools to technically compare deformation dynamics, with a wide range of
applications to performance evaluation and optimization in high tech
manufacturing of sophisticated deformable materials and soft objects.&lt;br/&gt;