* 0811728
* Examining the Impact of Online Distance Education on Student Learning and Student Engagement in STEM Disciplines at Historically Black Colleges and Universities
* EHR,HRD
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* James Moore III, Fayetteville State University
* Continuing Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2012
* USD 499,981.00

&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Utilizing a mixed methods research
design, the purpose of this educational research project is to increase the
general knowledge base regarding the impact of online distance education in
Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) disciplines on student
learning experiences and outcomes at Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCUs). Thus, a quantitative study will be designed to collect
data on students? learning styles, academic outcomes, and learning experiences
in online and traditional STEM courses. To accomplish this goal, a survey will
be distributed to a representative sample of undergraduate students enrolled in
online distance education courses in the STEM disciplines and to those
undergraduate students enrolled in traditional STEM courses at HBCUs.
Quantitative data will then be analyzed using descriptive statistical techniques
and multivariate analyses. To obtain more in-depth data, a qualitative research
design will be utilized to examine similarities and differences in learning
styles, academic outcomes, and learning experiences of undergraduate students
enrolled in online distance education courses in the STEM disciplines and those
students enrolled in traditional STEM courses at HBCUs. To achieve this aim,
individual and group interviews will be conducted with undergraduate students
enrolled in online STEM courses and those enrolled in traditional STEM courses.
Further, all interviews (both individual and group) will be audio taped and
transcribed, and this qualitative data will be analyzed utilizing the grounded
theory approach. Including both a quantitative and qualitative component, this
research project will provide valuable information regarding the extent to which
online courses in the STEM disciplines enhance student learning and academic
engagement. Moreover, this educational research project is designed to identify
student-centered pedagogical strategies that enhance students? online learning
experiences, complement students' learning styles, and provide students with a
foundational knowledge of STEM course content.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this education research project include
the enhancement of online distance education courses and traditional courses in
the STEM disciplines at HBCUs and other colleges and universities across the
nation, particularly with underrepresented student populations (e.g., African
Americans, Hispanic Americans, etc.). Given the fact that limited research
exists exploring the effectiveness of online distance education in the STEM
fields at HBCUs, the goals of this research project are noteworthy due to recent
data that demonstrates an increase in online distance education courses in the
STEM fields at colleges and universities. This novel research study will provide
critical data that will lead to curriculum enhancements in online and
traditional STEM courses at HBCUs. Moreover, the mixed methods research design
that will be employed in this study will serve as a future research model that
can be replicated to investigate complex factors that impact the effectiveness
of online and traditional courses in STEM disciplines at HBCUs and other
academic institutions around the country. Thus, STEM professors from the
nation?s colleges and universities can use the study?s design and findings as a
benchmark to conduct similar studies and validate data from their research
exploring the impact of online distance education in the STEM disciplines.
Furthermore, the dissemination strategy that will be employed is designed to
inform STEM faculty and educational researchers of the study?s results and their
implications for practice and future research regarding online instruction in
STEM disciplines at HBCUs. Notably, the data collected from this mixed methods
research study will yield scholarly publications in peer-reviewed journals and
presentations at national meetings and conferences that will further expand the
knowledge base, enhance pedagogical practices, and improve the design, delivery,
evaluation, and quality of online distance education in the STEM disciplines at
HBCUs and other colleges and universities in the nation. Further, a website will
be created to serve as an online repository for HBCUs, regarding distance
education. Such an approach will serve as a resource for other HBCUs, and it
will ensure that such universities and colleges have access to cutting-edge
research and ?best practices? on distance education in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;