* 0811665
* CPA-SEL-T: Domain Specific Languages, Logics, and Proofs for Certified Software Design
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2013
* Paul Hudak, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 06/30/2013
* USD 869,239.00

This research focuses on developing a new programming methodology to
dramatically improve the quality and dependability of software-intensive
systems. The key to this effort is an effective integration of domain-specific
languages (DSLs) and formal program verification, two well-known technologies
that have been used extensively on their own, but mostly in isolation of one
another. DSLs make it easier to write complex software for specific application
domains, but they often lack rigorous semantics, making it difficult to formally
specify and reason about the resulting programs. Existing program verification
systems, on the other hand, usually rely on a single unified logic (e.g. Hoare
logic) or type system, which cannot support the diversity of components in
typical software-intensive systems. By combining the two methodologies, the PI
intends to resolve both of these shortcomings. More specifically, the PIs
propose to develop a new DSL-centric certified software design methodology that
will elevate existing DSL practice into a rigorous software development
methodology that allows program verification to scale effectively to large
software systems. The proposed research will impact the software engineering
community and make it possible to build software more quickly, and with higher
assurance of correctness, than previously possible.