* 0811197
* Fast and Accurate Integral Equation Solvers for Mixed-scale Electromagnetic Simulation
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2012
* Shanker Balasubramaniam, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2012
* USD 231,022.00

In the electromagnetic simulation of realistic structures, the spatial
&lt;br/&gt;representation of the domain being analyzed depends not only on the
&lt;br/&gt;frequency of interest but also on the need to capture possible fine
&lt;br/&gt;geometric features. Such mixed scales cause havoc in standard
integral &lt;br/&gt;equation based solvers on three fronts; (i) discretized
integral &lt;br/&gt;equations become poorly conditioned as the size of the
element becomes &lt;br/&gt;smaller, (ii) the function spaces used do not
optimally represent the &lt;br/&gt;underlying physics, and (iii) the overall
computational burden is &lt;br/&gt;exceedingly large. This largely limits the
applicability of the &lt;br/&gt;existing methods. The proposed project seeks to
develop a demonstrably &lt;br/&gt;unified, robust and accurate solution
methodology that is well conditioned &lt;br/&gt;over a wide range of frequencies
and, at the same time, has the flexibility &lt;br/&gt;to handle complicated (and
possibly near singular) geometries. This is &lt;br/&gt;achieved by (i)
developing a well conditioned integral equation scheme &lt;br/&gt;(that are
Fredholm equations of the second kind) with provable bounds on
&lt;br/&gt;convergence rates and accuracy to solve for electromagnetic
quantities &lt;br/&gt;over a large range of spatial frequencies; (ii) enlarging
the approximation &lt;br/&gt;space used for representing the unknown quantity so
as to include the local &lt;br/&gt;physics; (iii) designing a scheme that
permits seamless interplay between &lt;br/&gt;a variety of basis functions to
model the unknown quantities to be used &lt;br/&gt;with the above integral
equation scheme; (iv) deriving error bounds and &lt;br/&gt;convergence estimates
on these schemes to demonstrate clear and easy user&lt;br/&gt;control over the
error, and (iv) developing a domain decomposition framework &lt;br/&gt;so that
these schemes can be integrated seamlessly with classical integral
&lt;br/&gt;equation and finite element methods to solve electrically large
problems. &lt;br/&gt;The educational objective is to develop a publicly
available set of &lt;br/&gt;tutorials/teaching modules based on this research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rapid progress in simulation methods in concert with
the Moore's law has made the analysis of electrically large problems possible on
simple desktop machines in reasonable computational times. So much so that
fullwave or rigorous simulation of realistic devices are within the realm of
possibility. However, as one tends towards this goal, new and more challenging
problems arise. In modeling mixed scale physics, it is necessary to correctly
represent local physics, develop methods to overcome conditioning issues, and
develop means to accelerate computation over multiple scales. This project
addresses the resolution of these problems. The methods developed herein will
have a wide footprint ranging from national security (design of conformal
antennas) to sensor technology (surface enhanced raman and plasmonics) to
metamaterials to nanotechnology (nano-structure crystal growth dynamics) to
molecular dynamics. In addition to training graduate students in engineering and
mathematics, existing channels are utilized to recruit women and minorities and
undergraduate students are involved through senior design projects and potential
REU&lt;br/&gt;supplements. &lt;br/&gt;