* 0811524
* Efficient Dynamic Analysis for Detecting and Tolerating Program Anomalies
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Kathryn McKinley, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 07/31/2011
* USD 399,450.00

Businesses, transportation, economies, and science all increasingly depend on
software. To manage these demands, programmers have turned to managed languages
such as Java, Ruby, and C#, because they help produce higher quality software
faster due to garbage collection and type safety. TOIBE fnds that most new
software is using Java or other managed languages. Although these languages
reduce errors, programs still contain memory and semantic errors. NIST estimates
that software errors cost the US economy $59 billion a year. Because most prior
tools for finding bugs slow programs down by factors and/or add substantial
memory overheads, they are typically employed only during testing or after a
crash, not during production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will explore
new approaches for detecting, reporting, and sometimes tolerating errors that
are efficient enough to use in deployed software. The techniques include new,
low overhead compiler analyses, runtime instrumentation, and runtime algorithms.
A key feature will be very low memory and modest time overheads that make them
appealing for use in deployed software, especially in multicore where processes
are competing for memory resources. A unique aspect will be that the garbage
collector will summarize data structures in the heap to discover program
patterns and anomalies. The proposed work will detect, report, and tolerate
memory leaks that would otherwise crash the program. The research impact from
this project will be higher quality software with fewer bugs that keeps
executing correctly in spite of some errors, tools that help users by keeping
software running, and tools that help developers find, diagnose, and fix errors.
The investigator will make the tools publicly available, train graduate
students, and mentor to increase minority participation in computer
science.&lt;br/&gt;