* 0811772
* Observations and Modeling of Shallow Fault Creep Along the San Andreas Fault Zone
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Yuri Fialko, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2012
* USD 298,000.00

Very precise measurements of ground motion are being used to study the
distribution and magnitude of slow creep along faults of the San Andreas Fault
(SAF) system. Measuring and modelling fault creep is improving our understanding
of both earthquake hazard and earthquake physics. Much of the creep signal is
close to the fault and therefore, best observed by a space-based technique
called Interferometric Synthetic Aperture Radar (InSAR) because of its complete
50-m spatial resolution. The new aspect of this research is the use of L-band
InSAR data from the recently launched ALOS spacecraft (JAXA). L-band
interferogram remain coherent over longer time intervals than the previously
available C-band interferograms. These new data are especially important in
central and northern California where C-band permanent scattering methods are
only partially successful in measuring slow crustal deformation. &lt;br/&gt;The
three-year investigation includes the following tasks: (1) Participate in the
Western North America InSAR consortium (WInSAR) to assemble the data needed for
this investigation as well as to prepare for future seismic events in
California. (2) Analyze InSAR data from ERS-1/2, ENVISAT, and ALOS to recover
slow inter-seismic creep signals along the SAF system. The investigators are
refining methods for stacking ERS and ENVISAT interferograms, as well developing
new software for the analysis of L-band ALOS data. (3) Use the measurements of
fault creep to improve our understanding of physical models for fault friction
at shallow depth. In particular the analysis is revealing the relationship
between creep rate, shallow stress accumulation rate, and major earthquake
recurrence intervals.&lt;br/&gt;These proposed research activities are
contributing to the objectives of NSF?s EarthScope Initiative by providing
insight into fault mechanics and earthquake hazard. Funding will primarily be
used to support graduate student research and training. This research has
significant international collaboration with scientists at the Japanese and
European Space Agencies. The researchers are also collaborating with the Scripps
Institution of Oceanography (SIO) Visualization Center in cataloging and
distributing images, animations, and 3-D visualizations. Educational activities
include development of graduate and undergraduate courses at UCSD and
presentations to local school groups on earthquake topics.