* 0811180
* Iterative upscaling of fluid flows in nonlinear deformable porous media
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Dimitris Lagoudas, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2012
* USD 154,505.00

The objective of this project is to develop numerical upscaling models for fluid
flow through shape changing, inelastic, porous media, capable of shape recovery
under pressure and temperature variations. Currently, the well-established
models for poro-elastic media can only be applied to linear, elastic, porous
solids. Moreover, macroscopic parameters such as average fluid pressure, and
solid displacements are subject to various limitations. A key scientific
contribution of the proposed research is modeling of the nonlinear coupling at
the microscale between the fluid flow and solid deformation, due to both
inelastic behavior of the solid and large pore-level displacements.
&lt;br/&gt;The project will focus on fluid flow in various types of 3D pore
geometries and different macroscopic parameters such as temperature, pressure
and displacements. The homogenization method will be used to identify
macroscopic equations and upscaled parameters which describe the effective
media. Due to the complexity of the coupled fluid-structure interaction problem
at the fine scale and the complex nonlinear response shape memory solids we will
not attempt do derive closed form macroscopic equations. Instead, an efficient,
easily parallelizable, Hybrid Multiscale Finite Element Model (HMFEM) which
bypasses the explicit homogenization step by building fine-scale information
directly into a coarse-scale computational grid will be developed. This
numerical upscaling method will be applied to the analysis of a variable
permeability filter with an SMA (Shape Memory Alloy) matrix, as a demonstration
of the proposed methodology. Experimental verification of the numerical
simulations will also be carried out.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A porous SMA (Shape
Memory Alloy) matrix makes possible devices with changing, temperature and/or
stress dependent, porosity without the need for moving parts and active control
mechanisms. The project will expand our understanding of tightly coupled
multiphyics phenomena in such media. Design of novel temperature and pressure-
controlled flow regulators with applications to filters, catalytic converters,
separators and microfluidic sensors can only become possible with accurate
mathematical modeling and numerical simulations of fluid flow in such deformable
porous media. The project will also provide a sound theoretical understanding of
upscaling strongly coupled fluid-structure interaction problems, extending
current methods for engineering analysis and design of complex devices. While we
focus on SMAs, SMAs encompass standard plastic materials and are representative
of a broader class of shape changing materials such as Magnetic SMAs, Shape
Memory Polymers and Ferroelectric materials. As a result, this work will be
directly applicable to a more general class of inelastic, temperature-dependent
materials.&lt;br/&gt;