* 0811880
* CPA-DA-T:    A Collaborative Framework for Design and Fabrication of Metallic Carbon Nanotube based Interconnect Structures for VLSI Circuits and Systems Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2013
* Alan Cassell, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2013
* USD 1,000,000.00

Proposal ID: 0811880&lt;br/&gt;PI Name: Kaustav Banerjee&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of California-Santa Barbara&lt;br/&gt;Title: A Collaborative
Framework for Design and Fabrication of Metallic Carbon Nanotube based
Interconnect Structures for VLSI Circuits and Systems Applications
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;The semiconductor industry is
confronting an acute problem in the interconnect area due to the limited current
carrying capability of copper wires, which are presently used to connect
billions of transistors in every integrated circuit (IC) including
microprocessors that are vital for information transmission, processing and
storage. As IC feature sizes continue to be scaled below 45 nanometer, copper
wires exhibit significant ?size effects? resulting in a sharp rise in their
resistivity, which, in turn, has adverse impact both on their performance as
well as reliability---in the form of current carrying capacity. This limitation
of copper interconnects has been recently highlighted by various leading
semiconductor companies around the world as well as in the International
Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors (ITRS), and threatens to slow down or even
stall the traditional growth of the semiconductor and related industries. Hence,
it is critical to identify and develop new interconnect solutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carbon nanotubes, tiny nanostructures 80,000 times
narrower than a human hair, are known to have amazing electrical, thermal and
mechanical properties, and can potentially address the challenges faced by
copper and thereby extend the lifetime of ?electrical interconnects?. Most of
these outstanding properties arise from the ?low-dimensionality? of CNTs---since
they are essentially 1-dimensional structures. The investigators seek to, for
the first time, understand how these tiny structures can be efficiently
integrated into microprocessors and other circuitry to address the dire need for
faster and more reliable on-chip wiring. The CNT interconnect structures also
offer exciting prospects for design of ultra high-density energy storage
elements (such as capacitors and inductors), as well as various system-level
architectural innovations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative four-year
project brings together a team of scientists and engineers for addressing the
key scientific and engineering challenges associated with the design and
fabrication of CNT interconnect structures for various circuits and systems
applications. The investigators employ an interdisciplinary approach that
combines innovative process technology and circuit/system architecture
development supported by rigorous modeling, analysis, and metrology techniques.
This presents an outstanding opportunity to truly demonstrate the prospects of
CNTs in overcoming one of the major limitations of nanometer scale ICs, and is
expected to have wide implications for the semiconductor industry. This research
will help scaling of CMOS circuits to its ultimate limits and also open new
opportunities in mixed-signal, analog and radio-frequency (RF) signal processing
applications as well as in 3-dimensional integrated circuit design, thereby
maintaining U.S. competitiveness in the worldwide semiconductor market. Broader
impact of the research includes emerging off-chip applications of carbon
nanotubes as ?solder bumps? and also as an excellent thermal interface material
for heat removal from chips and printed circuit boards. The overall program also
ties research to education at all levels (K-12, undergraduate, graduate,
continuing-education) partly via participation in programs designed by education
professionals, besides focusing on recruitment and retention of underrepresented
groups in nanoscience and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;