* 0811338
* Targeted Infusion to Attract Minorities to STEM by using an Accredited Forensic Biology Major: an Interdisciplinary Approach
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2010
* Leonard Davis, Delaware State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2010
* USD 149,957.00

ABSTRACT 0811338&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Delaware State University has developed a
BS degree in Forensic Biology, which accepted its first students in the fall of
2006. Recently, there has been a dramatic increase in student interest in
pursuing careers in or related to science, especially forensic biology, with
over forty television shows directly or indirectly incorporating forensic
science. The use of DNA technology in identifying human remains after mass
disasters and the recent exoneration of individuals convicted of crimes they had
not committed has further fueled student interest in careers in forensic
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Targeted Infusion project is focused on
strengthening our new forensic biology degree by revamping the current
curriculum to meet the accreditation standards set forth by the American Academy
of Forensic Science/Forensic Science Education Programs Accreditation Commission
(AAFS/FEPAC). We are developing new courses and strengthening existing courses
with new instrumentation and equipment needed for optimal training of students.
The newly-developed and strengthened courses provide educational and
technological training in current forensic DNA methodologies and will prepare
students to enter the growing forensic workforce and/or graduate
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Delaware State University is a minority serving
institution that attracts students from within the state of Delaware and
surrounding states. Our aggressive pursuit for accreditation for this program
makes DSU one of the few institutions (and the only HBCU) within our region to
offer an accredited program in forensic biology, thus increasing the number of
minority or underrepresented students receiving degrees in STEM related fields.
The appeal of our program is evident by the 25% increase in the number of
students choosing majors in biology since the advertisement and implementation
of our forensic program in 2006. &lt;br/&gt;