* 0811005
* Efficient spectrally accurate global basis methods for high frequency wave scattering, chaotic eigenmodes, and photonics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Alexander Barnett, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2011
* USD 310,517.00

Accurate and rapid numerical solution of the Helmholtz and related partial
differential equations in complex geometries is key to future progress in device
design, in imaging, and in basic science. However, at high frequencies (many
wavelengths across the system) this becomes prohibitively challenging using
direct discretization, due to the multiscale nature of the problem. The
investigator seeks to build upon boundary-based methods which have been uniquely
successful (up to a thousand times faster than the competition) in solving
eigenmode problems hundreds of wavelength in size with spectral accuracy in two
dimensions, and to extend them to the scattering problem, to more general media
and periodic boundary conditions, and to three dimensions. These methods are
global approximation by particular solution basis sets, and the scaling method
for Dirichlet eigenmodes. Proposed extensions include: 1) use of fundamental
solutions basis sets, and their analysis via the role of singularities in the
analytic continuation of the wave field, 2) exploiting a little-known analytic
formula for the fundamental solution in linear graded-index materials, enabling
non-piecewise-constant media to be solved on the boundary, 3) error analysis of
a reformulation of the scaling method via the Dirichlet-to-Neumann map for the
domain, 4) application of such methods to the spectrally accurate solution of
dielectric photonic crystal band structure, and to `quantum chaos' (the wave and
spectral properties of cavities with ergodic ray dynamics).

The impact of our technology such as radar, microwave communication (eg
cellphones), optics and lasers, acoustics, medical ultrasound imaging, and
miniaturized quantum devices has been, and will continue to be, profound and
far-reaching. To design all such devices, one must calculate how they will
reflect, guide and trap waves, and this is a time-intensive, difficult and
sometimes unreliable computation. The computer algorithms proposed by the
investigator will make such calculations faster and more accurate, particularly
when the objects are large or complicated in shape. This is expected to lead to
improvements in the design of, for example, optical signal-processing devices
(which rely on microscopic periodic structures the size of the wavelength of
light), promising candidates for the next generation of fast (post-silicon)
computers. A deeper grasp of quantum chaos (the behavior of waves trapped in
cavities which cause chaotic bouncing of rays) would impact nanoscale quantum
wave devices such as quantum dots, super-fast quantum computers, as well as
areas of pure mathematics and physics theory. The proposal also provides
training in applied and computational mathematics at both graduate and
undergraduate levels, and a course on the ``Mathematics of Music and Sound''
introducing non-majors to waves, modes, and resonance.

