* 0811375
* Collaborative Research: CPA-CSA: CMP Architectures with Global Communication
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2010
* Li-Shiuan Peh, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Ahmed Louri
* 02/28/2010
* USD 108,000.00

The focus of this proposal is to evaluate the use of instantaneous, chip-wide
global information for increasing performance and reducing power and cost in
large-scale, chip multi-processors (CMPs). Using global information contradicts
conventional thinking because it has been assumed that traversing the entire
chip requires many clock periods. Recently developed circuits, however, enable
single-cycle, chip-wide signaling, suggesting new possibilities of combining
global and local information simultaneously. Further, similar ideas have not
been previously implemented in large, traditional multi-chip systems because
design flexibility, interconnect configurability, and transistor performance
improvements exist only on chip. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary exploration
has identified both the required interconnect circuits and opportunities for
hardware and software to take advantage of up-to-date global information. The
research plans to exploit new circuit techniques that will enable the proposed
network-on-chip (NOC)with hybrid interconnect (NOCHI) architecture, which has
both a data plane using conventional interconnect techniques and an ultra low-
latency control plane with a global interconnect. Because NOCHI ignores
established design patterns, understanding the circuit properties is essential
for the architectural studies, which include: new algorithms that can better
control and regulate power consumption within the network and across cores;
improved interaction of the cores with the off-chip memory system to reduce
demands on on-chip network resources; the ramifications of global information on
cache coherence and management; and software controlled, ultra low-latency
efficient synchronization for multicores.