* 0811177
* Efficient Numerical Methods for Viscous Incompressible Flows
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,03/31/2010
* Jian-Guo Liu, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 03/31/2010
* USD 150,920.00

This project will address the development of a class of novel and very efficient
numerical methods for incompressible flows based on a reformulation of the
Navier-Stokes equations that has been proved well-posed and provides boundary
conditions for the viscous contribution to pressure in terms of vorticity
circulation. The main insight is that the total creation of boundary vorticity
can be computed exactly by a commutator between the Laplacian and
Helmholtzprojection operators. Moreover, this term is dominated by the viscosity
term, hence we can treat it explicitly to gain efficiency and
&lt;br/&gt;stability. The major advance is that the method can be formulated in
standard continuous finite element space, and there is no compatibility
condition needed for the velocity and pressure approximation spaces. Hence the
standard fast solver can be applied to Navier-Stokes equation
directly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accurate, efficient simulations of 3D flows in
complicated domain are still major challeges for many scientific and engineering
problems. The resolution of the flows near physical boundaries is essential to
the accurate prediction of the body force such as the lift and drag, shedding of
vortex and boundary layer separation. The success of this project will have an
important impact on many branches of science and engineering. It will give more
accurate predictions of body force which will result in better energy efficiency
for transportation related applications. It will provide fast and reliable
simulations for scientific research and engineering application.&lt;br/&gt;