* 0811946
* RI-Small: Motion-induced Extrinsic Calibration of Rigid and Reconfigurable Networks of Sensors
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Stergios Roumeliotis, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Richard Voyles
* 08/31/2012
* USD 397,999.00

Navigation sensors are found not only on robots, but also on passenger vehicles,
portable devices, such as cell phones, and on wheel-chairs and white-canes that
aid people with disabilities. For several applications, sensor-fusion algorithms
are employed to combine measurements from multiple sensors rigidly attached to
the same vehicle, or spatially dispersed and mobile. In either case, their
relative spatial configuration must be known. This introduces the need for
sensor-to-sensor extrinsic calibration. Moreover, in order for sensor
measurements to be useful for high-precision navigation, their placement on the
host robot must be determined, which brings about the problem of sensor-to-body
calibration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To this day, very little is known about how to
rigorously perform sensor-to-sensor and sensor-to-body extrinsic calibration.
Typically, the transformations between the sensor and/or robot frames of
interest are estimated using expensive calibration equipment, or found through
approximate manual measurements and use of CAD plots. The objectives of this
research effort are to develop rigorous methods for motion-induced sensor-to-
sensor and sensor-to-body calibration, and to conduct a detailed theoretical
study of their performance. The results of this work will significantly improve
the quality and reduce the effort needed for multi-sensor calibration, thus
providing valuable tools for designing and implementing navigation systems.