* 0811210
* HCC: Informing Social Translucence with Open Composable Online Reputation Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Alan Borning, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2013
* USD 477,415.00

Large, distributed, user-contributed content sites like blogs, web forums,
Slashdot and Wikipedia, have significantly changed the character of mass social
interaction online. As individuals participate, their actions are visible to
other participants. Examining the work of both preparing content and maintaining
the community is key to understanding the nature of these systems. Social
translucence is a conceptual framework for thinking about how social actions in
an online community facilitate future social interaction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reputation systems, systems that represent the reputation
of participants in an online community, have been well studied in the domain of
e-commerce. However, theoretical principles or guidelines to designing and
developing generalized reputation systems have not emerged. The proposed
research will answer four critical questions about the relationship between
reputation systems and the existing framework of social translucence: How can
social translucence frame the development of reflective social systems? What
methods unpack the components of "reputation" to reflect the full range of
valued activities in an online community? What technical methods effectively
collect, mine or elicit data related to specific dimensions of an individual's
reputation? How can systems be built that enable individuals to understand their
reputation as it is collected and interpreted by other members of the community?
Until recently developing a reputation system to elaborate the framework of
social translucence was prohibitively difficult. But the accessibility of large
community datasets, like that of Wikipedia, has mitigated one major stumbling
block, the availability of data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The
proposed research will extend social translucence as a framework for the design
and development of social and collaborative systems. The ability of developers
of distributed contributor communities to build reputation systems that can be
appropriated by the community will be illustrated through the use of social
translucence. Lastly, these results will develop a situated model of reputation
in distributed contributor communities - one that sees a majority of online work
activity as part of a community member's
reputation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The primary contribution will
be an improvement in the interaction, contribution and sense-making of the ever
growing diversity of distributed contributors to online communities. As more
people participate in online communities, the level of interaction and trust is
limited by the amount of information that participants have about one another.
Effectively supporting these communities is an important challenge of social
computing. The proposed approach puts socially translucent tools in the hands of
the community - those who are in the best position to create, reflect, debate
and refine socially translucent representations of behavior.