* 0811834
* CPA-CSA: Virtualization-Aware Architectures to Accelerate Network I/O Processing
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2013
* Laxmi Bhuyan, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

Proposal ID: 0811834 &lt;br/&gt;Title: Virtualization-Aware Architectures to
Accelerate Network I/O Processing &lt;br/&gt;PI name: Bhuyan, Laxmi N.
&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of California-Riverside
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current application
servers consist of high-performance computing, web and e-commerce servers,
proxies, database servers, and multimedia servers, all of which need high rates
of network I/O processing. The protocol-processing overhead in these servers
dominates the CPU execution time. Power and thermal constraints have forced CPU
vendors to turn to core multi-processing (CMP) instead of frequency scaling to
increase performance. Complimentary with CMP is surging industry interest in
virtualization for diverse uses including server consolidation and sharing of
various resources. However, several studies have shown that virtualization
brings significant extra overhead to network I/O.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The
project explores new architectural techniques in virtualized environment that
reduces the network I/O overhead through the following approaches:&lt;br/&gt;?
Measurement techniques are developed to trace the life of a packet in a
virtualized environment with multi-core server and 10 Gigabit Ethernet.
Architectural statistics like instruction types, IPC, and cache misses, etc. are
measured and compared with the results of the guest O/S protocol. The study
reveals architectural bottleneck points in network I/O processing.&lt;br/&gt;?
Techniques are developed for intelligent interrupt scheduling, TCP onloading,
affinity-based core scheduling, and domain-to-core-mapping to show that the
performance is enhanced to a great extent.&lt;br/&gt;? The project implements
several architectural techniques, such as ISA optimization for protocol stack,
incorporation of network cache and direct cache access, memory copy engines, and
CPU+NIC integration; and proves their superiority in performance of a
virtualized I/O system. &lt;br/&gt;? In order to evaluate new architectural
ideas, a cycle-accurate full system simulator is designed that can evaluate
virtualized IO operations. The simulation software is made available to
researchers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;