* 0811258
* ADVANCE IT Start Award:  South Dakota WISE Faculty: A Future of Excellence
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Jennifer Karlin, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kelly M. Mack
* 07/31/2011
* USD 194,407.00

South Dakota WISE (Women in Science and Engineering) Faculty: A Future of
Excellence is an IT-START project designed to acquire and analyze baseline data
that will form the foundation of a transformative plan to advance the quality of
the work environment for women faculty in science, technology, engineering, and
math (STEM) fields at the South Dakota School of Mines and Technology (SDSMT),
other South Dakota institutions and institutions that share attributes with
SDSMT. The attributes that differentiate SDSMT from other ADVANCE institutions
include (but are not limited to) size, specialty and geographic isolation. To
accomplish this work, the investigative team will collect and analyze data from
SDSMT, other public, private, and tribal colleges and universities in South
Dakota, the state of South Dakota, institutions outside of the state of South
Dakota with similar attributes, and current best practices. The investigative
team will link with SDSMT?s Women in Science and Engineering (WISE) program to
leverage the goals of the work and the WISE program. In particular, the
objectives of the ?South Dakota WISE Faculty: A Future of Excellence? project
are to: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Gather data to determine the social,
environmental, and attitudinal factors affecting the representation (recruitment
and retention) of women, including Native American women, in faculty and
administrative positions at SDSMT and other institutions of higher education in
South Dakota.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Determine the extent to which this data is
extendible to other institutions that share characteristics of SDSMT and the
other colleges and universities in South Dakota, including (but not limited to):
a) PUIs that are specialty engineering and science institutions, and b)
Geographically isolated institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Develop a plan for
an ADVANCE IT (Institutional Transformation) proposal that includes programming
that is scalable and extendible and that addresses the primary factors limiting
representation at all levels (recruitment, retention and advancement). The
ADVANCE Institutional Transformation proposal would aim to provide opportunities
for all of the colleges and universities in the State of South Dakota and to be
extendible to institutions with similar attributes as SDSMT.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work in this planning grant will allow the
investigative team to gather and analyze baseline data on (1) the state of women
STEM faculty in South Dakota and similar institutions and (2) the needs of these
faculty as perceived by both the faculty and the administration of the colleges
and universities where they work. The intellectual merit of this project will be
the identification of those factors that are common to STEM faculty in South
Dakota and Tribal Institutions, PUIs that are science and engineering specialty
institutions and, geographically isolated institutions that affect the
recruitment, retention and advancement of a diverse faculty. The evaluation of
this data provides an evidence-based approach to development of programming and
cultural changes at institutions for which methods proven to be effective at
urban or suburban comprehensive institutions and DGIs do not meet the particular
demographic or social needs of institutions with the attributes listed above.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the South Dakota WISE Faculty: A
Future of Excellence proposal include: (1)The expected transferability of the
lessons learned to other institutions who share some or all of the demographic
features of SDSMT and other colleges and universities in South Dakota; (2)
increase in linkages between South Dakota institutions for collaborative efforts
to better all of the institutions?? campus climates and recruitment and
retention efforts for women STEM faculty. Collaborative efforts significantly
increase the ability of the colleges and universities to leverage their
resources and create critical mass; and (3)strengthening and increasing the
pipeline of women, including Native American women, in STEM fields by
strengthening the ability of colleges and universities in South Dakota to
attract, recruit, and retain women faculty in STEM fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;