* 0811493
* CPA-G&amp;V:  A Scanning Pipeline for Synchronous Capture of Precise 3D Shape and Surface Appearance
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2014
* Jason Lawrence, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 07/31/2014
* USD 450,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;PI: Lawrence, Jason D. (0811493)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Methods
for digitizing an object?s 3D shape and visual appearance have broad
applications ranging from the digital arts to manufacturing, immersive virtual
environments, entertainment, digital archives, and archeology. On the one hand,
modern 3D scanning systems faithfully capture an object?s shape, but recover
very little information about its material properties (often only a crude
estimate of its diffuse albedo). On the other hand, techniques for measuring a
surface?s spatially- and directionally-dependent appearance require a precise 3D
model of the sample, usually obtained through a separate procedure. Although
researchers have made significant progress on both fronts, shape and appearance
acquisition have largely been studied separately. As a result, the few existing
pipelines that allow synchronous capture suffer from cumbersome and error-prone
registration steps, impractical calibration standards, and fail to take
advantage of the potential benefits that a combined analysis would
allow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research investigates new optical scanners and
accompanying algorithms to provide a complete pipeline for automated and
synchronous measurement of shape and surface appearance. These scanners are
designed to reliably measure the 3D shape of real-world objects along with a
complete model of the way incident light is reflected at their surfaces and (for
translucent samples) scattered internally. This research also includes the
development of algorithms that take into account both geometric and reflectance
information during scan alignment and model recovery, along with view planning
techniques that can identify optimal measurement sequences in this joint
context. Academic and commercial areas that rely on 3D scanned objects (e.g.,
archaeology, engineering, medicine, and entertainment) will benefit from this
research. &lt;br/&gt;