* 0811089
* ADVANCE IT Start Award: Toward Fostering Women Faculty in STEM Fields
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Timothy Holst, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Standard Grant
* Beth Mitchneck
* 07/31/2012
* USD 199,965.00

UMND Abstract

Despite the important role the University of Minnesota Duluth (UMD) plays in
educating the workforce in STEM fields, the gender and ethnic profile of its
faculty members who provide this training is far narrower than the diversity of
its students. The number of women faculty in UMD?s Swenson College of Sciences
and Engineering (SCSE) falls well below national averages with women comprising
less than 14% of the SCSE tenure-track faculty, and 4% of the full professors.
In addition, the attrition of female faculty within SCSE in recent years is
considerably higher than for SCSE male faculty members. This two-year planning
and assessment project will determine if there are institutional barriers that
work against the hiring, tenure, promotion, and advancement of women at UMD in
general, and women in the STEM fields in particular.

Intellectual Merit: UMD will undertake an evidence-based approach to
understanding the current status of women within the STEM fields at UMD. Such an
approach requires collection of a broad, deep, and thorough suite of
institutional data, as well as a range of non-institutional data. UMD will
pursue robust, careful, and comprehensive analysis of these data in order to
understand the status of women STEM faculty. In addition, a range of best
practices for recruitment, retention, and advancement of STEM women that have
been identified, pioneered, and tested by academic institutions across the
country will be studied. This proposal will work toward achieving a professional
environment within SCSE and UMD that is transparent and equitable, and that
facilitates successful academic careers for female STEM faculty, including
advancement to the highest ranks of academic leadership.

Broader Impact: Together these activities will enable us to design a
comprehensive, integrative, and successful plan for institutional change, with
the goal of increasing diversity in STEM faculty in order to advance UMD's
historically strong role in education within these field; increases in faculty
diversity contribute in turn to enhanced diversity in the future workforce in
science, engineering, and technological fields. It is anticipated that an
institutional transformation plan will be beneficial for all UMD faculty,
students and staff and could be a model for other similar institutions.