* 0811176
* MARGINS-SEIZE Workshop - The next decade of the Seismogenic Zone Experiment
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2008,03/31/2009
* Geoffrey Abers, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 03/31/2009
* USD 99,977.00

This award will fund a workshop in September, 2008, at Timberline Lodge on Mt.
Hood, Oregon to assemble a broad range of scientists to examine recent
accomplishments of the MARGINS SEIZE program and to assess the way into the next
phase of SEIZE. It is nearly 10 years since the initial SEIZE meeting in Hawaii
in 1997, and almost 5 years since the last SEIZE meeting at Snowbird, UT in
2003. The MARGINS program approach has been to address key topics at specific
reference sites by conducting focused observational, experimental, and
theoretical studies and to increase communication and cooperation to advance
SEIZE beyond the scope of individual investigations. Workshops play a key role
in communicating the results and developing strategies to advance the SEIZE
Initiative. This workshop is timely because of the upcoming reassessment of the
MARGINS program as part of the MARGINS program renewal process at the end of its
first decade. It is also timely because of recent accomplishments of the SEIZE
Initiative. The NanTroSEIZE program has now moved from the drilling program
planning phase, into an exciting drilling phase and obtaining the long-awaited
results. The Costa Rica margin has now been well characterized through detailed
seismicity studies, geodetic studies, fluid flow modeling, and more.

The workshop will fund approximately 68 US scientists, including students and
post-docs, and also for 7 critical keynote speakers from foreign countries (such
as Costa Rica and Japan). It is hoped that the workshop will also draw other
self-funded participants from foreign countries, many of whom could come from
Canada given the close proximity of our meeting to western Canada, and attract
participants from other similar programs such as SCEC and SAFOD and enable
important cross-fertilization with SEIZE.

Broader Impacts. Subduction zone settings generate the world?s largest and most
devastating earthquakes and tsunamis and the SEIZE program is a major effort to
understanding these hazards. The results of SEIZE will have a significant
societal impact on assessment of geohazards at the focus sites specifically, and
to a general understanding of these hazards around the globe. MARGINS-SEIZE
program research has an excellent record of contributing to educate the next
generation of Earth Scientists. MARGINS uses results from SEIZE research efforts
for course curriculum, and web-based undergraduate teaching modules, through the
CCLIfunded Mini-Lesson program. Presentations from this workshop will be an
excellent source of educational materials. Part of the workshop will include
summaries of SEIZErelated educational efforts, and breakout sessions devoted to
developing new Mini-Lessons from SEIZE research results. Another outcome of the
workshop will be a special publication highlighting the first decade of SEIZE
results, which will be broadly available.