* 0811448
* CPA-CSA:  Development of Parallel Reduced Run-Time Complexity Hardware-Oriented Deadlock Algorithms with Proofs and Extensions to Other Areas
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* John Lee, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Ahmed Louri
* 08/31/2011
* USD 120,875.00

Technology trends show that future multiprocessor system-on-chips will integrate
tens of processor cores and tens of on-chip resources. To exploit inherent
parallelism in such systems, multiple jobs can be run concurrently on different
processor cores, each using the abundant on-chip resources. As a result,
considerable interactions among processor cores and resources may result in
deadlocks and would be the most critical issue faced by such systems. Software
approaches to detect and resolve deadlock in such systems take longer time and
may even fail to be timely invoked. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
investigates a novel technique to inherently equip these systems with a hardware
mechanism that can detect deadlocks very fast so that an OS can react in minimal
time. The central idea behind this methodology is to transform one form of
complexity (e.g., graph) into another form of complexity (e.g., matrix) that can
then be parallelized in hardware. This project develops various parallel
hardware-oriented deadlock detection algorithms and their variations, which will
be not only faster but will also dramatically reduce the run-time complexity
from at most linear down to constant. Moreover, the project also provides proofs
of correctness and run-time complexity of these algorithms. These proofs are
essential for wide spread adoption in practical applications. The research is of
significant value to the reliability of many real-time systems such as medical
robots, automobiles and avionics. Finally, this project extends devised data
structures and algorithms to potential algorithms in various other areas that
utilize corresponding graph oriented data structures such as the Floyd-Warshall
algorithm; the manipulation of B-tree, T-tree, R-tree and their variations;
digital logic optimization; and Petri-net models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;