* 0811541
* Model-based Test Generation for Embedded Software with Simulink/Stateflow or Hybrid Automata Models
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2012
* Changyan Zhou, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 04/30/2012
* USD 300,000.00

Proposal No.: 0811541&lt;br/&gt;Title: Model-based Test Generation for Embedded
Software with Simulink/Stateflow or Hybrid Automata Models&lt;br/&gt;PI: Ratnesh
Kumar and Changyan Zhou, Dept. of Elec. &amp; Comp. Eng., Iowa State Univ.,
Ames, IA&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A model-based test generation approach for
embedded software systems that are reactive (interact with their environment),
possess hybrid behaviors (continuous dynamics mixed with switching logics), and
can be modeled using Simulink/Stateflow or hybrid automata models, is proposed.
Simulink/Stateflow is a graphical modeling, analysis, and simulation tool for
embedded software development, and is widely used in industries such as
automobile, aircraft, and medical devices. The intellectual merits of this
research include: (i) Translation of Simulink/Stateflow models into hybrid
automata models (to the extent possible), (ii) Test generation for hybrid
systems based on discrete-behaviors preserving abstractions and system
identification techniques, and (iii) Development of supporting software to be
integrated with the Matlab Simulink/Stateflow environment. The proposed research
is likely to have an impact in application domains where Simulink/Stateflow is
routinely used for embedded software development. Some of the techniques
developed as part of the project may find application in other areas such as
verification or monitoring for fault identification. The project will support
two new researchers who will be trained in model-based approaches to embedded
software testing. The research outcomes, including software tools, will be made
available through PIs' homepages and journal/conference publications. The PIs
are committed to recruiting minority students for the project.&lt;br/&gt;