* 0811429
* CPA-DA: Formal Methods for Multi-core Shared Memory Protocol Design
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2013
* Ganesh Gopalakrishnan, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2013
* USD 298,000.00

Title: Formal Methods for Multi-core Shared Memory Protocol Design&lt;br/&gt;PI:
Ganesh Gopalakrishnan&lt;br/&gt;Inst: University of Utah&lt;br/&gt;NSF Proposal
Number: 0811429 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;The human society
crucially depends on computing devices: from embedded computers in phones to
peta-scale computing systems that can perform a million billion multiplications
every second, and help simulate everything from car crashes to hurricanes. The
performance of a computer must increase each year, without which the
information-based human society will cease to advance. Unfortunately, past
methods to increase the performance of a computer ? namely increasing the clock
frequency and the functional unit complexity -- cease to be effective. These
techniques now produce only a miniscule performance increase, while causing huge
increases in the energy consumption. Already computing equipments consume more
than 5% of the nation's electricity! The only available energy-efficient method
of increasing computer performance is through the use of multiple central
processing units (CPUs). Unfortunately, such organizations (called "multi-core
CPUs") require that the accesses to the central memory be extremely efficient -
requiring the use of highly complex protocols - called cache coherence
protocols. Unfortunately these protocols must be hand-crafted for high
performance, and hence are extremely error-prone. Previous methods to verify
cache coherence protocols were already at the limits of the capabilities of
verification tools. With the advent of multi-core CPUs, the complexity has
become out of reach of all published techniques. The PI and his team are the
only academic group to have developed techniques to verify, using mathematically
sound computer algorithms, hierarchical multi-core CPU cache coherence
protocols. Unfortunately, their methods to date have involved expert humans and
often cause considerable tedium. The proposed methods in this proposal are
expected to: (1) reduce the burden of verifying cache coherence protocols, and
(2) help bridge two central abstraction gaps, thus minimizing the chances of
errors in microprocessors: (i) high-level to low-level behavioral modeling gap,
and (ii) the low behavioral level to hardware implementation level gap. It will
help train valuable manpower - including undergraduates and under-represented
groups. It will help sustain the technological momentum of the US, as the
availability of sustained high performance computing power is no less important
to the nation than its other basic needs such as water, clean air, and energy.
The verification tools developed in this project are expected to be technology
transferred to the computer industry. Last but not least, the students trained
in this project will join the national and international high-technology labor
force.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;