* 0811975
* III-CXT-Small: Collaborative Research: REGNET - Information Management and Compliance Assistance for Patent Laws and Regulations
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Jay Kesan, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2011
* USD 200,000.00

The REGNET research project proposes to develop an information infrastructure to
enhance the access, retrieval and transparency of government regulations, in
particular in the area of patents. Almost all manufacturing and engineered
products as well as the processes involved in inventing and producing such
products need to comply with regulatory requirements. Patent laws and related
issues are complex and voluminous, and can be disproportionately burdensome,
hindering technological and business innovations, particularly to small
businesses. Information technology (IT) has the potential to mitigate and help
solve many of these complicated issues and enhance public understanding.

Intellectual Merit

Government regulations are now available online. However, most of current online
portals are primarily designed for displaying the information and are difficult
to be used for further processing. The information service infrastructure
proposed for REGNET includes repositories as a base and, more importantly, tools
to locate, merge, compare, and analyze the information. This service
infrastructure will exploit in an intelligent way the communication and
computational resources that are now widely available to the public. Seven tasks
are planned: (1) textual parsing and storage, (2) semi-structured, indexed
storage, (3) means to resolve semantic ambiguities, (4) cross-referencing
appropriate for automated retrieval of relevant documents, (5) comparative
analysis of related regulatory documents, (6) on-line compliance assistance and
checking of governmental regulations, and (7) needs assessment and impact
analysis. New and innovative search and analysis techniques will be developed to
help disseminate regulatory data and allow finding and comparing multiple
sources of related legal and regulatory information.

Broad Impacts

IT systems for legal and regulatory purposes are being rapidly developed. The
social and legal impacts of such online regulation systems and compliance
assistance tools as well as their effects on the regulatory process will be
studied.