* 0811507
* Improving the Quality of STEM Education and Research at Oakwood College (STEMER)
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2013
* Kenneth LaiHing, Oakwood College
* Continuing Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 07/31/2013
* USD 1,989,377.00

Oakwood College, founded in 1896, is a Historically Black, four year private
liberal arts institution in Huntsville Alabama. Through the HBCU-UP program,
Oakwood aims to implement activities to increase the enrollment and graduation
rates of students, as well as strengthen the preparation and awareness of
incoming students. An overall goal is to increase the number of students
prepared by Oakwood for successful completion of STEM graduate programs or
successful entry into the STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activities
designed to achieve these goals include enhanced recruitment; a summer bridge
enrichment program; academic enrichment, mentoring and advising; graduate school
planning and preparation; and a weekend academy tutorial
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enhanced recruitment will involve web and other
electronic outreach, as well as more traditional flyers and attendance at
college and graduation functions. In order to achieve this, there will be a
person dedicated to recruitment for STEM majors. The summer bridge enrichment
program will be aimed at high school seniors and will focus on preparation for
success in mathematics, as well as an introduction to research activities.
Outreach to middle and high school students will also take the form of a Weekend
Academy Tutorial Program, especially aimed at students at three local schools
with high drop out rates. Undergraduate Oakwood students majoring in STEM will
have enhanced advising and mentoring, peer tutoring, undergraduate research
experience, and other extra-curricular activities aimed at strengthening the
quality of the undergraduate education experience. Enhanced advisement will
utilize a tool that offer guidance for exploring how students think, learn and
communicate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The series of activities planned should
positively impact the number of students entering Oakwood College prepared to
major in STEM, and the number of students completing STEM majors prepared for
graduate study or the STEM workforce.