* 0811467
* Improving Reliability and Availability of Chip Multiprocessors
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Sandip Kundu, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2011
* USD 149,621.00

Summary Statement&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal ID: 0811467 &lt;br/&gt;Proposal
Title: Improving Reliability and Availability of Chip
Multiprocessors&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigators: Sandip Kundu of
University of Massachusetts &lt;br/&gt; Kewal K. Saluja of University of
Wisconsin ? Madison&lt;br/&gt; James E. Smith of University of Wisconsin ?
Madison&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Period: June 2008 to May 2010
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Summary: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a multi-university
project. The central idea of the proposal is to develop and use a ?microvisor
layer? that resides between operating system and the hardware of a
microprocessor. The objective is to provide the desired system performance even
when some of the components in the system are unable to meet their specified
goals. In particular this study focuses on the use of microviosor layer to
protect the processor from overheating or for testing and diagnosis of faults in
the processor so as to improve the reliability and availability of a
microprocessor and microprocessor based system. The project will quantify the
advantages and the cost of implementing such a scheme.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader technological and academic impact of this research is availability of
results of this research to academia and industry though web share. The results
will be of great benefit to the semiconductor industry as the proposal addresses
reliability problems that are just around the corner. Innovations will help US
competitiveness by producing higher performance, high reliability computing
resources at lower cost, thus providing a great socioeconomic benefit to the
society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;