* 0811270
* CPA-DA: Efficient Sequential Synthesis and Optimization for High-Performance Circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,01/31/2013
* Hai Zhou, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 01/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

PI: Zhou, Hai&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No: 0811270&lt;br/&gt;Title: CPA-DA: Efficient
Sequential Synthesis and Optimization for High-Performance
Circuits&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Northwestern
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Processing speed and power
consumption have become the most important design criteria in modern high-
performance VLSI circuits. They are not only dependent on the combinational part
but also on the memory elements (latches and flip-flops) and the clocking
mechanism. In the project, we develop an efficient sequential synthesis and
optimization framework based on incremental retiming and other network flow
techniques. The framework is based on structural operations such as retiming,
re-synthesis, and sweep, which are shown to cover almost all possible sequential
transformations. A sequential optimization suite based on efficient algorithms
for incremental retiming, constrained clock skew scheduling, and sequential
floor-planning is developed and will be made available to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes of combined research and education
activities improve the performance and design productivity of nanometer VLSI
circuits of all types, from high-speed microprocessors to the omnipresent
systems-on-a-chips (SOCs) found in PDAs, cell phones, and more. The improvement
on performance and design productivity translates to lower cost and better
functionality to customers, thus giving all consumers, particularly socio-
economically disadvantaged, access to affordable information technology.
Furthermore, the high performance computers, enhanced by optimized performance
and improved design productivity, will aid research in other important
scientific areas such as genetics, bioinformatics, and medicine.&lt;br/&gt;