* 0811485
* Collaborative Rsch:  CPA-G&V-T: Aquatic Propulsion Lab
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2013
* C. Karen Liu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Rosenblum
* 07/31/2013
* USD 1,000,001.00

Abstract - Aquatic Propulsion Laboratory PIs ? Jarek Rossignac, Georgia
Institute of Technology / Eva Kanso, University of Southern California

The oceans are filled with creatures with a wondrous array of shapes and
swimming styles, yet only a small number of these have been studied. The goal of
the Aquatic Propulsion Laboratory is to create computer tools for reverse
engineering and evaluating the aquatic locomotion strategies across species in
order to advance our knowledge of the biology and mechanics of swimming.
Moreover, some of these unexplored swimming styles may inspire the design of
better artificial swimmers for use in aquatic exploration, engineering, and
medicine. The created tools, data sets, animations, and digital models of
swimming styles will be made available to other researchers, students, and
educators.

Our research combines: 1) inventing geometric representations of deforming
bodies for aquatic locomotion, and interactive tools for combining them, 2)
employing analytic and numerical techniques for simulating the motion of these
digital swimmers, and 3) developing control and optimization methods that allow
us to find the most efficient motion strategies for a given body. For
validation, we are comparing our synthetic motion to published results of tail-
driven motion of thunniform and carangiform fish. This validation informs our
study of other swimming styles, including the flapping of the wing-like pectoral
fins of rays, the vertical tail motions of whales and dolphins, the traveling
waves along the dorsal fins of electric eels and the mantles of cuttlefish, the
paddle-driven motion of sea turtles, the tail kicks of lobsters and the rippling
bells of jellyfish. For each swimming style, we are designing a geometric model
and a set of parameterized behaviors that can be controlled to achieve
coordinated motion and task-level goals. We are also conducting studies of the
effectiveness of these swimming styles under different fluid conditions and
goals.