* 0811612
* CPA-DA: Probalistic wearout in Nanoscale CMOS: analysis, monitoring and optimiazation
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Dennis Sylvester, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

Proposal No: 0811612&lt;br/&gt;PI: Sylvester, Dennis&lt;br/&gt;Title: CPA-DA:
Probabilistic wearout in Nanoscale CMOS: analysis, monitoring and
optimization&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Michigan Ann
Arbor&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;The PIs propose the development of
computer-aided design tools and circuit design techniques to analyze, monitor,
and improve the reliability of integrated circuits in extremely scaled CMOS
(i.e., sub-45nm) with significant levels of variability present. The desired
outcome is a cohesive approach that improves chip lifetimes via both better
estimation at design time (leading to reduced design margining, and therefore
design times and costs) and circuit-based techniques that enable post-
fabrication monitoring and improvement of robustness during the lifetime of a
given die. The key components of this work include: 1) a tool that statistically
determines expected chip-level reliability, 2) a theoretically rigorous approach
that uses a small number of post-silicon measurements on a wafer to improve the
reliability/performance characteristics of a larger set of chips, 3) new ultra-
compact on-chip sensors to monitor reliability mechanisms with low overhead and
compatibility with modern design methodologies, 4) a novel indirect measurement
scheme based on the quiescent current draw of a chip to monitor for wearout, 5)
design styles to combat very high intrinsic failure rates (e.g., 1 in 1000
devices fail). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed strategy to improve
reliability in highly variable nanoscale CMOS will facilitate sustained
improvement in the performance and robustness of integrated circuits - a
necessary condition for the continued evolution of semiconductor and information
technology. In particular, higher functional and parametric yields will enable
lower costs, which will largely benefit cost-constrained markets such as
wireless/mobile. The impact of this work will be enhanced by leveraging
promising undergraduate researchers, through improvements in curriculum, and
through industrial interaction via class project mentoring. At the graduate
level, this research will involve several students pursuing doctoral and
master?s degrees, training them directly to conduct research in this area. The
knowledge developed under the proposed research will be incorporated in VLSI CAD
and circuits courses at both the undergraduate and graduate levels. Seminars and
tutorials presented at the departmental level, at conferences, and at other
universities will play an important role in disseminating the knowledge gained
from this research, along with conventional publication in top journals and
international conferences.&lt;br/&gt;