* 0811596
* SGER: Regional Climate Modeling of Western North America in the Early Eocene: Applying a New Cutting-edge Model to a Long-standing and Significant Paleoclimate Problem
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2008,07/31/2009
* Lisa Sloan, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 07/31/2009
* USD 81,070.00

This proposal uses funds, under the auspices of the Small Grants for Exploratory
Research (SGER) program, to apply a novel analytical methodology to climate
analysis. The research is founded on the premise that the further back one
extends the examination of Earth's climate, the data becomes sparse and the
temporal resolution coarser. As such, the issues surrounding sparse data and
poor temporal resolution is a hindrance to making reasonable assessments of
climate because the climatic event of interest often has a temporal resolution
that is shorter than the sampling resolution of the measurement. This leads to
aliasing of the time series and a general lack of confidence in the fidelity of
the model output and analysis to the real world.

The researcher offers a novel approach to these twin problems by applying
regional climate models to a well-documented time of greenhouse warming on Earth
during the Eocene period, approximately 55 million years ago. Specifically, the
researcher will force models with carbon dioxide, methane, land cover, and
orbital parameters specific to the Eocene time period and examine model outputs
for regional climate impacts.

This research could have broad impact on the wider science community and
catalyze new thinking in issues surrounding climate by offering a new
perspective on old and knotty scientific problems. It is possible that a new
analytical approach could expose more of geologic time and the geologic record
to productive use in understanding climate processes and impacts. The proposed
activities fit well into the potentially transformative, high risk, and
exploratory nature of the SGER program and may yield a significant scientific
payoff in terms of a more comprehensive understanding of Earth's climate.