* 0811729
* CPA-CSA-T: Power-Performance Optimization Strategies for Highly Uncertain Multi-core Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Christine Shoemaker, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Hong Jiang
* 08/31/2012
* USD 350,000.00

This project involves minimizing the power-performance efficiency (PPE) loss in
future highly uncertain, failure-prone, large-scale (>100 processor) Chip Multi-
Processors (CMPs) in which the individual processors are deconfigured in various
ways in order to remain operational. Under this scenario of dynamic
heterogeneity, the achieved PPE will vary significantly depending on what
applications run on which degraded cores. For some assignments of threads to
cores, the degradation may be so severe as to render the system unusable.
However, the large problem size precludes straightforward search techniques.

This problem is addressed through a judicious combination of design-time
analysis and runtime measurements coupled with a hierarchical rules-based search
algorithm. The algorithm operates at two levels, with the lowest level divided
among subgroups of cores. Design time information regarding the characteristics
of cores in different degraded states helps prune the search space, while
runtime measurements provide feedback about the ``goodness'' of the solution.
The result will be a workable solution for future large-scale, highly uncertain
CMPs that permits maintaining as close to the peak PPE as possible. The broader
impacts of this research involve integrated research and education, broadening
the participation of under-represented groups, enhanced infrastructure for
research, broad dissemination of results, and potential societal impact.