* 0811186
* DUSEL R&amp;D: Depleted Argon from Underground Sources
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Peter Meyers, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 08/31/2012
* USD 1,666,772.00

Evidence for the existence of dark matter is now compelling, but its nature
remains a fundamental mystery. Particularly intriguing is the possibility that
dark matter is made of Weakly Interacting Massive Particles. These may be
detected by their collisions with nuclei, but the expected low rate of such
collisions and low energy of the recoil nuclei require massive detectors with
extremely low background rates. Liquid argon is an excellent target for
scintillation and ionization detectors and has unique features that make it
particularly attractive for the detection of dark matter.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Possible limits to size and sensitivity of argon dark
matter detectors come from Argon-39, a radioactive product of cosmic rays that
pollutes atmospheric argon at the level of one Becquerel/kilogram. Argon
depleted in Argon-39 would be highly desirable to improve the sensitivity of the
current detectors and to permit construction of future multi-ton argon dark
matter detectors. Centrifugation and differential thermal diffusion are
established techniques for Argon-39/Argon-40 isotopic separation, but, with
their cost and the global production capacity, these options are not practical.
Natural gas wells are a promising source because Argon-39 production by cosmic
rays is strongly suppressed underground. The PIs are conducting an investigation
of the Argon-39/Argon-40 ratio in underground wells and have so far identified
two sources of gas containing argon depleted in Argon-39.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides funding to deploy a small-scale system
to collect and purify argon with a production rate of about 1 kilogram/day. In
addition, this award will be used to develop a low-background 1-kilogram liquid
argon detector with a sensitivity to Argon-39 that is 0.1% of the level in
atmospheric argon. It will be used to monitor the production of the underground
argon gas and to test 1-kilogram gas samples from other gas sources, should they
become available. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For Broader Impacts, this work will
advance the education of graduate and undergraduate students. Depleted argon may
also enable studies on neutrinos from reactors and from high-intensity stopped-
pion neutrino sources, and the development of very sensitive neutron detectors.