* 0811144
* ADVANCE IT Start Award:   University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* EHR,HRD
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Marisol Vera-Colon, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Beth Mitchneck
* 07/31/2011
* USD 198,475.00



This project will collect and analyze data and other information in order to
understand the current status of female faculty in sciences, mathematics and
engineering at University of Puerto Rico, Mayaguez Campus (UPR-M). UPR-M is a
Hispanic-Serving Institution known for its rigorous undergraduate and graduate
programs in science and engineering, and a high percentage of female students in
each of these fields. Regardless of UPR-M?s leading role awarding engineering
degrees to women, women faculty recruitment and advancement is consider low when
compared to available potential candidates for faculty positions. This could be
influenced by demographic, socioeconomic, cultural, institutional variables,
among others. In order to understand these factors, this project proposes a set
of initiatives aimed at identifying barriers that impede females from pursuing
an academic career or advancing to higher positions within academia.

Intellectual merit: This two-year project will provide an institutional profile
of science, mathematics, and engineering female faculty at the UPR-M including
an analysis of its recruitment, retention, and advancement policies. Surveys
will be conducted in order to determine work climate and attitudes towards women
in academia. The project will be conducted in a predominantly Hispanic
institution with a significant number of rigorous undergraduate and graduate
programs in science and engineering. To our knowledge, there are no previous
studies in Puerto Rico exploring gender inequality and institutional climate in
a campus with characteristics similar to UPR-M. Even though Puertoricans are
categorized as Hispanics, there are cultural differences that justify conducting
contextualized research.

Broader impact: The data gathered in this proposal could be a model for other
Hispanic academic institutions that face similar issues regarding women in
academic science, mathematics, and engineering careers. The large number of
females that graduate from our engineering and science programs represent an
excellent pool of prospective female faculty. This project will help understand
some of the reasons that prevent or discourage them from entering careers in
academia. This knowledge will lead to designing intervention programs to address
the situation, which should lead to a better representation of female faculty in
science, mathematics, and engineering in the future.