* 0811382
* Holocene Sea Surface Temperature (SST) and El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) Reconstructions from Peruvian Mollusks
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2010
* Julian Sachs, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2010
* USD 98,898.00

Funding is provided to investigate the role of natural and anthropogenic forcing
in El Nino events by examining the record of El Nino events from Peruvian
mollusk shells in terms of their magnitude, intensity, and frequency during
glacial and interglacial time periods. The researcher will use mollusk shells as
climate proxies to complement direct measurements and observations from the
equatorial Pacific.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the research aims to
produce quantitative seasonal-scale sea surface temperature (SST)
reconstructions spanning the Holocene from the eastern tropical Pacific region
directly impacted by El Ni√±o events in coastal Peru. By determining annual mean
SSTs, the seasonal amplitude of SST, and ENSO activity, the researcher plans to
address: (i) how Holocene solar insolation changes may have affected the
seasonal cycle of SST, upwelling intensity, and ENSO variability; (ii) the
precise timing and extent of mid-Holocene ENSO variability changes in the
Eastern Pacific; (iii) how atmospheric ENSO teleconnections may have changed;
and (iv) the influence of seasonality and Pacific background state on ENSO
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts include the promise of
developing unique sea-surface temperature error estimates that can be used in
climate models and supporting graduate and graduate students involved in the
research. &lt;br/&gt;