* 0811680
* CPA -G&amp;V: Collaborative Research: Visual Equivalence: a New Foundation for Perceptually-Based Rendering of Complex Scenes
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Kavita Bala, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Rosenblum
* 07/31/2012
* USD 275,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;PI: Kavita Bala (0811680)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of realistic imaging is to produce images that faithfully represent the
appearance of the real world. Assessing image fidelity is an important aspect of
realistic imaging that has broad implications in both computer graphics and
digital photography. Recently perceptual metrics based on computational models
of human vision have been used to characterize image fidelity; but these metrics
typically characterize pixel-wise image differences. When we look at images we
don?t see pixels, we see objects with distinct shapes, sizes, materials, and
motions. Therefore, there is a need for image fidelity metrics that characterize
the appearance properties of objects. This project introduces a new standard for
image fidelity called visual equivalence. Images are visually equivalent if they
convey the same information about object appearance (shape, material, lighting),
even if they are different pixel-by-pixel. This new standard fundamentally
expands the scope of how to assess image fidelity, providing a metric that is
based on higher-level properties of visual coding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project seeks to understand and leverage the phenomenon of visual equivalence
by: a) conducting a series of psychophysical experiments that develop a
foundation for visual equivalence by exploring interactions between the
geometry, material and illumination properties of objects in complex scenes; b)
developing visual equivalence predictors that apply to a wide range of scenes;
and c) demonstrating the practical utility of the concept of visual equivalence
in a range of applications including high-fidelity environment map compression
and scalable rendering of complex scenes. The products of this research provide
valuable new tools for addressing one of the grand challenges in computer
graphics: the high performance, high fidelity image synthesis of complex scenes.
Further, this new approach to image fidelity should have a significant impact
beyond graphics in areas including 2d and 3d digital image acquisition, coding,
compression, transmission, storage, and display.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;