* 0811647
* CPA-G&amp;V:  Self-Completion of 4D (Space+Time) Models
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Jinze Liu, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Rosenblum
* 06/30/2012
* USD 324,993.00

CPA-G&amp;V: Self-Completion of 4D (Space+Time) Models&lt;br/&gt;Yang
(0811647)&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Digital 2D photos and videos are already
ubiquitous in our everyday life. Fueled by new products such as Google Earth and
interactive 3D games, the public seems to have a renewed interest in 3D
contents. Creating 3D contents beyond simple fixed viewpoint stereoscopic movies
has so far remained to be a labor intensive and expensive process. This research
investigates new software algorithms that can significantly simplify this
modeling process, in particular for dynamic models. &lt;br/&gt;The use of
inexpensive depth sensors (such a stereo camera) will capture a dynamic scene
over time from different locations and automatically generate a complete 4D
model. The recovered models can be used in many applications such as simulations
to create realistic virtual environment, entertainment to render special effect,
and perhaps simply to allow everyone to enjoy their cherish moments, such as a
baby?s first step, in interactive 3D. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a technical
standpoint, from the input sequence of color+depth maps, which provides a
partial sampling of the entire 4D (space+time) model, the central research
problem is how to fuse these partial samples to form a complete model. Different
from all previous hole filling approaches, this research aims to deal with
models that exhibit one or more of the following characteristics: large (e.g.,
several city blocks), dynamic, deforming, yet sparsely sampled (e.g., less than
50% is available), and possibly very noisy. Reconstructing a complete model
under these conditions can be very challenging or sometime ill-posed. However,
scene structures are usually not stochastic; the same or similar structure
element may have appeared in the input set a few times, probably at a different
time and location. Therefore, samples from different time or space can be used
to fill in the missing data, making model completion possible, without using any
external sources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;