* 0811696
* CPA-CPL: A hardware-design inspired methodology for parallel programming
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Professor Arvind, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2011
* USD 375,000.00

A source of weakness in parallel programming has been the lack of
compositionality; independently-written parallel programs, e.g., libraries and
packages, can't be combined to produce large parallel programs with predictable
performance or functionality. One may have the best parallel implementations of
FFT and Linear Equation Solvers and yet a large parallel program that calls both
of these procedures in parallel may not run well. The problem is much worse for
applications that are inherently parallel but produced by combining existing
sequential implementations. Consider your cell phone: it may drop an incoming
call while you are surfing the web, or not stop playing the music when you
answer a call. The problem is compositionally -- two independently written
programs don't interact properly in a parallel setting.

A scalable model for software composition is space-multiplexing, where a set of
resources (e.g., processors and memory) are devoted exclusively to executing a
given program fragment or module. This research plans to define and use Bluesoft
-- a derivative of the Bluespec SystemVerilog (BSV) -- as its source language.
Bluespec?s semantics are well understood and there is substantial experience in
using it for hardware design in both academia and industry. Bluesoft adds to
Bluespec a ?sequential connective? for combining atomic actions, a crucial
feature needed for software design. The Bluesoft compiler will combine the
strategies used for compiling Bluespec and StreamIt, a stream-based language
developed at MIT for tiled architectures. The Bluesoft compiler will borrow the
static elaboration phase of the BSV compiler to generate a network of modules
and use the sophisticated program analysis and code generation techniques used
in the StreamIt compiler for the backend.