* 0811026
* CAREER: Rationally Assembled Nanoparticles for Multi-Electron Transfer Processes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/31/2007,12/31/2009
* Sherine Obare, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 12/31/2009
* USD 449,153.00

With the support of the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, this CAREER
award adresses multi-electron transfer processes in nanoscale systems. The goal
of this work, carried out by Professor Obare and her coworkers at Western
Michigan University, is to design, synthesize and characterize nanoscale multi-
electron transfer catalysts. Using stopped flow kinetic measurements, coupled
with radical clock methods, the complex flow of electrons in these transfer
catalysts are being examined. The work provides a unified framework for multi-
electron transfer at the nanoscale, which will impact both fundamental
scientific understanding and applications in solar energy conversion,
electrocatalysis, and photonics. A well integrated program to incorporate this
research into the education of graduate, undergraduate, and high school students
is underway, and will result in the dissemination of information about
nanomaterials and nanoscience and engineering to the general public.

Integrating research into the transfer of electrons in nanoscale composite
materials with the education of graduate, undergraduate and high school students
is the goal of this CAREER award supported by the Analytical and Surface
Chemistry Program. Information obtained from these studies of multi-electron
transfer will be useful in the rational design of energy conversion devices and
electrocatalytic systems. Broad interaction with local schools and community
institutions promise to extend the impact of this research in the development of
an informed public.

