* 0811223
* Time Domain Numerical Methods for Electromagnetic Wave Propagation Problems in Complex Dispersive Dielectrics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2013
* Vrushali Bokil, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2013
* USD 132,800.00

This project aims to develop and analyze efficient numerical methods for forward
problems in the time domain involving the propagation and scattering of
electromagnetic waves in complex dielectric media that display physical
dispersion due to multiple polarization mechanisms. The forward solution of
dispersive, time-dependent electromagnetic wave systems is often used to obtain
safety standards regarding exposure of humans to high-energy electromagnetic
fields. These numerical simulations can also be utilized in an inverse-problem
formulation, for example, in cancer detection. In imaging for medical
applications, one seeks to investigate the internal structure of an object (the
human body) by means of electromagnetic fields at sub-infrared frequencies to
detect and characterize cancer or other anomalies by studying changes in the
dielectric properties (such as permittivity, conductivity, relaxation times,
etc.) of tissues. Electromagnetic wave propagation in complex dispersive media
is governed by the time-dependent Maxwell's equations coupled to equations that
describe the evolution of the induced macroscopic polarization. The behavior of
the media's macroscopic polarization may include first-order relaxation
mechanisms of Debye type, used in modeling polar materials such as water and
living tissue, as well as second-order mechanisms of Lorentz type. These two
mechanisms will be used as model problems. The investigator and a graduate
student will develop operator-splitting techniques along with mixed finite
element methods for electromagnetic wave propagation in dispersive dielectrics.
Additionally, fictitious domain methods will be applied to wave-scattering
problems in these materials. Efficient absorbing layers for terminating
computational boundaries involving dispersive dielectrics will be constructed
and analyzed. Analysis of well-posedness, stability, and convergence of the new
methods will be conducted. The graduate student will study existing simulation
methods and make comparisons with the newly developed computational techniques.