* 0811290
* CPA-CSA: Verification-Aware Microarchitecture
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Daniel Sorin, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Hong Jiang
* 08/31/2012
* USD 220,000.00

Microprocessor verification is a critical challenge for the computing industry.
A design bug in a shipped processor chip can lead to failures and data
corruptions, which can be catastrophic in many applications, such as medical
equipment, avionics, and automotive control. Microprocessor design bugs can also
be financially disastrous; the recall of Intel's Pentium, due to its notorious
division bug, cost Intel approximately 420 million dollars. Society relies upon
microprocessors, and thus the possibility of a flawed&lt;br/&gt;microprocessor
is an enormous concern. Unfortunately, verifying a complex, modern
microprocessor is extremely difficult. Due to both its difficulty and
importance, verification consumes a large fraction (60-70%) of the resources--
engineers, time, and money--devoted to the creation of a new microprocessor.
Despite this effort, the most recent processors from Intel, AMD, and IBM have
been shipped with dozens of documented design bugs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project addresses both society's need for correct microprocessor
designs and industry's desire to improve product quality and shorten the design
cycle, both of which can be achieved through a reduction in verification effort.
The project's goal is to design microprocessors such that they can be more
easily verified. To achieve this goal, this project will pursue three
complementary research thrusts. The first thrust will analyze existing designs
to identify features that require more verification effort than is merited by
their benefits. The second thrust will re-design the ways&lt;br/&gt;in which
microprocessor components interact, in order to reduce design complexity. The
third thrust will develop sets of invariants that facilitate verification; there
are often many ways to specify the correctness of a system, some of which are
far easier to verify than others. The benefits of the proposed research are
broader than its technical results, because of the importance of the
verification problem to national infrastructure and industry. This project will
also support training of undergraduate and minority students.