* 0811794
* CPA-CSA-T:   Arsenal:   Extending Moore's Law through the Design, Synthesis and Use of Massively Heterogeneous Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Steven Swanson, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Hong Jiang
* 07/31/2012
* USD 800,000.00

Power and microarchitectural scalability concerns have motivated the recent
industrial transition to multicore processors. In the near future, because of
VLSI scaling limitations, processors will only be able to make use of a small
fraction of the die at one time at full speed. The emergence of three-
dimensional CMOS integration exacerbates this problem by substantially
increasing device count without improving transistor power efficiency. This
"utilization wall" threatens to halt the progress of Moore's law and stop the
yearly improvements in processor performance that have transformed society over
the last 40 years.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research attacks the utilization
wall by examining the design, construction and analysis of Arsenal processors.
Arsenal processors are comprised of a heterogeneous array of 10s to 100s to even
1000s of specialized processing elements (SPEs), a small subset of which will be
active at any time. The SPEs in an Arsenal system will vary from specialized
ASICs to graphics accelerators and out-of-order superscalars. Different parts of
a program will run on the SPEs best suited to each part. Since specialized
processors are generally smaller and more efficient, each program will use just
a fraction of the die, but will do so extremely efficiently. Our preliminary
results show that Arsenal designs improve power efficiency by up to 7x compared
to less aggressively heterogeneous approaches. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the
potential benefits of Arsenal-style processors are alluring, Arsenal systems
present significant challenges as well. Designers must find a way to quickly
develop a wide range of SPEs that can collectively improve efficiency for a
typical end-user's workload. The memory system in an Arsenal design must deliver
sufficient memory bandwidth to each SPE.Arsenal processors must include an on-
chip interconnect that can support thousands of communicating SPEs. To this end,
we will colloborate with the MIT ATAC project, which focuses on on-chip
interconnect design, and we will incorporate their interconnect into our own
work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will explore many architectural
challenges that arise in designing massively heterogeneous Arsenal systems with
potentially 1000s of specialized cores. Its goals are to demonstrate the
potential of Arsenal processors, develop the tools needed to design complete
Arsenal-based systems, and to build a complete, general-purpose prototype
Arsenal processor.