* 0811454
* Silicon Calibrated Scan Based Timing Tests for Delay Defect Detection
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Adit Singh, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2012
* USD 350,000.00

Project ID: CCF - 0811454&lt;br/&gt;Title: eSilicon Calibrated Scan Based Timing
Tests for Delay Defect Detection&lt;br/&gt;PI name: Singh, Adit D.
&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Auburn University, Alabama&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&
gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Microscopic manufacturing flaws,
such as the localized narrowing of interconnection lines, via voids, and pin
holes in insulating gate oxide, are a major reliability concern in nanometer
digital integrated circuit technologies. Such defects are difficult to detect
during production testing because they often do not cause catastrophic
malfunction in the circuit; instead, circuit switching delays may be marginally
increased along the signal paths containing the defect. Since a complex chip
contains billions of circuit paths of varying lengths, and circuit clock timing
is designed to accommodate the longest path delay, small delay defects on short
paths can remain hidden within circuit timing slacks during post manufacturing
testing. However, such defects can often cause errors under worse case operating
conditions or degrade further under the stress of field operation to cause early
life reliability failure. These small delay defects can potentially be detected
through more aggressive timing tests, using faster than rated clock frequencies,
to capture and expose any erroneous response due to the excessive delays along
short paths. This requires the use of the scan design-for-test methodology which
provides full access to the internal flip-flops in sequential designs, and can
thereby allow circuit timing to be observed for single cycle operation. Scan
delay tests check if signal propagation delays along the targeted paths in the
circuit, activated by two vector delay test patterns, fall within the applied
?launch? to ?capture? clock period. However, because single cycle scan tests
operate the circuit in a manner which is different from normal multi-cycle
sequential operation, there is increasing evidence that the observed circuit
timing may not reflect true circuit delays in normal continuous functional
operation. Factors such as power supply noise, coupling and cross talk from
abnormal switching activity, variations in die thermal profile, and ?clock
stretching? can all significantly impact scan test timing. Normal manufacturing
process variations further add to these test timing uncertainties, making the
detection of small delay defects extremely challenging. This research takes the
view that it may be impractical to observe true circuit functional timing with
sufficient accuracy using a surrogate scan based timing test to reliably detect
small delay defects. Instead, such defects are better detected by identifying
abnormal switching delays (timing anomalies) through a comparison of timing test
results from a matched population of parts. Here the scan tests are not used to
test circuit timing against a fixed rated clock (e.g. as required for speed
binning), but only to identify anomalous parts that display abnormal delays
relative to the statistical norm for the population. Critically, this relative
rather than absolute timing evaluation eliminates the need for the scan timing
tests to accurately match functional timing. The impact of common mode factors
such as power supply and coupling noise, clock stretching, etc. is factored out
by the comparison test. Non-functional test inputs can also be used by the test,
with multiple fast clocks, to achieve high coverage of small delay defects, even
on short paths. Preliminary research has experimentally shown that if test
responses from adjacent die are compared, delay defects of size less than 5% of
the critical path can be reliably detected. This research is developing and
evaluating a number of new methodologies to make such silicon ?calibrated? scan
delay testing practical and commercially attractive. The new delay test
methodologies will be evaluated using specially designed test chips. A longer
term goal of the proposed research is to carry out experimental studies, in
partnership with industry, to validate the methodologies developed on volume
production parts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will help improve
the research capabilities of Alabama, an EPSCoR state. Results from the research
will also be incorporated in advanced courses taught by the PI, both at Auburn
and off campus, through the IEEE Test Technology Education Program. The PI works
closely with the Historically Black Tuskegee University located near Auburn,
including cooperating on an ongoing joint NSF Computing Research Infrastructure
(CRI) grant in the VLSI testing area. Tuskegee students take graduate courses at
Auburn University, and some are jointly advised by Auburn faculty. Tuskegee
Ph.D. students, who have taken graduate courses with the PI, will be encouraged
to participate in this research. This will further strengthen the research
interaction between Auburn and Tuskegee, which is helping to attract minority
U.S. citizens to graduate studies the computing field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;