* 0811562
* III-CTX-Small: Adaptive Integration of Structured and Unstructured Data from Many Sources in a Biological Domain
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* John Woolford, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Vasant G. Honavar
* 08/31/2012
* USD 443,128.00

This project involves the design and building of&lt;br/&gt;a knowledge base (KB)
system that&lt;br/&gt;learns to more accurately integrate the many heterogeneous
sources of&lt;br/&gt;information that are relevant to a single scientist's
research needs.&lt;br/&gt;The system works by loosely integrating data of many
sorts (including&lt;br/&gt;unstructured text) into a single typed directed
graph, and then&lt;br/&gt;querying the graph using a query language that allows
"schema-free&lt;br/&gt;similarity queries". These queries specify a set of query
terms&lt;br/&gt;(e.g. keywords, entities in the KB, etc) and constraints on
the&lt;br/&gt;desired output (e.g. a target data type). The result of a query is
a&lt;br/&gt;ranked list of KB entities, ordered by similarity to the query
terms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;After a query, a user can optionally label any
subset of the ranked&lt;br/&gt;list of suggested answers as ``relevant'' or
``non-relevant''. These&lt;br/&gt;labels drive a learning phase, the goal of
which is to produce a&lt;br/&gt;better ranking. Types of learning currently
being investigated&lt;br/&gt;include EM-based parameter turning, learning to
discriminatively&lt;br/&gt;re-rank, and learning to restructure the graph (by
adding or deleting&lt;br/&gt;edges or vertexes). Queries collected in the
laboratory of working&lt;br/&gt;biologists are used to evaluate these learning
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broadest impact of this project is on the
problem of learning to&lt;br/&gt;integrate heterogeneous data sources (including
free text and&lt;br/&gt;structured data). However, if successful, the KB system
will have&lt;br/&gt;broad impact in the biological research community; in
particular, we&lt;br/&gt;believe that adaptive personal KB systems of this sort
will be a&lt;br/&gt;valuable complement to existing biological
KBs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Further information on this project can be found
at&lt;br/&gt;http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~wcohen/querendipity/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;