* 0811994
* III-COR-Small: Social Integration of Semantic Annotation Networks for Web Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Filippo Menczer, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Vasant G. Honavar
* 08/31/2012
* USD 449,995.00

Link analysis algorithms leverage hyperlinks created by authors as
&lt;br/&gt;semantic endorsements between pages, while social bookmarks provide a
&lt;br/&gt;way to leverage annotations by information consumers as a source of
&lt;br/&gt;information about pages. This project explores a novel approach that
&lt;br/&gt;is a synergy of the two: soliciting annotations from users about the
&lt;br/&gt;content of pages, in a way that implicitly forms networks of
&lt;br/&gt;relationships between and among resources and tags. These socially
&lt;br/&gt;generated relationships are then aggregated to build bottom-up,
&lt;br/&gt;global semantic similarity networks. Algorithms are developed to
&lt;br/&gt;construct, analyze, and mine these networks in support of search and
&lt;br/&gt;recommendation applications, exploratory navigation interfaces,
&lt;br/&gt;resource management utilities, tag spam detection, and incentive
&lt;br/&gt;games to accelerate the achievement of critical
mass.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To extrapolate both annotations about content (tags)
and semantic &lt;br/&gt;relationships (similarity) from single users to the
``wisdom of the &lt;br/&gt;crowd,'' the project investigates an information-
theoretic model that &lt;br/&gt;extracts semantic assessments from information
structures that many &lt;br/&gt;users are already maintaining, namely the
bookmarks and tags they &lt;br/&gt;manage on their browsers or online. This
entails the design and &lt;br/&gt;evaluation of several network-based measures
and algorithms, such as &lt;br/&gt;similarity, novelty, centrality, and focus.
Among the aims of this &lt;br/&gt;model are the exploration of the duality
between resources (URLs) and &lt;br/&gt;concepts (tags or categories) and the
integration of social &lt;br/&gt;annotation and collaborative filtering. One way
to provide users with &lt;br/&gt;immediate value is to integrate client-based
taxonomies and server- &lt;br/&gt;based folksonomies for social bookmark
management. Both traditional &lt;br/&gt;users of browser bookmarks and social
users of online bookmarks can &lt;br/&gt;take advantage of the same semantic
maps while retaining the &lt;br/&gt;convenience of intuitive browser interfaces
and centralized storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Further information about the
project can &lt;br/&gt;be found at http://GiveALink.org.&lt;br/&gt;