* 0811518
* CPA-SEL: Blended Static/Dynamic Analyses for Performance Understanding and Improved Security of Framework-intensive Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2008,11/30/2009
* Barbara Ryder, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 11/30/2009
* USD 255,500.00

CCF-0811518&lt;br/&gt;Blended Static/Dynamic Analysis for Performance
Understanding and &lt;br/&gt;Improved Security of Framework-intensive
Applications&lt;br/&gt;Barbara G. Ryder&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Web applications
built on numerous layers of frameworks are in wide usage by the commercial and
research communities, and present a challenge to existing analysis techniques.
Purely static analyses suffer problems of insufficient scalability and/or
insufficient precision for answering behavioral questions. Purely dynamic
analyses introduce too much overhead in production systems, or are too limited
in the information gathered. Further, while existing dynamic performance
analyses focus on control flow, the main purpose of these web applications is to
manipulate data. This proposal addresses these weaknesses by blending static and
dynamic analyses in new ways that avoid these problems and support tools for
framework-intensive applications. The intellectual challenge is to advance the
state-of-the-art in program analysis by developing analyses of practical cost
and of sufficient precision to scale up to industrial-strength framework-
intensive software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will address two specific
sub goals: (i) the design of and experimentation with blended analyses that
identify performance problems in framework-based applications, (e.g., excessive
use of temporary data structures), and (ii) the development of a blended
analysis to refine current access control analyses for framework-intensive
software.&lt;br/&gt;