* 0811934
* Collaborative Research: Agricultural antibiotics and human health: A multi-scale ecological approach to the development and spread of antibiotic resistance
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* Joseph Eisenberg, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,858,484.00

The causal linkages between the use of antibiotics in animals and the spread of
antibiotic resistance in humans involve complex ecological processes, including
the development of resistance, within- and between-species spread, circulation
amongst animal and human populations, and the behavioral and economic conditions
that foster or inhibit this circulation and spread. This study will look at the
ecology and evolution of the spread of antibiotic resistance in northern coastal
Ecuador, where road-building and deforestation are leading to an influx of
small-scale poultry farming in rural communities. The study area offers a unique
opportunity to investigate the role of the environment in the evolution of
antibiotic resistance at the household, village and landscape scales and will
draw on our expertise in molecular and microbial ecology, epidemiology,
mathematical modeling, and ethnography. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intensive
antibiotic usage in animal husbandry is a major contributor to the growing
problem of antibiotic resistance worldwide, posing threats to both animal and
human health. Understanding the ecological processes involved in the emergence
and spread of antibiotic resistance is crucial in designing effective
intervention programs. The research team will include graduate students at the
University of Michigan and the Universidad San Francisco de Quito (USFQ). There
will be training and periodic health education workshops for community health
workers, and the sharing of findings with health ministry employees at the
local, provincial and national levels in Ecuador.