* 0811099
* Collaborative Research: A Precipitation Dipole in Eastern North America: Issues of Space-Time Variability and Physical Mechanisms
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Mathew Barlow, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 07/31/2012
* USD 174,584.00

Recent studies suggest that precipitation over Eastern North America (ENA)
exhibits a dipole pattern of wet and dry conditions between the central United
States and eastern Canada, with particular prominence at decadal timescales and
considerable contribution to local trends ? but which is largely erased in the
usual calculations of area-averaged trends. The associated trend toward
increased Central US precipitation is not well reproduced in current models and
is contrary to the usual expectations of drying in the continental interior with
a warmer climate. Decreasing precipitation over eastern Canada is also contrary
to model projections of generally wetter conditions nearer the coasts. Several
fundamental questions have yet to be addressed: What are the underlying dynamics
and key physical mechanisms? How closely is it related to large-scale climate
variability? What processes are setting the decadal timescale?&lt;br/&gt;What
are the intellectual merits of the proposed activity?&lt;br/&gt;The goals of
this project are to determine the underlying dynamics of the dipole pattern and
its connections to large-scale climate variability and trends. The three primary
objectives of the proposed work are to: 1) determine the timescales,
seasonality, and structure of the dipole pattern, 2) examine the dynamics of the
precipitation changes in terms of the hydrologic budget, moisture transport, and
storm track variability, and 3) use a hierarchy of models to investigate the
influence of large-scale variability on the dipole mode. To investigate the
underlying mechanisms, we will test a set of hypotheses on the local forcing of
the precipitation via moisture flux and thermodynamically-forced vertical
velocity, and on the large-scale controls on the regional circulation via both
baroclinic and barotropic response to tropical convection.&lt;br/&gt;We will
expand our observational data analyses to establish and clarify the link among
precipitation variations, circulation anomalies, and boundary forcing that may
create a precipitation dipole over ENA. We will then investigate the links to
large-scale climate variability and tropical forcing. This is perhaps one of the
first attempts to understand and characterize the existence of a precipitation
dipole over ENA. Our methodology -- which builds on our ongoing and previous
work -- was briefly tested and some preliminary results are presented in the
proposal. We will conduct observational analysis of a range of hydrologic and
atmospheric variables to determine the structure of the seasonal and spatial
pattern. We will analyze the observed hydrologic budget, moisture transport,
shifts in the storm tracks, and transient-mean flow interaction to investigate
the internal dynamics of the dipole, using both simple compositing and pattern-
based analysis techniques such as Principal Component Analysis. We will use
multiple estimates of precipitation and atmospheric circulation to alleviate
known data quality issues. For dynamical investigations, we will use a range of
models of increasing complexity: a global barotropic (one-layer) model
linearized about a zonally-varying mean flow, a tropical Gill-Matsuno model with
generalized heating, and the NCAR Community Atmospheric Model, which we have
modified to allow imposition of convective anomalies.&lt;br/&gt;What are the
broader impacts of the proposed activity?&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project
between the Tufts University and University of Massachusetts builds on mutually
synergistic expertise in water cycle research, atmospheric dynamics, and
hydrology. This partnership will be further expanded through co-mentoring of a
post doctoral fellow, PhD students and involvement of undergraduate and high
school students through summer internships. The proposed research addresses
several important scientific questions, including the dynamics of large-scale
atmospheric influences on hydrology, mechanisms of hydrologic variability at
decadal and longer timescales, and trend attribution over different regions of
ENA. There is also considerable societal relevance: understanding these regional
changes in precipitation and their long-term variations has important
implications on how, and to what extent, long-term variations in precipitation
over ENA can be predicted and managed. The results are also relevant to
agriculture (e.g., winter wheat) and, potentially, to water trade with Canada
and increased terrestrial carbon fluxes to stream.