* 0811878
* RI-Small: Multi-level Priors for Multi-view Stereo
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Steven Seitz, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2012
* USD 316,000.00

Humans are remarkably good at perceiving shape, even in cases where the image
cues alone would seem to be insufficient. For example, up to certain
distortions, people can infer the structure of a scene from a single photograph.
Similarly, they can often estimate the shape of surfaces that are only partially
visible, such as a chair that is half-occluded. These remarkable abilities are
due to the human capacity to combine visual cues with prior information about
the shapes of objects and surfaces in the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
computer vision, modern multi-view stereo algorithms that exploit very low-level
cues now produce shape models that are proving to be nearly as accurate as laser
scanners and are doing so in very unconstrained settings, e.g., using photos
from Internet sharing sites. However, these algorithms lack the other piece of
the puzzle --- the ability of the human visual system to exploit prior
information about scene shape. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this work, the PIs focus
on the particular domain of architectural scenes for which prior notions of
shape are particularly applicable. Existing priors typically fall into two
categories: low-level, usually a preference to reconstruct smooth surfaces, and
high-level, such as model-based techniques that have parameterized templates for
specific architectural features. The PIs are exploring a range of priors between
these extremes, significantly increasing the expressiveness of low-level priors
and defining a set of mid-level priors. The key ideas are to consider the
differential properties of architectural surfaces (e.g., curvature behavior) and
to exploit the symmetries that frequently occur in this setting. The PIs are
studying a range of reconstruction problems and applications, from single-view
reconstruction to multi-view stereo, that exploit priors and prior
selection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, the PIs are evaluating the potential of
these techniques to reconstruct detailed architectural models from street-level,
aerial, and interior views from the Internet. As part of this evaluation, they
are obtaining ground truth laser scans and registered imagery to provide a
benchmark for the research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcome of this
research, i.e., tools that can automatically reconstruct geometric models from
large collections of images, will enable a host of important applications,
ranging across 3D visualization, localization, communication, recognition, and
cultural heritage, that go well beyond traditional computer vision problems and
can have broad impacts for the population at large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
http://grail.cs.washington.edu/projects/cpc/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;