* 0811935
* III-COR-Small: Collaborative Research: Preference- And Context-Aware Query Processing for Location-based Database Servers
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Mohamed Mokbel, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Frank Olken
* 08/31/2012
* USD 253,987.00

The goal of this project is to turn existing location-based services to be
preference- and context-aware. Enabling preference- and context-awareness will
make location-based services more convenient to use by casual users and make the
best use of technology advances in location-detection devices, wireless
communication, and mobile computing. The project achieves its goals using the
following approaches: (1) define a context taxonomy and build a system
architecture to guide location-based query processors to be preference- and
context-aware, (2) extend the SQL language with new constructs to
define/manipulate preference and context, (3) develop new query processing
techniques that integrate user preferences, user context, and database context,
(4) develop query processing techniques that can make use of the surrounding
user peers, (5) integrate the awareness of the continuous changes in the
environmental context, like changes in the road network, into query processors,
and (6) take into account data incompleteness and uncertainty in real life
scenarios. PhD students pursue research in this project. Publications, technical
reports, software and experimental data from this research will be disseminated
via the project web site
(http://www.cs.umn.edu/~mokbel/ContextAware).&lt;br/&gt;