* 0811086
* Accurate digital representation and recovery for redundant frames
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Alexander Powell, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2012
* USD 123,108.00

Redundant frame representations play a central role in signal processing
applications. By using overcomplete systems to represent signals, frames offer
increased design flexibility and are thereby able to provide robustness against
noise and data loss in many settings. The investigator studies the mathematics
of digitally representing redundant finite frame expansions, with an emphasis on
two key steps: coefficient quantization and signal reconstruction. The work on
quantization (the encoding step) focuses on the class of Sigma-Delta algorithms
and studies rigorous approximation error bounds, dual frame methods for boosting
performance, and the design of new algorithms for multiple description coding
and orthogonal frequency division multiplexing. Sigma-Delta algorithms are well
suited for utilizing the correlations inherent in redundant collections of frame
coefficients, and are desirable in practice since they can be robustly
implemented using very coarse, for example one bit, scalar quantizers. In the
work on signal recovery (the decoding step), the investigator studies new
nonlinear consistent reconstruction algorithms for analog-to-digital conversion
in the settings of Pulse Code Modulation and Sigma-Delta quantization. The
investigator also studies how to extend noise-shaping and consistent
reconstruction methods to distributed processing applications based on fusion
frames.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Digital data is ubiquitous in modern technology.
The project addresses the general problem of how to accurately process,
transmit, and recover digital signals in noisy environments. The massive size of
many digital data sets drives a need for new mathematical techniques that are
capable of providing efficient and robust data processing algorithms. The work
on quantization of fusion frames applies to scenarios where a dense collection
of low resolution sensors is deployed in a remote environment; the project
studies methods for optimally communicating and extracting digital information
through the sensor network. The work on quantization of finite frame expansions
is applicable to communication over erasure channels where physical constraints
or other interference result in a loss of transmitted information; the project
studies procedures for mitigating the effect of data erasures.&lt;br/&gt;