* 0811141
* ACS Symposium entitled "NMR Spectroscopy of Polymers:  Solutions, Melts, and Solid State," April 6-10, 2008, New Orleans, LA
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2008,01/31/2009
* John Rabolt, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 01/31/2009
* USD 3,000.00

The ACS Division of Polymer Chemistry is sponsoring a five-day symposium
entitled "NMR Spectroscopy of Polymers: Solutions, Melts and Solid State"
consisting of nine oral sessions (with more than 50 speakers) and a poster
session that will be held as part of the Division of Chemistry's technical
program at the Spring 2008, National ACS Meeting to be held in New
Orleans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Once objective of the symposium is to bring
together the leading scientists from around the world to exchange thoughts and
make presentations of their recent work in the utilization of NMR spectroscopy
to characterize both synthetic and naturally occurring polymers. Foreign
speakers will use this trip as part of a seminar tour at U.S. universities. We
anticipate that this meeting will have an attendance of approximately
150.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A second objective of the symposium is the education
and development of graduate students, post-doctoral associates, and young
faculty. To this end, we have scheduled tutorial lectures as the first session
of the symposium and more general lectures to start each day that are intended,
in part, to be pedagogical. Expenses will be associated with under writing
graduate students, post-doctoral associates and younger faculty
attendance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;