* 0811437
* Integrating Problem-driven and Class-based Learning for Constraint Satisfaction
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Susan Epstein, CUNY Hunter College
* Continuing Grant
* James Donlon
* 08/31/2013
* USD 433,335.00

Many large-scale, real-world problems are readily understood, represented, and
solved as constraint satisfaction problems. Organizations throughout the world
exploit this approach to solve difficult problems in design and configuration,
planning and scheduling, and diagnosis and testing. Nonetheless, each new,
large-scale problem faces the same bottleneck: scarce human experts must select,
combine, and refine the various techniques currently available for constraint
satisfaction and optimization. This cognitively-oriented project increases the
ability of both people and machines to address challenging new constraint
satisfaction problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The resultant autonomous, robust
system reasons from past experience, but with the ability to recognize and
respond intelligently to novelty. The new approach integrates a variety of
techniques to capture crucial subproblems, the most informative and conflict-
ridden parts of a problem. Because crucial sub-problems often recur with only
small variations, knowledge about how to solve them may be re-used. Moreover,
when a problem is unsolvable, the system identifies crucial subproblems for
human analysis and reformulation ? a first step toward collaborative problem
solving.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project speeds the uptake of an important
technology. It generates knowledge about crucial subproblems, search,
representation, and learning for constraint solving, and thereby makes
constraint-programming expertise more readily available. This project analyzes
the efficacy of its approach on a variety of constraint problems, particularly
real-world problems.