* 0811249
* CPA-CSA:    Algorithms and Implementations for Scalable Transactional Memory
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Rajeev Balasubramonian, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Ahmed Louri
* 06/30/2012
* USD 275,000.00

Within a few years, every laptop/desktop/server processor will be
a&lt;br/&gt;multi-core machine. For an application to perform well, it must
be&lt;br/&gt;efficiently parallelized to execute on all the cores on the
machine.&lt;br/&gt;Chip manufacturers must therefore provide architectures
that&lt;br/&gt;make it convenient for programmers to partition an application
into&lt;br/&gt;multiple parallel threads. The Transactional Memory (TM)
programming&lt;br/&gt;model is widely acknowledged to be the best known model
for&lt;br/&gt;concurrency: it eliminates deadlocks, provides high performance
in&lt;br/&gt;the common case, and greatly simplifies programming. It is
receiving&lt;br/&gt;great attention in research conferences and is also being
incorporated&lt;br/&gt;in commercial processors. One of the biggest overheads
for such a&lt;br/&gt;system is the communication required between cores to
implement&lt;br/&gt;transactional semantics. This overhead significantly
impacts&lt;br/&gt;performance and power consumption of future processors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project explores algorithms to not only reduce the
required amount of&lt;br/&gt;communication, but also explores mechanisms to
reduce the overheads&lt;br/&gt;of communication. The key insight behind the
proposed work is that an&lt;br/&gt;optimal on-chip network and transactional
memory implementation will&lt;br/&gt;emerge by closely studying the interaction
between the two. The&lt;br/&gt;insight developed during this work will lead to
better methodologies&lt;br/&gt;to compute an optimal on-chip network. The
simulators and tools&lt;br/&gt;developed during the research efforts will also
support projects in&lt;br/&gt;graduate and undergraduate courses at the
University of Utah.&lt;br/&gt;