* 0811175
* Systematic Lagrangian Methods for Transport Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Andrew Christlieb, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2011
* USD 167,000.00

This work focuses on the development of higher-order Lagrangian particle methods
for problems which have long-range self forces exhibiting algebraic decay. The
advantage of a Lagrangian particle framework is that regions that require
characterization (i.e., mesh points) are precisely where there are test
particles. Most particle methods are first order at best; in particular, the ad
hoc fashion in which they are obtained makes it extremely challenging to
systematically derive higher-order boundary conditions. An important sub-class
of problems with long range forces are those arising in plasma physics. The
fundamental governing set of equations is the Boltzmann-Maxwell (BM) system,
which may be reduced to the Vlasov-Poisson (VP) system under key assumptions.
These problems are 6D plus time and exhibit a range of complex dynamics.
Typically, Particle-In-Cell (PIC) is used to address computational problems
governed by these systems. The proposer has been engaged in addressing issues
with PIC (and other schemes) by developing a systematic particle formulation.
The initial framework is based on the evolution of the Lagrangian flow map,
where long range forces are evaluated using fast summation algorithms. The
proposed work seeks to develop high-order Lagrangian methods with four or higher
dimensions. Critical issues to be addressed include: I) a rigorous analysis of
numerical heating in mesh-based particle methods, II) increasing the spatial
accuracy of Lagrangian particle methods, III) an analysis of the use of
regularization and its impact on the accuracy of boundary integral methods, and
IV) accelerating explicit/implicit Spectral Deferred Correction (SDC) using
high-order correction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will create new
simulation tools that are more accurate, more reliable, and of broader
applicability than existing methods for a range of problems of interest in
applied physics, chemistry and materials science. Higher accuracy and better
predictive capability have a real impact in the applied sciences on reducing the
huge expense of experimental design procedure by providing a refined design
prior to construction. Collaboration with the Air Force Research Laboratory is
under way, aimed at real world problems such as modeling spacecraft plume
interactions. &lt;br/&gt;