* 0811379
* Curriculum Enhancements in Environmental Engineering
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Subramania Sritharan, Central State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2011
* USD 149,938.00

ABSTRACT HRD 0811379&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Central State University (CSU),
through a prior HBCU-UP grant, has introduced an Environmental Engineering (ENE)
Program at the baccalaureate level in response to the need for environmental
engineers globally beginning in Fall of 2007. The department, under the ENE
Program has identified industrial water/wastewater treatment as an emerging area
with an increasing global focus. This is also a signature area where ultra pure
filtration of emerging pollutants identified by the US EPA using nanotechnology
offers immense research possibilities. Education and research experience in this
area would allow our students to compete for opportunities both in the domestic
and international water sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The International Center
for Water Resources Management (ICWRM) at Central State University (CSU ICWRM)
is unique amongst the HBCU institutions in the Nation in having an
interdisciplinary program in WRM at the undergraduate level. CSU ICWRM is
enhancing the quality of its current program through infusion of industrial
wastewater treatment into its curriculum. This is being accomplished by
revamping existing course content and instructional delivery in the areas of
water and wastewater treatment and by expanding current capabilities of the
Water quality laboratory through acquiring additional analytical
instrumentation. The enriched curriculum allows students to gain an
understanding of the fate and transport of heavy metals and other inorganic ions
in the environment, particularly in the industrial effluents. Other areas
benefiting include the Environmental Science minor offered jointly by ICWRM and
Biology area of the Natural Sciences Department and the Biotechnology initiative
of the Biology area. It supplements the analytical support required for the
Forensic science program being conceived within Chemistry and Biology
departments. In anticipation of future work force needs in industrial water
treatment, ICWRM also proposes to conduct undergraduate educational research on
feasibility of using nanofibers in ultra pure filtration of trace metals from
drinking water and industrial effluents.