* 0811419
* Collaborative Research:   CPA-SEL:   Implementation Techniques for High-level Parallel Languages
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2008,02/28/2010
* Matthew Fluet, Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 02/28/2010
* USD 91,867.00

The rapid trend toward multi-core architectures promises faster execution of
computer programs but poses significant difficulties for software development
due to the lack of good programming models for exploiting the parallelism in
such architectures. This situation is a significant opportunity for programming-
language research to supply effective languages and tools for writing desktop
applications while exploiting the performance of multi-core hardware. It is well
known that functional-programming languages provide a good semantic base for
concurrent and parallel programming, but for such languages to be successful,
they need to provide competitive performance. The research focuses on the
technical challenges in the efficient implementation of parallel functional
languages. The characteristics of multi-core and many-core architectures demand
that implementations preserve sequential semantics in parallel constructs,
manage the granularity and scheduling of parallel threads, and be aware of the
locality of data. The research explores a collection of techniques that combine
static program analyses, compiler transformations, and dynamic runtime policies.
Empirical analysis of both traditional parallel benchmarks and small
applications is used to evaluate the effectiveness of the techniques developed
by this research. By addressing performance concerns, the research will enable
the practical use of parallel functional programming languages for a broad range
of applications.