* 0811791
* CPA-CPL:  Exploring and Exploiting Heterogeneous Cache Sharing in Chip Multiprocessors Systems for Locality Optimization and Proactive Cache Management
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,12/31/2012
* Xipeng Shen, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 12/31/2012
* USD 290,000.00

The increasing problems of power, heat dissipation, and
design&lt;br/&gt;complexity have caused a shift in processor technology to
favor&lt;br/&gt;multicore multiprocessors. Along with that shift, the sharing
of&lt;br/&gt;memory hierarchy becomes deeper, heterogeneous and more
complex,&lt;br/&gt;causing cache contention, increased conflicts, and also,
synergy&lt;br/&gt;sharing. Without understanding the implications of this
change,&lt;br/&gt;current multicore systems suffer from considerable
performance&lt;br/&gt;degradation, poor performance isolation and inferior
fairness&lt;br/&gt;guarantees. The urgency of these issues increases as the
degree of&lt;br/&gt;processor-level parallelism increments
rapidly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior studies, mostly in areas of architecture and
operating systems,&lt;br/&gt;rely on simple heuristics to estimate cache
requirement of corunning&lt;br/&gt;programs; the inaccuracy and overhead limits
their scalability and&lt;br/&gt;effectiveness. This work tackles these
challenges uniquely from the&lt;br/&gt;compiler aspect by constructing
predictive behavior models for&lt;br/&gt;corunning processes, developing cache-
sharing-aware program&lt;br/&gt;transformations and loop scheduling, and
combining the program-level&lt;br/&gt;knowledge of programming systems with the
proactive resource&lt;br/&gt;management by runtime systems. Specifically, this
work proposes&lt;br/&gt;inclusive reuse signatures to characterize inclusive
locality---the&lt;br/&gt;memory behavior of corunning programs on shared caches,
and&lt;br/&gt;inter-thread affinity models to capture data locality among
parallel&lt;br/&gt;threads. It tackles the challenges facing the measurement,
prediction&lt;br/&gt;and exploitation of inclusive locality. The analysis opens
new&lt;br/&gt;opportunities for shared-cache optimizations by both compilers
and&lt;br/&gt;runtime systems. The PI develops a series of program
transformations,&lt;br/&gt;such as inter-thread memory reorganization and cache-
sharing aware&lt;br/&gt;loop scheduling, to increase inter-thread spacial
locality and&lt;br/&gt;ameliorate conflicts, contention and false sharing. For
runtime&lt;br/&gt;systems, this work invents proactive cache management which
partitions&lt;br/&gt;caches or schedules processes according to predicted
inclusive&lt;br/&gt;locality proactively, overcoming the limitations of current
reactive&lt;br/&gt;schemes on scalability, accuracy and
effectiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;