* 0811745
* RI-Small: Efficient hidden structure annotation via structural multiple-sequence alignments
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Brian Roark, Oregon Health & Science University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 07/31/2012
* USD 437,750.00

The focus of this project is to develop finite-state syntactic processing models
for natural language that use features encoding global structural constraints
derived through multiple sequence alignment (MSA) techniques, to significantly
improve accuracy without expensive context-free inference. MSAs are widely used
in computational biology for building finite-state models that capture long-
distance dependencies in sequences (e.g., in RNA secondary structure). Given a
large set of functionally aligned sequences in MSA format, finite-state models
can be constructed that allow for the efficient alignment of new sequences with
the given MSA. In natural language processing (NLP), only very rarely have MSA
techniques been used, and then to characterize phonetic or semantic similarity.
This project is exploring the definition of a purely syntactic functional
alignment between semantically unrelated strings from the same language, to
define a structural MSA for constructing finite-state syntactic models. The
project has two specific aims. The first aim is to develop natural language
sequence processing algorithms and models that can: a) define sequence
alignments with respect to syntactic function; b) build structural MSAs based on
defined functional alignments; c) derive finite-state models to efficiently
align new sequences with the built MSA; and d) extract features from an
alignment with the MSA for improved sequence modeling. The second aim is to
empirically validate this approach within a number of large-scale text
processing applications in multiple domains and languages. The resulting
algorithms are expected to provide improved finite-state natural language models
that will contribute to the state-of-the-art in critical text processing
applications.