* 0811194
* ADVANCE Institutional Transformation Award:  Purdue Center for Faculty Success
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2008,03/31/2015
* Gwendolyn Taylor, Purdue University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jessie Dearo
* 03/31/2015
* USD 3,946,814.00

The Purdue Center for Faculty Success (PCFS) will provide targeted research,
programs and University-level coordination to increase the number of minority
women in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) faculty
positions; improve the success of all women STEM faculty; and engage all faculty
in transforming the institution. The PCFS will combine NSF and institutional
support to undertake research on the applicability of specific theoretical
models in the Purdue environment, develop programs informed by these theoretical
models and that focus on gaps in our current portfolio of initiatives, and
provide formative assessment and comprehensive evaluation of programmatic
impacts. University leaders and policymakers, including Purdue President and
ADVANCE PI France CÃ³rdova, will use PCFS results as compelling evidence to
sustain and advance institutional transformation and implement policy that will
impact the Purdue STEM community and beyond. Our vision is to accelerate
institutional transformation through a highly visible infrastructure that offers
innovative campus-wide coordination and collaboration for initiatives such as:
an innovative and prestigious Presidential ADVANCE Advocate position focused on
increasing the diversity of the pool of STEM faculty candidates; enhancing the
role of Purdue's ethnic cultural centers in faculty support; adapting ADVANCE
best practice STRIDE and WISELI "train the trainer" workshops; mentoring cohorts
of junior faculty for research and career development; providing leadership
mentoring for associate and full professors; transforming the entire faculty,
including majority faculty; developing Diversity Forum toolkits; and initiating
Diversity Catalyst and Leader Workshops. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merits. Institutional ethnography is a critical method with which to approach
understanding the experience of marginalized participants, and provides a new
approach to enrich ADVANCE research on STEM women faculty, in particular
underrepresented minority women. PCFS efforts will not only advance
understanding of the applicability of pipeline and chilly climate models that
ground so many "women in science" initiatives but will explore through
institutional ethnography the applicability of proposed new models that
integrate "boundary" metaphor approaches for exploring women's
underrepresentation. Thus PCFS research will generate new knowledge and advance
theoretical frameworks that will be of interest to theorists and ADVANCE
programs across the nation. The Purdue ADVANCE Advocate and cultural center
efforts aimed at enhancing minority women STEM faculty recruiting will be
assessed for new insights into enhancing minority faculty recruitment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. Improved understanding of the career
pathways of women STEM faculty at Purdue, in combination with the assessments of
the effectiveness of novel programs, will result in a rigorously tested,
explicitly articulated suite of programs that other institutions can adapt to
their own campuses. Innovative PCFS efforts to recruit minority women STEM
faculty will help address a particularly persistent national STEM challenge, and
other PCFS initiatives will increase participation of women in the STEM faculty
ranks and in leadership positions. This will have an immediate positive impact
on STEM undergraduate and graduate women at Purdue who may contemplate a
potential career in academia and potentially on all individuals who are
interested in science and engineering careers. PCFS includes Research Team
students at the graduate and post-doctoral level and junior faculty in all
programmatic initiatives and thus will support and encourage early-career
advancement. Through novel partnerships with our ethnic cultural centers, PCFS
will broaden participation across campus in the recruitment and support of
faculty from underrepresented groups. The transformation of the entire faculty,
including majority faculty, by PCFS will provide new approaches to sustain
institutional support for faculty success. In addition to publications in
leading journals and presentations at national and international research
conferences, Purdue will disseminate a PCFS-developed toolkit for Diversity
Forums and will host a national conference focused on ADVANCE theoretical
frameworks as drivers for institutional change.