* 0811096
* Computational Methods in Applied Nonlinear Dynamical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Timothy Sauer, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2012
* USD 89,402.00

Investigations are proposed at the overlap of computational mathematics and
applied dynamical systems, including improving our understanding of the role of
chaotic dynamics in computer simulations, and new computational methods for
inferring information about dynamical structure from time series data. The work
on simulation is an ongoing study of large statistical errors occurring in
deterministic modeling, including computational models of complex systems. The
second major area is work by the investigator on fundamental questions in the
interpretation of experimental multivariate time series, including data from
physical and biological experiments. Particular attention will be paid to
complex deterministic time series from physical, chemical, engineering and
biological/medical settings that are produced by network dynamics. We propose
new methods to solve discrimination problems, infer network structure and
dynamics, and to track and reduce noise from trajectories using data
assimilation methods in cases where the structure is
known.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The project focuses on the development of new
approaches to study computer simulation validity, and to the interpretation of
experimental data. Computer simulation is a critical ingredient of modern
science. Simulations that depend on the solution of differential equations are
subject to small modeling and truncation errors. The proposal builds a
foundation for analyzing the possible effect of the errors on long-term
simulation results, for physically relevant models. The second major focus of
this project is the interpretation of data collected from experimental systems
and nature when only a partial mathematical model is available. We will
investigate a range of techniques which, depending on the completeness of the
available model, can be used to attempt to reconstruct the model and dynamical
behavior of the process, with potential to predict or control the process. Both
parts of the project have implications in many areas of sciences and
engineering, and special relevance to biological systems.&lt;br/&gt;