* 0811276
* Comprehensive Enhancement of STEM programs at SUSLA
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2014
* Barry Hester, Southern University at Shreveport
* Continuing Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 09/30/2014
* USD 2,469,845.00

Southern University at Shreveport (SUSLA) requested support for an HBCU-UP
implementation award aimed at supporting the institutional mission of SUSLA: to
provide a quality education for its students, while being committed to the total
community?. Southern University at Shreveport, Louisiana, is a two year
institution with a student body enrollment of approximately 2,400, predominantly
African American (90%) and predominantly female (76%). The HBCU-UP project is
designed to strengthen STEM teaching and research to improve retention of
undergraduates and strengthen their academic preparation. Strategies include: i)
Course and curriculum reform and enhancement through the incorporation of
advances in science and engineering knowledge and research based teaching and
learning; ii) faculty professional development; iii) supervised research and
active learning experiences for STEM undergraduates in research laboratories and
other institutions during the summer; iv) infusion of technology into research
and teaching; and v) critical transition activities for student recruitment and
retention in STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Course and curricular reform
will focus on gate-keeper courses. The revisions will enhance entry-level
lab/research exercises, supported by updated equipment and teaching activities.
In addition, through the HBCU-UP project, SUSLA will obtain technology resources
to be used to update and enhance the teaching methodology. The courses impacted
will include biology, chemistry, computer science, electronics technology and
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Faculty support will include release time for
mentoring of students, support for research and support for participation in
scientific meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will benefit from strong
partnerships aimed at enriching the research experiences for the undergraduate
students. SUSLA has partnerships with other academic institutions and private
companies, through which students will receive research training, a new activity
at this two-year institution. Partnerships with secondary schools will
strengthen recruitment efforts through a summer research program for high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Underlying the strategies presented is the focus
on high school to undergraduate transition, and associate-baccalaureate-graduate
school transitions. The activities aimed at these transition points will be
implemented through partnerships with other funded programs, including the LS
AMP (Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation) and the LSAMP Bridges
programs, also funded by the National Science Foundation.