* 0811988
* HCC: Small: Designing and Using FastLane: Distilling Lessons for Cyberinfrastructures
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Jeffrey Yost, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2012
* USD 444,509.00

This is an analytical history project examining FastLane, the pioneering system
created to manage review of research proposals submitted to the National Science
Foundation. It will advance the history of contemporary computing and contribute
to the development of the human-centered computing field. A rigorous evaluative
history of NSF?s FastLane is feasible at this moment, owing to accessibility of
the designers of the system as well as the distinct communities of users,
including NSF legacy users, staff at Sponsored Projects offices, and principal
investigators. Substantial advance work has been carried out in contacting NSF
staff (concerning both document collection and oral histories) and in designing
and developing new research methods that will facilitate collecting qualitative,
interview-type data from the large population of varied users. The research
explores the human-centered computing (HCC) theme of how government agencies
respond to and shape the introduction of new information technologies, and it
will develop insights into the design and use of other complex computing
systems. The project will also contribute to the interdisciplinarity of HCC by
exploring the process of design, models for learning, modes of communication,
and the social, cultural, and ethical contexts of
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evaluation of the development of FastLane, an
early cyberinfrastructure (CI), will yield insights and lessons for contemporary
designers, managers, and users of CI. The research will generate insights into
the interaction of computing systems with complex cultural and organizational
processes. The project will also develop novel research tools for collecting
rich qualitative data on these processes, including a web-based interview
platform, a Wiki-site designed for the FastLane community, and semi-automated
oral-history transcription. The research is carefully designed to permit an
evaluation of FastLane?s impact on the participation of diverse researchers and
diverse educational institutions in the nation?s research infrastructure. This
project will create, analyze, and archive important data on the research
participation of several historically under-represented groups, including HBCU
institutions and EPSCoR states.&lt;br/&gt;