* 0812824
* Collaborative Research: Interactions Among Keystone Species:  Effects of Termites and Ungulates on Biodiversity in East African Savannas.
* BIO,DEB
* 11/28/2007,08/31/2011
* Daniel Doak, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2011
* USD 96,936.00

Intellectual Merit: Species do not all function equally in their native
habitats: some species have profound effects on ecological communities and their
elimination could cause a collapse of the community and a sharp reduction of
local and regional biological diversity. Understanding the importance of
species' interactions and their impact on communities is thus a central goal of
ecologists and conservation biologists, and is the central aim of this work. The
overarching goal is to examine the interactions between termites and large
vertebrates in supporting the biological diversity of East African savannas, and
to understand how these groups affect the distribution, diversity and abundance
of other species. Such an understanding is of paramount importance as these
habitats are lost, fragmented, and modified through agricultural use. Termites
have been identified as key species, crucial to the functioning of entire
ecosystems. In East Africa, termite mounds are a common feature of the
landscape. Through their mound building activities, termites enhance soil
nutrients and thus may be affect the diversity of the plants and insects that
live in close proximity to these mounds. Vertebrates have also been implicated
as playing a large role in the ecology of savanna habitats. However, the
interactions between termites and herbivores and their effects on communities
have rarely been examined. This work will provide novel data on the interactions
between termites and vertebrates in providing habitat and resources that
structure plant and animal communities across much of East Africa. These data
are critical to understanding the forces that generate and maintain habitat
heterogeneity and species diversity and to managing savanna
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project will support one
full-time Post-doctoral Researcher, one part-time Post-doctoral Researcher, two
graduate students (one in Kenya, one in the U.S.), three full-time technicians
(two in Kenya, one in the US), and two part-time field assistants each year. The
project will also be used for teaching at least 20 students per year through UC
Santa Barbara's Kenya Wildlands Program. Yearly meetings will be held with the
Laikipia Wildlife Forum, which includes scientists, local ranch managers and
traditional Maasai pastoralists, to discuss the results of the project. The
results will be disseminated to scientists in Kenya at the International Center
for Insect Physiology and Ecology, the National Museums of Kenya and the
University of Nairobi. The project represents a significant contribution to
human resource development, bridge-building among scientific institutions and
among the scientific and lay communities of East Africa, and education in a
geographical region where such opportunities are rare.&lt;br/&gt;