* 0812440
* RI-Small: Collaborative Research: Dispatcher's Assistant for Emergency First Response
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Dilek Hakkani-Tur, International Computer Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2009
* USD 75,731.00

Last Modified Date: 07/23/08 Last Modified By: Tatiana D. Korelsky &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Abstract &lt;br/&gt;In crisis response domains, emotional
manifestations are very complex and extreme emotions are common. While speech
technologies have shown significant progress over the years, recognizing and
understanding emotional speech in noisy environments is still a big challenge.
Understanding such language is daunting given fragmented and ungrammatical
utterances in addition to errors &lt;br/&gt;from automatic speech recognition
(ASR). Furthermore, there is little &lt;br/&gt;research on the analysis of the
relationship between emotion detection and language understanding which have
traditionally been viewed as parallel independent tasks. Even when the output of
one of these tasks is used as an input feature to the other, typically, during
training a "true" classification is used instead of the "estimated" classes (as
would be the case if the system were to be used in a real-setting) resulting in
a mismatch and degraded performance. This project attempts to overcome such a
limitation of current approaches by focusing on analyzing the degree of the
dependencies between emotion and intent and investigating joint classification
methods via multitask learning for language understanding and emotion detection
tasks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary intellectual merit of the
project is integrated research on &lt;br/&gt;developing an end-to-end
information processing system that has the potential to very significantly
impact the crisis response process. For speech processing, communucation between
individuals and emergency dispatch personnel &lt;br/&gt;as well as
communications during responders during response pose a big challenge since
callers are typically very emotional and the language used reflects that.
Processing such speech requires significant research, and this project can is a
first step toward this genre. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;