* 0812072
* NSF Engineering Research Center for Integrated Access Networks (CIAN)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2019
* Nasser Peyghambarian, University of Arizona
* Cooperative Agreement
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2019
* USD 36,528,818.00

The University of Arizona (Lead) with Nasser Peyghambarian as its director, and
its partner institutions, the University of California at San Diego, the
University of Southern California, the California Institute of Technology, the
University of California at Berkeley, Columbia University, Stanford University,
the University of California at Los Angeles, Norfolk State University and
Tuskegee University propose to establish a Center for Integrated Access Networks
(CIAN). The vision of CIAN is to create transformative technologies for optical
access networks where virtually any application requiring any resource can be
seamlessly and efficiently aggregated and interfaced with existing and future
core networks in a cost-effective manner. Analogous to the evolution over
decades of today?s computer laptop using massive integration of discrete
electronic components, the CIAN vision would lead to the creation of the PC
equivalent of the optical access network by employing optoelectronic integration
to enable affordable and flexible access to any type of service, including
delivery of data rates approaching 10 Gigabits/sec to a broad population base
anywhere and at anytime.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of CIAN
includes: (1) transforming expensive discrete components-based subsystems into
flexible cost-effective integrated optoelectronic subsystems to achieve
scaleable and affordable high-data-rate access networks; and (2) demonstrating
flexible network functionalities by moving services from the higher layers of
the network closer to the physical layer. To achieve these goals, the CIAN
strategic research program is organized into three integrated technical thrusts.
Thrust 1: Optical Communication Systems and Networking will act as the ?top-
down? driver for the development and integration of components and devices to
enable and demonstrate novel network functionalities for applications including
ultra high-data-rate processing centers. Thrust 2: Subsystem Integration and
Silicon Nanophotonics will explore signal conditioning, processing,
reconfiguration, and control functions realized with various platforms including
CMOS compatible nanostructures and silicon nanophotonics, and multifunctional
integrated subsystems exploiting monolithic and heterogeneous integration.
Thrust 3: Materials and Devices will act as the scientific and technological
foundation by conducting research on new materials, device technologies,
processing and integration methods for chip-scale integrated optoelectronics.
The shared CIAN Testbed is a research facility that allows CIAN?s comprehensive
vertically structured research efforts to be integrated, enabling effective
systems-driven collaborative research among participants and the wider research
and industrial community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of CIAN?s
research will be felt in every home and in the quality of life. Ultra-high data
rate and cost effective services will contribute to business innovation, improve
educational opportunities, enhance distribution of medical services, avoid the
expense and human costs of unnecessary commuting, minimize the environmental
impact from infrastructure and pollution, substantially reduce dependence on
energy imports, enable new and varied entertainment opportunities, and increase
overall national security. The infrastructure to carry these services is as
precious a national resource as the air, rail, and road transportation system or
the electrical power grid. Education, research, and knowledge transfer will be
integrated through the team-based multidisciplinary environment of CIAN. The
education, outreach and diversity efforts will focus on educating a skilled and
diverse workforce including Native Americans, Hispanic Americans, and African
Americans. CIAN will have an extensive pre-college education and outreach
program. Creation of intellectual property and technology transfer will be a
cornerstone of CIAN?s efforts.&lt;br/&gt;