* 0812718
* Student Travel Grant Program for the 2008 American Control Conference in Seatle on June 11-13, 2008
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2009
* Dawn Tilbury, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2009
* USD 16,500.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this project is to provide
financial assistance for undergraduate and graduate students to participate and
present technical papers at the 2008 American Control Conference (ACC 2008) in
Seattle. The American Control Conference, sponsored by the American Automatic
Control Council, is one of the most prestigious control conferences in the world
with an expected level of participation of over 2000 scientists, students, and
practicing engineers. The conference will focus on theoretical issues,
engineering methodologies, and industrial applications in all areas of control
research and development. The project funding will enable US students to
participate in a high quality, peer-reviewed technical conference that is
attended by many of the research leaders in the systems and control area. With
over 1000 research presentations, numerous technical workshops, plenary
lectures, group panel discussions by leaders on numerous special issues of
importance, and industry exhibits, ACC 2008 will expose the students to the
state-of-the-art and emerging areas of research and technology in systems and
control area. The conference provides a unique opportunity for students to
present their work to their peers and renowned researches. The conference
provides special activities for students seeking to expand educational
opportunities and for those nearing graduation to seek employment in industry,
academia, and government labs. Since the control systems field is
interdisciplinary, student participants will have a unique opportunity to
interact with their peers from other fields of engineering and from pure
sciences. The rich experience from such interactions will benefit their career
and development. The conference is sponsored by American Automatic Control
Council which in turn is composed of eight member societies, AIAA, AIChE, AISE,
ASCE, ASME, IEEE, ISA, and SCS. Students from engineering, mathematics and other
pure sciences are eligible for funding from this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts resulting from the Proposed
Activity: &lt;br/&gt;The conference will help train the next generation of
control researchers and practitioners. Control systems are ubiquitous; they can
be found in such diverse areas as automated manufacturing systems, automobiles,
airplanes, refineries, power plants, electrical power grid, Internet,
communication, and chemical processes. Modern engineering systems are becoming
increasingly complex in this information rich world. Advances in sensing and
control technology are making it possible to manage and control modern complex
engineering systems. Control technology is a critical area for the US industry,
the future technological edge and security of the United States depends on
keeping a pool of trained scientists and engineers. The students funded under
this project will be future leaders of control technology. Travel support for
student participants, in the form of ACC 2008 Student Travel&lt;br/&gt;Grants,
will be advertised nationally. Women, minorities, and disabled students will be
especially encouraged to apply.