* 0812309
* III-COR-Small: Collaborative Research: Time Series Subsequence Matching for Content-based Access in Very Large Multimedia Databases
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* George Kollios, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2012
* USD 224,998.00

In a query-by-humming system, a user sings part of a melody and the computer
identifies the songs that contain the melody. In a sign spotting system, a sign
language user searches for occurrences of specific signs in a video database of
sign language content. These are two example applications where users want to
retrieve the best matching subsequences in a time series database given a query
sequence. This project is developing methods for efficient subsequence matching
in large time-series databases using the popular Dynamic Time Warping (DTW)
distance measure. Embeddings are being designed that partially convert the
subsequence matching problem into the much more manageable problem of similarity
search in a vector space. This conversion allows leveraging the full arsenal of
vector indexing and metric indexing methods for speeding up subsequence
matching. The proposed methods will be applicable in a wide variety of time
series domains, including, e.g., stock market modeling, seismic activity
analysis, and sensor-based health monitoring. To showcase the commercial,
social, and educational impact of the research, the project will produce three
demonstration systems: a query-by-humming system, a handwritten document search-
by-keyword system, and a sign spotting system. The results of the research are
being integrated into these systems to achieve efficient retrieval in the
presence of large amounts of data. The creation and dissemination of large,
real-world datasets for these three systems will be an additional contribution
of the project.