* 0812162
* Priming Appraisals:  Testing a Process Model of Emotions
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2007,06/30/2009
* Leslie Kirby, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Kellina Craig-Henderson
* 06/30/2009
* USD 80,000.00

In the scholarly literature, human emotions are increasingly appreciated as
representing highly context-specific responses that serve important adaptational
functions at both intrapersonal and interpersonal levels. Intrapersonally,
emotions are posited to serve important attention-regulatory functions, alerting
the individual to adaptationally relevant events and preparing and motivating
the individual to respond to those events. Interpersonally, through their
physical expression, emotions are posited to communicate important information
regarding the person's reactions and likely behaviors to others in the social
environment. Given the importance of emotion in human functioning, it is vital
to understand how emotions can be elicited in a highly context-specific manner.
The ultimate goal of this line of research is to test for a causal role of
appraisal, or internal evaluations, in eliciting emotional experience, and to
test a key premise of a process model by examining the effects of incidentally
primed appraisals on emotion and emotion-related behaviors. However, an
important first step in this research is to demonstrate that appraisals can be
primed effectively. Although strong effects of social priming have been found in
other domains, priming of appraisals is a new research direction. Preliminary
evidence suggests the feasibility of emotional priming, but this small grant
will explicitly test a variety of priming manipulations, such as cognitive tasks
and incidental exposure, to make sure they can effectively and uniquely prime
specific appraisals. Several distinct appraisals, having specific hypothesized
roles in differentiating emotional experience, will be targeted. These include
appraisals of motivational relevance (an evaluation of subjective importance
which determines the intensity of the emotional response), coping potential (the
extent to which a person feels able to change or maintain circumstances in order
to further her/his goals), and accountability (which tells the individual toward
whom/what to direct coping efforts). Each targeted appraisal will be primed in
two different ways, and the strength and specificity of the priming will be
evaluated. The results of these studies will lay the groundwork for subsequent
research that will directly test the effects of primed appraisals on emotional
response. This research line will greatly strengthen the existing empirical
evidence regarding the causal role of appraisal in the elicitation and
differentiation of emotional experience, and further, will help provide a
theoretical account of the cognitive processes underlying emotion elicitation.
The development of this theoretical account in turn will have great utility for
understanding the functioning of emotions more broadly through an improved
understanding of the conditions and processes by which specific emotions, both
adaptive and maladaptive, are elicited. Beyond the broader benefits to society
to accrue from an increased understanding of emotional functioning, the proposed
research will be conducted so to maximize its educational benefits. The
scientific training of both undergraduate and graduate students will be advanced
through their participation in data collection, analysis, and presenting the
research at scientific meetings, as well as by participating in seminars that
examine the theoretical underpinnings of this research.&lt;br/&gt;