* 0812514
* III-COR-SMALL:  RUI:  Models and Methods for Information Organization
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Brent Heeringa, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2012
* USD 200,063.00

A pivotal challenge for the next generation of internet applications is
effectively managing and presenting massive amounts of data. Many current
research efforts focus on indexing data for the purposes of search and
information retrieval. Here the data is represented for optimal algorithmic
traversal. In contrast, almost no attention is paid toward optimizing the data
for human traversal.&lt;br/&gt;For example, when saving email, it is common to
store messages in a series of hierarchically arranged folders where each child
folder is more specific than its parents. To retrieve a message, a user
typically enters a query in a search box. The application returns a list of
matching emails and the user searches this list linearly. This proposal develops
a formal algorithmic framework for automatically organizing and presenting
information suitable for human traversal. A central goal when organizing and
presenting information to a person is creating a system where desired
information is quick and easy to find. Extending this criterion to human
traversable organizations means arranging data so that the organizational
structure is intuitive and the search is efficient. This proposal investigates
three specific problems related to human-traversable organization of data:
optimal ways to organize the information, dynamic models of information
organization, and new organization models for tagged data, such as available on
blogs, news websites and in scientific repositories. Algorithms and models
implementations will be made publicly available for download by other
researchers and educators. Results will be disseminated at national workshops
and published papers. This research will also be incorporated into several
courses at Williams including a new tutorial-style course on approximation
algorithms. Collaborative work with undergraduate students on problems defined
within the proposal will both enhance and expand the current opportunities for
undergraduate research at Williams
College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;