* 0812562
* HCC-Small: Collaborative Research:  Design and Evaluation of the Next Generation of E-book Readers.
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Maneesh Agrawala, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2011
* USD 75,999.00

This research will evaluate the potential of a new generation of electronic
document readers that present information across multiple displays - a design
that anticipates the future availability of fast, bi-stable, display technology.
Despite the fact that e-book readers have been available to the general public
for several years, paper remains far more popular as a medium for reading and
annotating documents. Although electronic devices for reading can provide unique
affordances such as a large storage capacity, keyword search, indexing, and some
interactivity, they remain unpopular probably because they fail to offer several
core affordances of paper such as efficient page-to-page navigation, quick
access to multiple documents, and efficient handling of
annotations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Starting from an existing proof of concept,
this project will design a fully functional prototype that addresses a large
spectrum of reading activities that include: reading a book or magazine, lateral
reading, and active reading. A set of deployable prototypes will be used to
evaluate the potential of the design through a series of longitudinal studies.
In producing prototypes of a next generation electronic document reader, this
project will systematically study the design parameters that might enhance the
reading experience on such devices in a wide variety of scenarios encompassing a
diversity of reading activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is possible that
digital displays will become the predominant technology for&lt;br/&gt;consuming
text information. However, digital reading devices will be used only if they
combine physical design, software infrastructure, and interface features that
support a wide variety of reading patterns. Increasing amounts of reading
material (both classic and modern) are available through digital distribution.
By making it convenient and enjoyable to access this wealth of digital content,
this project will spur new interest in reading both for work and
pleasure.&lt;br/&gt;