* 0812794
* Workshop: Vision 2020 for Biology to be held on January 3-4, 2008 in Arlington, Virginia
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2008,12/31/2008
* Philip Benfey, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 12/31/2008
* USD 36,322.00

In the next 10-15 years, biology will move from a descriptive to a predictive
science. This 'next generation' research will have as its foundation, a detailed
understanding of the systems that control the behavior of individual cells and
the interactions between them, resulting in outputs at the whole organism level.
Systems biology aims to transform molecular maps into networks of functional
interactions within living cells, and develop mathematical platforms to
integrate and interpret biological data obtained from diverse experimental
approaches. This will require detailed knowledge of what happens as networks of
genetic components are perturbed, through variation induced in the laboratory or
by taking advantage of natural variation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nine years ago, a
group of scientists met in a NSF sponsored workshop to discuss the grand
challenges facing biology at that time. Their primary aim was to identify areas
in which plant science could provide important and lasting contributions to
addressing these challenges. A key recommendation from their report was to focus
sufficient resources on the model plant Arabidopsis to be able to fully exploit
its soon to be completed genome sequence. As the NSF 2010 program nears
completion it seems appropriate to step back, assess progress and once again ask
how plants can contribute to addressing the grand challenges in Biology. This
workshop, to be held in Arlington, Virginia January 3-4, 2008, will bring
together scientists from US and foreign institutions to discuss the future
directions for plant research, building on the tools, resources and knowledge
gained from Arabidopsis in facing future challenges.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Today, a host of real-world problems
involve plants: escalating pressures for food, renewable and carbon neutral
biofuels, and habitat preservation are being driven by the demands of an ever
growing, and ever more prosperous human population. The ability to face these
challenges is dependent on understanding the basic biology and ecology of
plants. It is in addressing fundamental problems in biology that NSF funded
plant research has provided the foundations for meeting some of these pressing
problems. It is the expectation that by identifying the next set of grand
challenges in biology and how they can best be met by plant research, this
workshop will provide the best preparation for the unforeseen problems of
tomorrow. A summary report describing the outcomes of the discussions will be
disseminated broadly to the scientific community through the Arabidopsis
Information Resource (TAIR) web site (http://www.arabidopsis.org). &lt;br/&gt;