* 0812509
* RI: Extension of the APP detector for multipitch tracking and speaker separation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2010
* Carol Espy-Wilson, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 02/28/2010
* USD 125,000.00

In many real world scenarios, speech recognition and speaker identification
systems must deal with simultaneous speech from several talkers, i.e., speech
mixtures representing conversations in natural environments. Users of cochlear
implants encounter problems in separating speakers in multi-speaker
environments, because of the loss of fine temporal structure. Thus, a crucial
preprocessing step for such systems is the segregation of speech according to
its constituent sources. The project is the first part of this process which
involves the recognition of the number of speakers and the separation of their
pitch tracks based on the periodic portions of the speech signal (i.e., voiced
regions). Since different speakers have characteristic pitch ranges as a
consequence of vocal cord physiology, pitch tracks can be used to help separate
the combined signal into different speech streams. Current popular multi-pitch
tracking approaches are susceptible to artifacts caused by the interaction
between the periodic regions of the different speech signals. Consequently, the
periodicity of the combined signal can be different from that of the individual
components. The major new idea is the extension of an existent periodicity and
pitch estimation process to higher dimensions, arriving at a multi-dimensional
periodicity function which is not susceptible to the harmonic interaction
artifacts. Preliminary results show that the multiple pitch tracks obtained are
accurate even when one speaker is considerably more dominant than the other
speaker. The approach is easily generalized to non-speech audio and it should be
robust in noisy channels. The outcome of this project will be used in a future
project where the actual speech streams will be separated from each other based
on the multi-pitch information.