* 0812195
* RUI:Â Empirical Density Functional Theory Using the Laplacian of the Density
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Antonio Cancio, Ball State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2012
* USD 150,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and education on
Density Functional Theory. The work develops a series of improvements in the
theory based on insights gained from modeling exchange-correlation holes and
energy densities in Si crystal and other systems. The approach focuses on using
the Laplacian of the density. The change in density about an electron?s position
due to Pauli exclusion and Coulomb correlations and the change in the local
energy due to the existence of the hole are key theoretical inputs to this
approach at enhancing density functional theory (DFT). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research employs a growing body of data comparing Quantum Monte Carlo
simulations of the exchange-correlation holes and energy density in realistic
systems with those from density functional theories, such as the local density
approximation (LDA). The PI and others previously showed a strong linear
correlation of the error of the hole with the local Laplacian of the density. In
this research, the correlation is quantified with a model transferable to a
number of different systems. This research effort incorporates the essential
physics revealed by these studies into preexisting, widely used DFT?s with only
minor changes. The research implements a series of changes to current DFT models
based on the model and data previously acquired. The activities include
developing a test-bed of basic solid-state and molecular systems to test the
performance of these models with respect to energies and ground-state
structures. As a result, this research improves DFT predictions for
semiconductor structures and facilitates extensions to include other properties
of the energy functional known to depend on the Laplacian of the
density.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has broader impact beyond the specific
research investigations including education and relevance to growing device
technologies. The work adds a deeper understanding of the key inputs of existing
DFT models. The result is a more robust description of exchange-correlation
potentials and ground-state structural properties without a significant increase
in computational cost. Scientific impact follows from the fact that Density
Functional Theory is the most important computational tool for electronic
structure in materials science and quantum chemistry. Thus an improvement in the
predictive power accomplished under this award has a potentially significant
impact on a wide range of applications and fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact extends to economic development. The PI's institution, Ball State
University, is the major institution of higher education in the region, with a
mission of technology development and transfer supporting a transition from
heavy industry. Initiatives associated with this mission include a Center of
Computational Nanoscience in the department of Physics, with collaborators from
Purdue University, Ohio University and others, and a push to computation-based
research and education focused on high performance computing. The proposed
project makes a substantive contribution in these initiatives by enhancement of
theoretical methods of immediate relevance to computer modeling of nanoscale
electronic systems. The development undertaken also helps to educate researchers
and educators in the use of modern atomistic modeling techniques, developing
educational tools in solid-state physics and nanoscience, and providing
graduates with excellent training in materials modeling and excellent
preparation for industry and graduate
school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports research and education on Density Functional Theory, the current
predominant tool for calculating electronic properties in chemistry and
materials. The work develops a series of improvements in the theory based on
insights gained from comparisons with quasi-exact but less flexible methods such
a Quantum Monte Carlo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum Monte Carlo simulations give
reliable details about the local arrangement of electrons relative to one
another as they undergo movement according to the laws of quantum physics.
Studying these correlations of the positions of electrons in molecules and
materials, the PI and others previously established a strong connection between
the error of the predictions of Density Functional Theory and Quantum Monte
Carlo. The error is found connected with regions where the overall electronic
density was changing in a nonlinear fashion. This research describes these
connections mathematically and appropriately incorporates the essential laws of
physics. It is so able to identify enhancements to widely used variants of
Density Functional Theory with only minor changes in the computations. The
research activities include developing a test-bed of basic solid-state and
molecular systems to evaluate the performance of these models with respect to
predicting energies and structures. As a result, this research improves DFT
predictions for semiconductor structures and facilitates extensions to include
other properties of materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact extends
to economic development. The PI's institution, Ball State University, is the
major institution of higher education in the region, with a mission of
technology development and transfer supporting a transition from heavy industry.
Initiatives associated with this mission include a Center of Computational
Nanoscience in the department of Physics, with collaborators from Purdue
University, Ohio University and others, and a push to computation-based research
and education focused on high performance computing. The proposed project makes
a substantive contribution in these initiatives by enhancement of theoretical
methods of immediate relevance to computer modeling of nanoscale electronic
systems. The development undertaken also helps to educate researchers and
educators in the use of modern atomistic modeling techniques, developing
educational tools in solid-state physics and nanoscience, and providing
graduates with excellent training in materials modeling and excellent
preparation for industry and graduate school.&lt;br/&gt;