* 0812111
* III-CXT-Small: Graphs to Diversity: extracting genomic variation from sequence graphs
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Mihai Pop, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,390,291.00

Recent advances in genome sequencing technologies have enabled
the&lt;br/&gt;sequencing of bacteria directly from the environment, providing
a&lt;br/&gt;broader outlook on the diversity of bacteria than ever
before&lt;br/&gt;possible. Recent studies of environmental samples have
revealed&lt;br/&gt;complex communities containing many previously unknown
species, and&lt;br/&gt;uncovered a large amount of genetic variation and
diversity even among&lt;br/&gt;closely related strains. Characterizing this
genomic variation is&lt;br/&gt;critical in studies of microbial ecology and
evolution, yet currently&lt;br/&gt;available computational tools, originally
developed for the study of&lt;br/&gt;single organisms, are ill-suited for this
task.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to develop the theoretical and
computational&lt;br/&gt;infrastructure for the study of genomic variation within
mixtures of&lt;br/&gt;organisms. The proposed research relies on both
theoretical and&lt;br/&gt;empirical analyses of the structure of genome assembly
graphs in order&lt;br/&gt;to characterize graph signatures that are correlated
with intra- and&lt;br/&gt;inter- species polymorphisms. A particular focus is
placed on&lt;br/&gt;understanding and using the information provided by next
generation&lt;br/&gt;sequencing technologies as well as other high-throughput
experimental&lt;br/&gt;techniques. The proposed work provides critical analysis
tools&lt;br/&gt;to help biologists explore the genetic variation within
the&lt;br/&gt;environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additional information about
this project is available at&lt;br/&gt;http://www.cbcb.umd.edu/research/Genomic_
Variation.shtml.&lt;br/&gt;