* 0812337
* U. S. - Egypt International Collaboraton: Utilitarian Supramolecular nanoCellulosic Materials/OISE
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2013
* George Newkome, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 02/28/2013
* USD 30,000.00

TECHNICAL:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Macromolecular and supramolecular chemistries,
along with nanomaterials are expanding rapidly; however, it is at the
intersections of these disciplines where the creation of novel materials has the
most interesting potential and a wide appeal. This research, submitted to the US
Egypt International collaboration and funded by the NSF Office of International
Science and Engineering, will lead to the construction of new polymeric
materials based on cellulose modification and the tools of crystal engineering,
self-assembly, and polymer and materials sciences. Specifically, the PIs will
explore dendritic and non-dendritic polymeric architectures, based on (1)
ligand-metal-ligand assemblies of preconstructed and precisely designed
components resulting in macromolecular, network-based architectures; and (2)
potential polymeric megastructures obtained by the logical combination of
dendrons, metal cations, and cellulosic materials for the construction of
precisely positioned components within matricies attached to polymeric
scaffolds. Such strategies have afforded advantages in photophysical and
electrooptical materials, and as a result of the ability to tailor the
properties of the active site(s), it herein is proposed that the construction of
metal-containing, polymerized, dendritic networks onto a polymeric array will
result in layered regions of nested nanoparticles. The potential surface-
protection and electronic interaction of the nested, internal nanoparticles will
be evaluated. Application of this process to the formation of poly-layered
polymeric surfaces is also envisioned.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is in the area of new materials utilizing natural resources. Advancement
of discovery and understanding of the proposed work will promote the integration
of student training and enrichment, at all education levels, including K-12,
undergraduate, graduate, post-doctoral and visiting scientists (national and
international), by providing appropriately staged conceptual and technical
scientific challenges, as well as foster US/Egyptian collaborative efforts. This
will facilitate student competence while instilling and nurturing specific
elements of critical thinking, requisite for all disciplines. Participation of
underrepresented groups and minorities is encouraged through direct support and
community outreach projects as well as includes inner-city school presentations
and K-12 teacher involvement that broadly promote scientific and technical
understanding. Additionally, scientific information about polymeric materials,
and dendritic materials in particular, is promulgated through the principal
investigator's website (www.dendrimers.com ), which currently averages
6,000-7,000 visits per month.