* 0812113
* (RI+hcc)-Small: Computational Social Choice: Aggregating Preferences in Combinatorial Domains
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Vincent Conitzer, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Todd Leen
* 08/31/2012
* USD 437,212.00

In traditional social choice, it is assumed that each agent explicitly ranks all
of the alternatives. In Artificial Intelligence applications this is generally
impractical: for example, there are exponentially many joint plans&lt;br/&gt;or
allocations of tasks/resources. Nevertheless, even the computational social
choice community has so&lt;br/&gt;far focused primarily on the explicit-ranking
model. While this was a necessary phase to establish a
solid&lt;br/&gt;foundation for this line of research, it is now time to move on
and consider the combinatorial domains with&lt;br/&gt;exponentially many
alternatives that motivated computational social choice in the first place. This
is what&lt;br/&gt;the proposed research will do.&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes the
following 5-part research plan. First, he plans to study how agents? votes
should&lt;br/&gt;be represented, that is, what language the agents should use to
express their preferences in a combinatorial&lt;br/&gt;domain. Once the language
has been determined, he plans to study what rule should be used to make
a&lt;br/&gt;decision based on the votes. Such a rule would be useless without a
good algorithm for executing it, that&lt;br/&gt;is, for solving the winner
determination problem. Even with a good language, it may be
overwhelming&lt;br/&gt;for an agent to report its complete preferences, so the
PI plans to study how to elicit the (relevant parts of)&lt;br/&gt;agents?
preferences by asking the agents simple queries. Finally, he plans to address
the problem of agents&lt;br/&gt;voting insincerely to manipulate the decision,
in part by investigating whether such manipulation can be&lt;br/&gt;made
computationally infeasible.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will allow agents to coordinate when solving a complex problem, even if
they have&lt;br/&gt;been created by different designers with different
objectives. For example, robots in search-and-rescue or&lt;br/&gt;other
exploration settings can vote over how they will divide the exploration. This
allows a much greater&lt;br/&gt;diversity of agents to participate in such a
task, undoubtedly leading to better results. Also, some of
the&lt;br/&gt;research is likely to be applicable to human decision
making.&lt;br/&gt;Europe is starting to take the lead in computational social
choice; if funded, this proposal will ensure that&lt;br/&gt;the U.S. retains
expertise in and continues to shape this burgeoning research area. Of course,
research is not&lt;br/&gt;a zero-sum game, and the PI plans to collaborate
closely with the other researchers in the area. In fact, this&lt;br/&gt;proposal
corresponds to the PI?s part of a 12-investigator proposal that was just
recommended for funding&lt;br/&gt;by the European Science Foundation (ESF). This
(NSF) proposal would also support the PI?s collaboration&lt;br/&gt;with Jeff
Rosenschein (Hebrew University); for this collaboration, Jeff and the PI already
received a small&lt;br/&gt;US-Israel Binational Science Foundation grant that
serves to support the Israeli side as well as travel.&lt;br/&gt;The proposal
also includes plans to develop a new graduate course on computational social
choice,&lt;br/&gt;mentor graduate and undergraduate students, build connections
to economics and political science, and&lt;br/&gt;attract more women to computer
science (as well as participate in other outreach activities).