* 0812377
* III-COR-Small: Similarity Criteria Issues in Similarity Retrieval
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Hanan Samet, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2012
* USD 457,999.00

The wide use of the internet coupled with the steadily decreasing cost in
computing and storage has led to an expansion of the data that users expect to
retrieve from simple numeric and alphanumeric, to include images,audio, video,
where the retrieval criterion is one of similarity. An inherent difficulty with
similarity retrieval is deciding on a criterion for the similarity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
explores issues involved in retrieval that is based on several criteria of
similarity:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) In the spatial data context, similarity is
usually defined in terms of proximity in spatial position. Instead, this
research will examine similarity in relative spatial orientation. Thus there
will be a focus on groups of objects, In particular, attention will be paid to
position-independent indexes that find use in applications involving
pictorially-specified queries to symbolic image databases.&lt;br/&gt;(2) Issues
involved in finding the k nearest types of objects rather than the k nearest
objects will be explored. At present, it is the type of the objects that is of
interest rather than their identity. This differentiation is similar to the
classic distinction made in spatial databases between location-based and
feature-based queries.&lt;br/&gt;(3) Also of interest will be finding similarity
between sets of objects where the similarity measure is the maximum of the
minimum distance between objects in the two sets (the Hausdorff distance). Of
particular interest will be methods that are incremental so that data is
obtained as quickly as possible without waiting for the algorithms to
complete.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Position-
independent indexing has application to pictorially-specified image databases as
well as to databases of moving objects which can be used for searches that
include traffic data. The Hausdorff distance is applicable to multimedia
databases as is the focus on retrieval by type rather than individual objects.
Via a collaboration with the National Cancer Institute, the research team will
investigate what makes a good similarity measure for bioinformatics
applications.