* 0812913
* Collaborative Research:  Linkage of Bacterial Pathogens to Human infectious Disease in an Estuary Subjected to Extreme Climatic Events
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* Richard Luettich, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,541,139.00

In this project, researchers at two campuses of the University of North Carolina
(Chapel Hill and Charlotte) will continue their research focused on
characterizing, quantifying, and modeling links among waterborne pathogens,
extreme climatic events, impacts on nutrient/sediment delivery and phytoplankton
blooms, and outbreaks of infectious disease in the anthropogenically-influenced
Neuse River Estuary (NRE). With prior and current NSF support, the team utilized
an interdisciplinary approach to examine potential links between eutrophication
and pathogen fate and transport, including research on remobilization and
particle attachment of pathogens, and modeling of pathogens and human health
based upon data from normal climatic conditions. Work to date has demonstrated
he enormous impact of extreme climatic (storm) events on the abovementioned
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accordingly, with this renewal funding, the
research team will increase its focus on these events (storms and droughts),
which have increased dramatically in the past decade, and will test a two-
pronged hypothesis that relates the growth, transport, survival, and vectoring
of autochthonous (native) and allochthonous (from runoff containing fecal
contamination) heterotrophic pathogens to complex biological and physical
processes in this key estuarine system. Research will evaluate process-level
(i.e., climatic disruption, particle attachment, estuarine transport, vectoring
of pathogens to coastal communities) linkages that play central roles in the
causation of human disease from runoff-contaminated waters and subject to
environmental conditions favoring proliferation of native bacterial pathogens.
The project will integrate; 1) baseline and extreme event monitoring, using
advanced in situ sampling approaches, 2) targeted process-based studies, 3)
human health and pathogen data (including novel approaches to link estuarine
pathogens and human disease isolates), and 4) 3-D mechanistic and human health
models of the estuarine system. Results will provide for a
mechanistic/explanatory modeling framework that will elucidate causes, controls,
fates, and environmental controls on pathogen fate in the NRE, and subsequent
risk to human health; all impacted by increases in extreme events likely to
accompany global climate change. Hydrologic, water quality, and human health
models will improve knowledge of pathogen dynamics in diverse estuarine systems,
and yield tools that will allow society to respond to and manage threats to
human health from pathogens (re)mobilized and/or concentrated during extreme
climatic events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of Broader Impacts, this
research will yield both a computational model of and a unique system for
collection and analysis of environmental, ecological, and human health data
related to the response of human populations to the increase in pathogens in
estuaries following extreme climatic events; all directed towards protection of
the public from microbial disease transmitted through estuaries. This project
will produce a network of research scientists and public health practitioners
whose work is integrated to ensure the ability of regions to respond to extreme
climatic events as they unfold. Lastly, the project will continue to train
undergraduate and graduate students, including minority groups and women, in
this new field of study, creating an interdisciplinary area that brings together
the fields of ecology, medical microbiology, public health and epidemiology,
modeling, geography, oceanography, and water systems engineering. &lt;br/&gt;