* 0812183
* III-COR-Small: Multi-Relational Data Clustering with Probabilistic Mixture Models
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Arindam Banerjee, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Clifton Bingham
* 08/31/2013
* USD 399,609.00

With widespread attempts to apply data mining methods to real
life&lt;br/&gt;problems, there is an increasing realization that real life data
is&lt;br/&gt;often multi-relational, involving observations connecting
multiple&lt;br/&gt;entities through a set of relations. A central problem in
several&lt;br/&gt;applications involving multi-relational data is to
simultaneously find&lt;br/&gt;clusters of objects across related entities, e.g.,
customer clusters&lt;br/&gt;and related product clusters in e-commerce, movie
clusters and related&lt;br/&gt;user clusters in recommendation systems,
communities and shared&lt;br/&gt;content in social networks, etc. The key novel
aspect is that the&lt;br/&gt;clustering of objects in an entity, such as the set
of movies or&lt;br/&gt;users, depends on its relationships with objects in other
entities,&lt;br/&gt;e.g., users are similar if they like similar movies, and
vice versa.&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of of this project is to develop a
unified&lt;br/&gt;statistical approach to multi-relational clustering and
related&lt;br/&gt;problems in multi-relational data analysis. Towards this end,
the&lt;br/&gt;project investigates a family of novel statistical multi-
relational&lt;br/&gt;mixture models, with focus on additive and multiplicative
models for&lt;br/&gt;multi-relational clustering. Due to modularity of design,
both&lt;br/&gt;additive and multiplicative models can incorporate domain
specific&lt;br/&gt;semantics as well as automatic model selection using
appropriate&lt;br/&gt;Bayesian priors. Further, the project investigates
efficient&lt;br/&gt;variational inference methods appropriate for discovering
latent&lt;br/&gt;multi-relational clusters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
significantly empowers the knowledge discovery component&lt;br/&gt;of data
mining. Crucial clues to understanding observed data in&lt;br/&gt;several
disciplines, including social, biological, and information&lt;br/&gt;sciences,
are often spread across multiple related observations. The&lt;br/&gt;project
enables a statistical approach to detecting latent structure&lt;br/&gt;in such
multi-relational data, which is an important step towards&lt;br/&gt;knowledge
discovery from multiple related data sources. The project&lt;br/&gt;plays an
important role in developing closer collaboration across&lt;br/&gt;disciplines
and broaden participation in computer science. Building&lt;br/&gt;on the
increasing awareness regarding the ubiquity of multi-relational&lt;br/&gt;data,
the project contributes to the development of appropriate&lt;br/&gt;educational
material for the next generation work-force. Further&lt;br/&gt;information on
the project may be found at the project web
site:&lt;br/&gt;http://www.cs.umn.edu/~banerjee/multi-
relational.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;