* 0812005
* CAREER:Methods and Challenges in Discrete Mathematics
* NONE,NONE
* 12/01/2007,06/30/2012
* Benjamin Sudakov, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2012
* USD 372,333.00

This proposal outlines a challenging career developments plan focusing on
several fascinating problems in Discrete Mathematics. Specific areas in which PI
plans to work include Ramsey Theory, Graph colorings, Extremal Combinatorics and
Random and pseudo-random graphs. Furthermore the author plan to study
application of all these areas to Theoretical Computer Science. The main tools
which are going to be used in this investigation combine combinatorial
techniques, probabilistic methods, tools from Linear Algebra and spectral
techniques amongst the others. First group of questions in this proposal deals
with Ramsey numbers. The author wants to bound these numbers for sparse graphs,
i.e., graphs in which every subgraph has bounded average degree. Here the goal
is to show that such graphs have Ramsey numbers which grow linearly in the size
of the graph. An additional topic is to study various extremal problems. In
particular to obtain extensions of classical Turan's theorem and prove better
bounds on the Max Cut in the graphs with forbidden subgraphs. Some of these
problems were posed many years ago by Erdos, and despite all efforts are still
open. Another set of questions deals mainly with the study of the chromatic and
choice numbers of graphs. Usually there is a huge gap between these two
parameters, so one of the goals in this proposal is to understand the graphs for
which chromatic and choice numbers are equal. Finally the PI also intends to
study the asymptotic properties of random and pseudo-random graphs which is one
of the central topics in Probabilistic Combinatorics.

Concepts and questions of Combinatorics appear naturally in many branches of
mathematics, and have also found applications in other disciplines. These
include applications in Information Theory and Electrical Engineering, in
Statistical Physics and Molecular Biology, and most notably in Computer Science.
The PI is convinced that progress in the problems he discusses will be
interesting and significant, and will lead to new developments in Discrete
Mathematics. He believes that the new approaches and techniques resulting from
this project will be applicable and useful in other fields as well. The author
also proposes a wide range of educational measures closely related to his
project. He plans to develop a series of courses for senior undergraduate and
starting graduate students, which will serve as a gentle introduction to the
variety of powerful methods in modern Combinatorics. Part of these courses will
be closely related to the research problems in this proposal. Along the course,
the author plans to integrate research activities into the teaching by
introducing open questions that will motivate the students to undertake research
on these fascinating topics, which can lead to a B.A. thesis or Ph.D.
dissertation.