* 0812056
* NSF Engineering Research Center for Smart Lighting
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2019
* Thomas Little, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Cooperative Agreement
* Deborah Jackson
* 02/28/2019
* USD 32,729,057.00

Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI, lead institution), the University of New
Mexico (UNM), and Boston University (BU) are jointly proposing to establish an
Engineering Research Center for Smart Lighting under the direction of Fred
Schubert, Department of Electrical, Computer, and Systems
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integrated research, education, and
technology transfer of the Smart Lighting ERC will demonstrate revolutionary
lighting systems for rapid diagnostic bio-imaging, high-efficiency displays,
safer transportation, and novel modes of communication. The critical enabler for
advanced lighting systems will be a new generation of smart light sources whose
spectral composition, color temperature, polarization, spatial, and temporal
modulation properties are fully controllable and tunable. Smart light
sources&lt;br/&gt;and advanced lighting systems will result in tremendous
benefits to society and humankind, including:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Fundamental
advances in biotechnology for rapid and highly specific identification of
cells.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Brilliant displays with high efficiency and large
color gamut enabled by polarized emitters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Increased safety
in transportation systems through the implementation of ambient
intelligence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Novel modes of communication, networking,
and sensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reduced pollution and global warming through
energy-conserving, mercury-free lighting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reduced
dependency on sleep-inducing pharmaceuticals, reduced risk of cancer, and
support of the natural circadian rhythm, thereby enabling higher productivity
and a better quality of life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These benefits will be
realized through the systematic exploration and development of smart-lighting
principles in three vertically integrated research thrusts: (1) novel materials,
(2) device technology, and&lt;br/&gt;(3) system applications and impacts. As
envisioned, the center will create a unique and focused program in which faculty
and students from a wide range of disciplines come together with industry,
government, and non-government agencies to work toward the following
objectives:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Conduct fundamental research to develop Smart
Lighting. A strategic analysis has identified the critical attributes of future
controllable light sources, and their underlying materials technology necessary
to enable new and revolutionary functionalities that go far beyond present
capabilities. At the device level,these attributes include polarization control,
novel low- and high-index nanostructured materials, nanoepitaxial methods,
photonic crystals, and novel types of phosphor distributions. These core
innovations will be integrated into working devices and systems that are
adaptable, controllable, and manufacturable. Testbed systems that use the
devices will demonstrate advances in biomedical, display, transportation, and
network communication technologies.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Establish a multi-
faceted, cross-disciplinary education and training program in Smart Lighting for
students and professionals. The hands-on special education program Science You
Can See, to be integrated with ERC educational materials, will increase the
interest of a broad and minority-rich pre-college and undergraduate audience in
science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Rapidly transfer knowledge to the
commercial sector and commercialize validated products. This will be achieved by
working side-by-side with established firms and small startup companies in the
concept,development, and validation stages of smart-lighting products. Providing
industry with rapid access to key results while aggressively pursuing knowledge
transfer and securing intellectual property.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Increase
diversity through a focused effort to attract, educate, and advance women and
underrepresented and disadvantaged minorities within the ERC pre-college,
undergraduate, and graduate programs, and, ultimately, enable successful careers
in Smart Lighting and related industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: The ERC will establish a world-class program in Smart Lighting that will
dominate scientific discovery and technological innovation in a new area of
photonics. Research and education programs will lead to revolutionary advances
in fields as diverse as biotechnology, display, transportation, and networked
communications technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The ERC,
through rapid commercialization, interactive education programs, and diversity
outreach programs, will increase the competitiveness of US industry and make
Smart Lighting products&lt;br/&gt;and benefits available worldwide. Additional
key participation will come from strategic, corporate, and foreign academic
partners. Training programs on entrepreneurship, intellectual property,
marketing, and unintended consequences will create a culture of innovation and
broaden the scope of research.