* 0812244
* RI-Small: Real-Time Planning of a Conductable Orchestra
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Christopher Raphael, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2012
* USD 457,995.00

The goal of this research is to allow a (live) conductor to create a personal
musical performance by controlling a computer-driven (virtual) orchestra through
gesture captured on video. The immediate focus is to provide an educational tool
for conducting students, or others with some serious musical training who are
capable of communicating musical intent clearly through the traditional language
of gesture used by conductors. However, the PI expects that less-schooled or
novice users will also be able to learn from and find enjoyment with the outcome
of this research, which will culminate in a computer system that runs on generic
computer hardware, and will be made freely available. The system will take video
of a conductor as input, reducing this input into a two-dimensional conducting
trace that describes the movement of the tip of the conductor's baton over time.
The system will perform real-time estimation of the conductor's precise "state"
within the composition, using an approach that fuses hidden Markov model
methodology with a Kalman filter model for musical timing. Using this on-line
estimate, the system will predict the location of future musical events, thus
addressing the inevitable issue of detection latency. Concurrently, the system
will synthesize real-time audio to follow the conducted performance, using a
previously recorded performance whose timing is continually warped using phase-
vocoding. The initial focus of this work will be on musical timing rather than
dynamics, articulation, etc., as this is the aspect of conducting that is most
clearly communicated through motion and usually also that which affords the most
expressive potential and sense of "ownership" of the performance. Educated
musicians find surprising agreement when evaluating the accuracy with which a
musician or ensemble follows a knowledgeable conductor, suggesting that the
conductor's "signal" must be relatively unambiguous. Making mathematical sense
of the relationship between this signal and its meaning constitutes a
challenging dimension of this research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
This work will have lasting impact on conducting pedagogy, by providing a
tireless and responsive laboratory for musical experimentation. The research
will also make contributions to instrumental and voice pedagogy, by allowing a
musician to focus on the interpretive aspects of a piece without simultaneously
addressing the technical challenges. The problem of planning the orchestra's
musical evolution with uncertain and continually evolving knowledge of the
conductor's actions is deeply challenging; thus, this work has implications for
the general domain of planning under uncertainty. Perhaps most importantly for
society at large, a successful conducting system would bring the pleasure of
music-making to a broad and international collection of users who might
otherwise have little or no experience creating music.