* 0812382
* HCC-Small: End-User Retrofitting of Applications By Recognizing Text and UI Components
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Andries van Dam, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2010
* USD 328,086.00

Despite the enormous effort that goes into application design, end users
invariably encounter workflow scenarios that are poorly supported by even the
most developed, commercial-quality applications. Lack of support for end-user
extension increases the burden on application developers to exhaustively
anticipate the needs of all end users and then to commit enough resources to
address their needs, which often includes re-implementing solutions already
found in other applications. This project develops the feasibility of externally
retrofitting, without altering, running applications with new interfaces and
functionality made possible by using a combination of application-independent
pixel-level recognition techniques and more specialized techniques for
inspecting data structures exposed by the window system or application. Users
will be able to make annotations to those running applications, including hand-
drawn ink, typed text, diagrams, interactive widgets, or even links to other
application user interface components. Registration techniques will then be
researched to associate the annotations with specific elements of an application
or document so that such an annotation can be made to appear perhaps only in one
place in a specific file, or whenever a certain application runs. This supports
a variety of practices, including: integrating functionality from different
applications, enriched collaboration, task or user customized interfaces, and
adding new fine-grained user interface elements to applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. Making applications more malleable by
embracing customization as a first class and general notion could fundamentally
shift application design. Instead of relying solely on inherently slow
development of one-size-fits-all applications, end-users could become de facto
participants in application design, somewhat analogous to the relationship
between traditional print-copy publishing and blogging. Rather than waiting,
possibly years, for even simple revisions to fix workflow inefficiencies, users
will be empowered to make limited modifications to applications almost as easily
as marking up a document, for example by freely rearranging applications?
interfaces, or adding diagrammatic annotations displayed over documents which do
not natively support them.&lt;br/&gt;