* 0812526
* HCC-Small: Do Nintendo Surgeons Defy Stress?
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Barbara Bass, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2011
* USD 478,285.00

Stress is an integral part of human existence. It is the primary survival
mechanism with which nature endowed human physiology, and in this sense it is
the prerequisite of everything else human. Stress is always present as a tonic
component to sustain autonomic functions. What is of singular interest is the
phasic component of stress, which represents responses to instantaneous or
persistent external challenges. It is assumed that patterns of phasic stress
responses deeply affect a person's performance and quality of life. However,
such patterns have been inadequately quantified and studied up to now. In this
project, the PI will explore a novel methodological framework for measuring and
understanding the evolution of stress patterns in humans, and for determining
their importance in phenotypes and performance. Physiological stress is effected
through blood flow redistribution that results in localized thermoregulatory
changes; these changes can be sensed by a thermal imaging sensor and analyzed
within a computational framework. The PI argues that there is no better place to
monitor stress signs than the face, because it is heavily innervated with
sympathetic pathways, is amenable to non-contact (passive) sensing, and is open
to cross-verification with traditional observational methods from psychology. He
further contends that there is no better experimental framework to perform a
stress study than when humans are engaged in challenging tasks with substantial
stakes, as exemplified by the paradigm of surgical training. In this project,
the PI will develop a novel integrated suite of sensing and computational
methods to quantify stress. He will use these tools to correlate underlying
physiological sensing with overt visual observation, and also to conduct
longitudinal, quantifiable monitoring of realistic behavior with zero
interference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: In the short term, the
findings from the surgical training study will shed light on the role of stress
in a very critical profession. In the long term, not only will the technology
resulting from this research be directly applicable to diverse fields such as
cyber therapy, medical training, medical imaging and cognitive research, but
perhaps more importantly this work will likely deepen our understanding of
human-computer interaction and create a fundamentally new interface dimension
for human-centric computing.