* 0812465
* HCC-Small: A Cognitive Assistive System for Coaching the Use of Home Medical Devices
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Alexander Hauptmann, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2012
* USD 466,000.00

This research project will develop methods and algorithms to assist people with
the procedures required to operate their home medical devices without errors.
The goal is for the system to be trained on sample recordings of the person
operating the device correctly, so that later it will be able to detect
deviations from the correct operation sequence in the currently performed
procedure, and automatically provide corrective feedback to the user, including
segments of the video portions that show the appropriate steps. The project
provides a new paradigm for learning by observation that does not require
complete understanding of detailed activities in arbitrary visual and sensor
sequences, but merely aligns a given new sequence in known context with
previously established training data to detect significant deviations. The
approach has four components: (1) defining the key states in an operational
procedure and the sensors required to best detect and later communicate the
proper operation of a portable home medical device; (2) training the system by
observing multiple correct operations; (3) observing a new instance of the
operation sequence and recognizing that this operation deviates from the
training data in a significant way; and (4) providing corrective feedback to the
user in the form of audio and video prompts. The research aims to understand the
common types of steps required in the operations of home medical devices, map
how the critical indicators of these steps can be detected through appropriate
sensors, train a system to recognize these steps in the context of a specific
human operator, establish a range of required training repetitions for different
operational step types and corresponding sensors, and provide a set of suitable
interventions to the end user when errors occur. The experiments will establish
the range of training data set sizes for the automated classification of device
operations. The research expects to yield a taxonomy of typical operational
steps from an observational perspective for a set of devices such as infusion
pumps, and establish the most effective sensors or sensor combinations to detect
the successful completion of each type of step. In addition, the work will help
find suitable passages in the video portion of the training observations to use
as corrective feedback, together with other interactive dialog interventions
that may be appropriate for the particular user. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-
term goal of this research is to develop a cognitive assistance system to learn
and represent sequences of steps in the operation of home medical devices
through multi-sensor observation and interaction with a human operator. Examples
of some of the targeted home healthcare devices are respirators and nebulizers
(to help breathing), dialysis machines, infusion pumps, home monitoring devices
for blood pulse oxygen, EEG, and ECG. The project will develop a means for home
users of these devices to ensure that the correct procedures are followed and
accurate operations result. The system provides ongoing feedback to assist users
in their device operation by ?watching? the process via different sensing
technologies and providing appropriate guidance when required. The target
population immediately benefiting from this work would be patients with mild
cognitive impairments who would be supported with the automated coach in their
use of home medical devices. The growing user base includes elderly people
living at home, but requiring support from home medical devices. These medical
devices can allow a patient to live independently with minimal assistance, as
long as the home medical devices provide the required health support. The end
result may be a reduction in errors and in the number of calls for assistance in
the operation and maintenance of home medical devices. This will allow people to
live independently at home for an average longer period than at present and
thereby reduce health care system costs. The research is valuable for medical
device companies with respect to device design, verification, and validation
processes, offering insights into what sensors and communication devices could
be most beneficial for integration into the device itself.