* 0812148
* HCC-Small: Understanding and Supporting Online Question-Answering Sites
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2013
* John Logie, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Crowston
* 02/28/2013
* USD 483,531.00

Online Question-Answering Sites (Q&amp;A sites, for short) are a new and rapidly
growing piece of the community-created content landscape. From Knowledge iN in
South Korea to Microsoft's Live QnA in the U.S., to Yahoo! Answers in 26
countries world-wide, users are flocking to sites where they can post questions
and get answers. Yahoo! Answers alone attracts about 18 million unique visitors
monthly and has accumulated over 400 million answers since its launch in 2005.
Not only do these sites meet individual needs for information, the content they
generate is an important source for online search and knowledge discovery.
However, a casual browse through any one site reveals significant noise in the
signal. Too many questions receive sarcastic or even insulting answers. Too
often, it seems, users re-ask a question rather than finding value in the
answers already posed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because the dramatic growth of
Q&amp;A sites is so recent, there has been little opportunity to empirically
investigate them as a new information resource and as a new type of social
space. This project examines five Q&amp;A sites using a variety of observational
and experimental methods to gain an understanding of how users interact in and
with these sites while also developing tools to help users better meet their
goals. Specifically, this project will: 1.) identify structures or properties in
questions posed on Q&amp;A sites that affect response characteristics such as
quantity, quality, and timeliness; and explore the use of templates, critics,
and bots to help question-askers obtain better responses; 2.) identify
structures or properties in response threads that suggest high risk of failure;
and explore the use of bots to intervene and "rescue" derailed Q&amp;A threads;
3.) understand the lifecycle of Q&amp;A site participants, including their
social interaction on the sites; and develop tools to help support user
integration into online Q&amp;A communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given their
importance as an information resource and social phenomenon, understanding
online Q&amp;A sites has intellectual merit in its own right, in addition: this
work advances an important line of research on online and computer-mediated
communications that has helped rhetoric and communications experts contribute to
the design of more effective online communication tools. It will also be the
first work to study online Q&amp;A from both a social and an information
resource perspective, giving new insight into the nature of online voluntary
knowledge creation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Online question-
answering sites have become an important source of information and advice for
individuals and businesses, as well as an important source of content for web
search engines. By understanding these sites and developing tools to support
their continued successful operation, we will help Q&amp;A community designers
understand approaches that can both promote beneficial social experiences for
users and the construction of valuable community-contributed repositories of
knowledge.