* 0812134
* HCC-Small: Collaborative Research: Statistical Methods for Learning to Diagnose Specific Language Impairment in Bilingual Children
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,01/31/2010
* Yang Liu, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 01/31/2010
* USD 110,493.00

Children with Specific Language Impairment (SLI) experience a delay in
acquisition of certain language skills, with no evidence of hearing impediments
or other cognitive, behavioral, or neurological problems. To diagnose
monolingual children with SLI, clinicians have at hand standardized tests, such
as the Test for Early Grammatical Impairment, that provide "cut-off" thresholds
defining the normal range for children of different ages. Diagnosing bilingual
children with SLI is far more complicated, however, due to a lack of
standardized tests, a lack of bilingual clinicians, and most importantly a lack
of a deep understanding of bilingualism and its implications on language
disorders. In addition, bilingual children often exhibit code-switching patterns
that make the assessment task even more challenging. The PIs' goal in this
project is to contribute to the early and accurate identification of English-
Spanish bilingual children with SLI, by developing an automated method for
discriminating syntactic patterns indicative of SLI. Recent approaches on
differential diagnosis of bilingual children are focused either on assessing the
phonological systems of both languages to identify children with speech
disorders, or on the analysis of error patterns on specific morphemes, such as
article gender and number agreement. In contrast, the PIs' approach is not to
restrict the analysis to a specific syntactic structure, but rather to focus on
adapting Machine Learning (ML) and Natural Language Processing (NLP) techniques
so that they can learn the patterns that distinguish an otherwise typical
language development. The PIs will pursue the objectives along two core topics:
automatic part-of-speech (POS) tagging of bilingual discourse (in which they
will investigate the use of ML approaches, in particular domain adaptation
techniques, for combining existing linguistic resources on both languages), and
statistical methods for discriminating patterns of language use indicative of
SLI (in which syntactic information, generated by the tagger will be used to
train statistical models). The intuitive motivation for this approach is that
the language patterning of bilingual children with SLI will be different from
those of typically developing children both at the syntactic level and at the
interaction level of the two languages, and these differences will be captured
by the statistical methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The clinical
implications for this research are far-reaching, particularly regarding the
issue of both over- and under-identification of bilingual children experiencing
SLI. Because the criteria for this diagnosis involve identification of
disordered patterns of language form, content, and use, children who engage in
code-switching are at risk of being inappropriately labeled as SLI and placed in
special education services. The ability to apply objective technology to the
diagnostic process will serve as another sensitive evaluation instrument,
eventually allowing for more accurate differentiation of children demonstrating
language differences from those experiencing language disorders. For the NLP
community, this research will advance the state-of-the-art by developing
approaches that can solve problems where the task involves cross-linguistic
features, children?s spontaneous speech, and small amounts of data. The NLP
methods developed will be generalizable to other clinical tasks and bilingual
populations.