* 0812307
* III-COR-Small: Developing Novel Mosaic Generation Methods for Object-Based Multimedia Information Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Ramazan Aygun, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 09/30/2012
* USD 205,441.00

This project provides solutions to one of the important components of an
interactive, object-based, semantic multimedia information retrieval system:
"mosaic" generation. A mosaic can be considered as a static component (or
background) of a scene that does not change over a sequence of frames and is
obtained by computing the global motion between frames, warping according to the
global motion, and then blending the frames. Mosaic generation plays an
important role in many applications including object-based coding (where objects
in a scene are also coded or compressed independent of regular rectangular frame
coding), video compression, video indexing, object tracking, virtual
environments, security surveillance, wide-area surveillance, panoramic video,
traffic monitoring, object recognition, and human behavior analysis since these
applications usually require the subtraction of actual scenes from the
background (or the mosaic) to determine the foreground objects. Since
traditional mosaic generation methods require object segmentation for videos
containing moving objects, they are not suitable for real-time mosaic generation
and especially for video encoders that require sprite coding (coding based on
layering objects on top of a mosaic or a sprite). This project (i) develops
mosaic generation solutions for larger domains of videos; (ii) generates mosaics
for videos containing many shots by classifying video shots; and (iii) develops
objective evaluation methods for mosaic generation by producing ground-truths.
Sprite fusion method blends assertive and conservative sprites that are
generated using the aligned frame differences without object segmentation thus
eliminating the object occlusion problem especially for videos where the camera
tracks an object. Since the sprite fusion method computes the global motion once
for a pair of frames and does not require object segmentation, it suits well for
real-time mosaic generation or sprite coding for video encoders. As the mosaic
is constructed for a sequence, the global motion vectors are stored to be able
to generate (or warp) any frame with respect to another frame thus allowing to
provide multiple degrees-of-freedom for spatial interactions including up-down,
left-right, move forward-backward, and rotation. The multiple degrees-of-freedom
with the warping of the current (or active) scene forms the basis of interactive
video reproduction by regenerating any frame from the mosaic and then overlaying
the active (current scene) on top of the reproduced frame.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational component of this project includes
development of a new course on multimedia that appeals to any freshman students
in order to grow interest in computer science. This course covers fundamental
concepts in computer science including types of media, color models, storage
devices, multimedia authoring, and internet. A multimedia workshop is planned
for K-12 students. The results of this research project will be disseminated via
Internet (http://www.cs.uah.edu/~raygun/projects/mosaics.htm), including a video
database system (video sets and any truth annotation for it) to share test data
with other researchers and to encourage open metrics-based evaluations across
research institutions. This project will foster the development of photo-
realistic visualization systems using interactive video reproduction, with a
wide range of applications.&lt;br/&gt;