* 0812653
* Supporting Wilderness Search and Rescue Personnel: Acquiring and Visualizing Aerial Imagery
* CSE,IIS
* 11/01/2008,10/31/2012
* Bryan Morse, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 10/31/2012
* USD 462,784.00

Wilderness search and rescue (WiSAR) is the task of finding and giving
assistance to humans who are lost or injured in mountain, desert, lake, river,
or other remote settings. Rapid coverage of large search areas and difficult
terrain is critical; as the search radius increases, the probability of finding
and successfully aiding the missing person decreases. Prior NSF-sponsored
research established the hypothesis that mini (2-8 foot wing span), fixed-wing
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) equipped with video cameras can support WiSAR
personnel. In this project the PIs plan to extend that work, by addressing key
human factors and technology obstacles that must be overcome to make such
support practical and efficient. Through enhanced WiSAR-oriented UAV operator
interfaces and visualization, the PIs will improve both the UAV's coverage of
the search area by people without piloting skills and the searcher's detection
of the missing person or other signs in the video. The design of these WiSAR
systems will integrate the PIs' expertise in human-robot interaction, computer
vision, visualization, and artificial intelligence. The project adopts a human-
centered evaluation approach that uses both laboratory and field tests.
Innovative aspects of the work include integration of video mapping, missing-
person modeling, and human interaction to create prioritized search maps that
are dynamically updated as information is acquired, and which can then be used
to perform search planning based on this dynamic information, requiring real-
time planning algorithms that can adapt to uncertainty and new information. The
prioritized search maps and resulting plans can be used directly by WiSAR
personnel, or integrated into the UAV operator?s interface, or allow WiSAR
personnel to outline a plan and grant the UAV sufficient autonomy to optimize
coverage subject to this outline. The PIs will also integrate multiple video
sources (including infrared imaging), anomaly detection and tracking, and geo-
registered video annotation in order to further assist WiSAR personnel in
detecting, identifying, and communicating information about objects of potential
interest in the video sources. These will be presented to WiSAR personnel in the
form of interfaces designed for their separate roles: UAV operator, video
searcher, incident commander, and field searcher, as well as integrated
interfaces for individuals acting in multiple roles simultaneously. Finally, the
PIs will extend this work to support video-equipped manned aircraft and ground
search teams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Each year, many people are
lost or find themselves in jeopardy while hiking, boating/kayaking, skiing,
fishing, etc. WiSAR consumes thousands of man-hours and hundreds of thousands of
dollars each year in Utah alone. Creating appropriate visualization algorithms
and user interfaces to support planning, visualization, and UAV control should
decrease the amount of time required to locate and offer assistance to missing
persons, increasing the likelihood of successful rescue. The PIs plan to include
in this project undergraduate students from nearby Utah Valley State College
(UVSC), a school that does not yet have a graduate program and consequently has
few opportunities for socially relevant, interdisciplinary undergraduate
research.