* 0812902
* Collaborative Research: International Nanofluid Properties Benchmark Exercise (INPBE)
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2008,01/31/2009
* David Venerus, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Theodore L. Bergman
* 01/31/2009
* USD 12,500.00

CBET-0812902, Venerus

This project partially supports the International Nanofluid Properties Benchmark
Exercise (INPBE), culminating in a two-day workshop which will be held in the
continental U.S. in the September - November, 2008, time frame. The purpose of
this workshop and associated 'round-robin' testing is to reduce the great
uncertainties surrounding the thermophysical properties of nanoscale colloidal
solutions, popularly termed 'nanofluids.' Within NSF, funding is provided by
both the Thermal Transport Processes (TTP) Program and the Particulate &
Multiphase Processes (PMP) Program.

With respect to the intellectual merit, progress in developing nanofluids for
thermal and other applications is hindered by a lack of fundamental
understanding of their thermophysical properties. A number of inconsistent
experimental reports have plagued the literature, making it difficult to
formulate definitive models to describe thermal transport in nanofluids. This
collaborative workshop proposal addresses these outstanding issues by proposing
that a relatively large number of interested laboratories around the world
measure the thermal conductivity of nominally identical nanofluid samples,
prepared from a single batch by the same manufacturer. Afterwards,
representatives from the participating laboratories will meet in a two-day
workshop to discuss their results and to plan future activities.

The broader impacts include partial support for a number of women and minority
researchers to participate in this exercise, and to attend the two-day workshop.
Improved fundamental understanding of nanofluids? transport properties may lead
to their application in a number of thermal systems, resulting in improved
efficiencies and reduced energy consumption. Since a number of the participating
laboratories are located outside the US, this project will also serve to enhance
international collaboration.