* 0812435
* RI-Small: Graph-Based Learning for Speech Processing
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2008,12/31/2012
* Katrin Kirchhoff, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 12/31/2012
* USD 427,198.00

Graph-Based Learning for Speech Processing&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the past
decades much research has been invested in automatic
speech&lt;br/&gt;processing, and current speech processing systems often achieve
remarkably &lt;br/&gt;low error rates. However, systems are still dependent on
matched training and &lt;br/&gt;test corpora, and their performance deteriorates
rapidly when faced with&lt;br/&gt;test conditions that differ from the training
data. In the machine learning &lt;br/&gt;community, many novel algorithms have
recently been proposed to better &lt;br/&gt;incorporate information from
unlabeled test data into the learning and &lt;br/&gt;classification process.
Most of these techniques scale poorly to large tasks &lt;br/&gt;and thus seem
unsuitable for speech processing. This project investigates&lt;br/&gt;the
applicability of one recently developed paradigm, graph-based&lt;br/&gt;learning
(GBL), for automatic speech recognition. In particular, it &lt;br/&gt;uses GBL
as an adaptation framework where acoustic classifiers are &lt;br/&gt;constrained
to yield outputs that vary smoothly along underlying data&lt;br/&gt;manifolds
characterizing the test data. The project addresses the &lt;br/&gt;core problems
of poor scalability and computational complexity of GBL &lt;br/&gt;by using data
clustering and subselection techniques as well as &lt;br/&gt;sparse matrix
computation. Various ways of incorporating domain &lt;br/&gt;information (e.g.
temporal or higher-level prosodic information) &lt;br/&gt;into graph
construction are evaluated, including the use of multiple, &lt;br/&gt;combined
similarity measures for graph construction. Finally,
online,&lt;br/&gt;incremental GBL techniques are being investigated in order to
&lt;br/&gt;facilitate real-time processing. The outcome of this project is
&lt;br/&gt;expected to significantly improve the accuracy and robustness of
&lt;br/&gt;speech processing systems. Furthermore, it will contribute to
improving &lt;br/&gt;the scalability of semi-supervised learning algorithms in
general and&lt;br/&gt;thus facilitate their application to related pattern
recognition fields.&lt;br/&gt;