* 0812141
* RI-Small: Combinatorial Search Algorithms as Rational Agents
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Wheeler Ruml, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 08/31/2012
* USD 478,700.00

This project pursues three concurrent activities: 1) analysis of common search
spaces and previously proposed search strategies to broadly characterize the
relevant regularities that can be exploited during search, 2) development of
search algorithms that can efficiently learn, update, and exploit models of
those parameters on-line during problem-solving, and 3) comprehensive evaluation
of the new algorithms across many common benchmarks in terms of actual CPU time,
taking into account their increased overhead. Algorithms will be developed for
the two most common types of search problems: 1) shortest-path problems, such as
task planning or robot navigation, where the depth of the search tree is not
usefully bounded, and 2) bounded-depth problems, such as constraint satisfaction
or combinatorial optimization problems, where the number of decision variables
is known.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rational search approach yields a form of
hybrid metareasoning, in which the problem-solver reasons statistically about
which combinatorial reasoning to do next. This combination promises significant
gains in robustness and performance over the current paradigm in which search
algorithms use the numerical information available to them only in simple ways,
such as allowing it to directly dictate expansion order or using it only to
prune. Rational search will provide a sound basis for moving beyond search
strategies motivated by intuition to algorithms that adapt their behavior in
unanticipated ways to suit precisely the problem at hand. By
focusing&lt;br/&gt;attention on optimal use of information, this project will
help the field of heuristic search address the question of problem formulation:
what problem-specific heuristic information is most useful to guide search, and
how can it best be conveyed to the search algorithm? It will also strengthen the
nascent links between machine learning and heuristic search, particularly around
the issues of exploration vs exploitation and the value of information. Because
they form the engines of most AI systems, improvements in heuristic search
algorithms yield social benefits wherever such systems are used. Increasing the
robustness and generality of search methods also makes industrial adoption of AI
technology easier and faster,&lt;br/&gt;widening its applicability.