* 0812590
* HCC-Small:  Investigating and Supporting the Iterative and Exploratory Process of Applying Statistical Machine Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* James Fogarty, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2012
* USD 505,527.00

Software engineering emerged out of a need to better address the real-world
development of software, transforming the practice of software development from
an art, into a craft, and eventually into an engineering discipline. In
contrast, the effective application of statistical machine learning algorithms
and techniques currently remains an art, based primarily in expert intuition and
experience. This project is an integrated program of research and education
targeting researcher, student, and practitioner application of statistical
machine learning algorithms and techniques as tools for software development.
The research focuses on the design of human-centered computing through the
investigation of the needs of people applying statistical machine learning as a
tool for software development, the creation of new methods and tools supporting
the development and deployment of applications that use statistical machine
learning, and the evaluation of these new methods and tools in supporting the
complex and exploratory task of applying statistical machine learning. There are
two primary foci in a new proposed toolset: explicit support for history and
experimentation in an iterative and exploratory process and new opportunities
for mixed-initiative tools to aid that process. By examining the application of
statistical machine learning as a craft, this research enables the potential
broad impact of statistical machine learning as a tool for software development
in human-centered computing research and applications.