* 0812363
* III-Small: Result Space Support for Personal and Group Information Seeking Over Time
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2013
* Gary Marchionini, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 02/28/2013
* USD 464,071.00

The goal of this research is to develop techniques and systems that help people
solve information problems that are complex, general, or ongoing and when
information seeking takes place over multiple intervals or in collaboration with
other people. The approach is to first study how people seek information and
interpret results of searches as they use multiple systems over time and in
collaboration with emphasis given to managing and optionally sharing result sets
and items. Second, based on these initial investigations, systems are designed
that support dynamic search and visualization and can serve both as a personal
information manager and a group information manager. Third, these tools are
evaluated in field and laboratory settings. The research is linked to
educational theories of active learning and is embedded in university student
and research team information needs over multiple months. Students play an
active role in this project by participating in the design and evaluation of the
information seeking systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research
will provide guidance for designers of the next generation of systems that
support a full range of complex information seeking needs. The project also
contributes specific open source tools that people can easily adopt as plug-ins
to popular web browsing software. Publications, software and other information
items will be widely disseminated, including via the project Web site
(http://www.ils.unc.edu/infoseek/). This work will thus have broad impact on
Internet-based information activities in schools, homes, offices, and research
laboratories. &lt;br/&gt;