* 0812118
* Collaborative Research: Simultaneous Contour Grouping and Medial Axis Estimation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Longin Jan Latecki, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2012
* USD 210,000.00

With the ever faster growing number of images and videos, the main bottleneck in
extracting the information contained in them is their analysis (indexing) and
retrieval. Nowadays image and video search engines are based on textual
descriptions, since visual cues are at too low level to provide useful retrieval
results when dealing with a large variety of images and videos. For example, if
a human submits a query image with the request to find similar images, she
focuses on a certain object or a group of objects in the query image. Thus, the
meaning of similarity is given by the images that contain similar objects.
Therefore, extraction of objects in images (and videos) is a key factor for true
progress in content based image/video retrieval (CBIR). However, object
extraction belongs to unsolved problems in Computer Vision (CV). This fact led
to the development of a huge number of approaches that try to do CBIR without
object extraction. However, although such approaches may be successful in some
restricted application domains, in which case low level features may be
sufficient to replace object extraction, they have not been successful in
general purpose CBIR. The PIs believe solving the object extraction problem will
lead to a breakthrough in CBIR. Therefore, the PIs propose to work on object
extraction in images. There have been a large number of attempts to solve the
object extraction problem in CV, and none provided a satisfactory solution. Why
will our approach provide a good solution? A new methodology and a computation
framework proposed by the PIs provide solid evidence that the breakthrough in
object extraction is possible. On the cognitive and geometric modeling side, the
PIs propose to use a higher level knowledge of shape similarity and a mid level
knowledge of local and global symmetry as cognitively motivated constraints for
object extraction. Constraints are essential because object extraction is known
to be an ill-posed inverse problem. The human visual system solves this problem
very well and we are getting close to a full understanding of how this is done.
On the computational side, the PIs propose a new framework for a simultaneous
estimation of medial axes and the contours. The proposed approach is inspired by
the SLAM (Simultaneous Localization and Mapping) approaches in the field of
robot mapping. Recent breakthrough solutions in robot mapping are based on the
SLAM computation with particle filters. SLAM computation iterates over the
processes of localization of the robot in the existing partial map (trajectory
estimation), followed by a map update based on new observations and the
estimated trajectory. The PIs treat the medial axis as trajectory of a virtual
robot and the partial boundary as the map that is composed of edge segments
associated with the medial axis. A first successful application of this
framework is demonstrated by the PIs in the preliminary results.

Project URL: http://knight.cis.temple.edu/~shape/