* 0812121
* NSF Engineering Research Center for Future Renewable Electric Energy Delivery and Management (FREEDM) Systems
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2019
* Gerald Heydt, North Carolina State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2019
* USD 36,310,444.00

ERC for Future Renewable Electric Energy Delivery and Management (FREEDM)
Systems&lt;br/&gt;Alex Q. Huang, Director&lt;br/&gt;North Carolina State
University, Arizona State University, Florida State
University,&lt;br/&gt;Florida A&amp;M University, University of Missouri-
Rolla&lt;br/&gt;Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;Our vision for the ERC for Future
Renewable Electric Energy Delivery and Management&lt;br/&gt;(FREEDM) Systems is
an efficient electric power grid integrating highly distributed and
scalable&lt;br/&gt;alternative generating sources and storage with existing
power systems to facilitate a green&lt;br/&gt;energy based society, mitigate the
growing energy crisis, and reduce the impact of carbon&lt;br/&gt;emissions on
the environment. We believe the key to solving the energy crisis is not
necessarily&lt;br/&gt;the renewable energy itself, but the infrastructure needed
to deliver and manage large scale&lt;br/&gt;distributed renewable energy
resources (DRER).&lt;br/&gt;The mission of the ERC for FREEDM Systems is to
develop the fundamental and enabling&lt;br/&gt;technology to demonstrate the
system and, through such development and demonstration,&lt;br/&gt;foster a
revolution in innovation and technology in the electric power and renewable
energy&lt;br/&gt;industries, providing long-term energy security and
environmental sustainability for the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;Key Goals:&lt;br/&gt;Develop
the fundamental knowledge base for the FREEDM system and provide
fundamental&lt;br/&gt;breakthrough technology in energy storage and power
semiconductor devices. Develop enabling technologies for subsystem and system
demonstrations.&lt;br/&gt;Develop a 1MW FREEDM green energy hub system to power
the ERC headquarters.&lt;br/&gt;Develop a diverse group of adaptive, creative,
and innovative graduates who advance&lt;br/&gt;fundamental knowledge, enabling
technology and engineered systems innovations in&lt;br/&gt;renewable electric
energy delivery and management systems&lt;br/&gt;Develop long-term partnerships
with middle and high schools, teachers, and students to&lt;br/&gt;enhance
engineering content knowledge and pedagogical methods, bring
engineering&lt;br/&gt;concepts into the classroom, involve pre-college students
in research, and thereby increase&lt;br/&gt;the diversity and enrollment of
domestic students in university engineering degree programs.&lt;br/&gt;Form
long-term partnerships with large and small firms to speed the translation of
ERC&lt;br/&gt;research into commercially viable products, stimulate formation of
start-up companies based&lt;br/&gt;on ERC intellectual property, and involve
students in all phases of the innovation process.&lt;br/&gt;Increase the
diversity of the proposed Center?s leadership, faculty, and students to
exceed&lt;br/&gt;academic engineering-wide national averages within the first
five years of operation.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: In addition to social,
economic, and market challenges to be addressed&lt;br/&gt;by the ERC and by the
power industry as a whole, barriers include needs for: new
system&lt;br/&gt;theory for the paradigm-shifting FREEDM system; new high-
frequency high-voltage power&lt;br/&gt;electronics based on wide bandgap
materials; and significantly higher energy density
storage&lt;br/&gt;technologies. Innovative development of such an infrastructure
cannot be expected to occur in&lt;br/&gt;todays centralized model, where power
companies seek only incremental solutions and&lt;br/&gt;research investments are
suppressed to maximize profits. The systems approach required&lt;br/&gt;cannot
be expected to occur through individual research projects with no common
standards or&lt;br/&gt;test bed. To develop the FREEDM system, a
multidisciplinary center of excellence is needed to&lt;br/&gt;pull together our
nation?s top expertise in energy system theory, policy, renewable
energy&lt;br/&gt;technology, energy storage technology, electronic devices, and
communication.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts include an increasingly diverse and
innovative pool of U.S. engineers;&lt;br/&gt;mitigation of global warming;
aversion of an energy crisis; innovation in renewable energy&lt;br/&gt;systems
developed with industry leading to new products, companies, and jobs;
integration of&lt;br/&gt;innovation in multidisciplinary training for graduate
and undergraduate students; broadening&lt;br/&gt;participation in power
engineering through integrated research activities for K-12 teachers
and&lt;br/&gt;students; and improved faculty and graduate student skills in
mentoring minorities and women.