* 0812372
* III-CXT-Small: Collaborative Research: Automatic Geomorphic Mapping and Analysis of Land Surfaces Using Pattern Recognition
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Ricardo Vilalta, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2012
* USD 174,579.00

Advances in remote sensing techniques have made available large datasets of
topographic measurements pertaining to terrestrial and planetary land surfaces.
However, the scientific utilization of these datasets is hampered by a lack of
tools for effective automated analysis. This project seeks to develop a system
for fast, objective and transparent conversion of topographic data into
knowledge about land surfaces. The project has two complementary goals: 1) to
develop a tool that autonomously produces geomorphic maps mimicking traditional,
manually derived maps in their appearance and content, and 2) to develop a tool
that classifies entire topographic scenes into characteristic landscape
categories. The mapping tool is based on the object-oriented supervised
classification principle. A number of novel solutions, including semi-supervised
learning, meta-learning, and a wrapping technique coupling classification and
segmentation, are proposed to address challenges posed by the specificity of
topographic data. The scene classification tool is based on information-
theoretic metrics and incorporates novel solutions to problems posed by the
raster character of topographic datasets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project employs a novel fusion of machine
learning and computer vision techniques to open new possibilities. In the
process of constructing the mapping and classifying tools, novel machine
learning methodologies will be developed and tested. The products of this
research will enable a qualitatively new type of analysis of land surface
topography: the large scale statistical comparison of spatial distribution of
landforms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad Impact &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful
mapping and classifying tools will have impact beyond the analysis of natural
landscapes; they can be also be applied to the study of surface metrology (the
numerical characterization of industrial surfaces). The nature of this project
will attract interest and collaboration with specialists from diverse
disciplines, such as computer science, remote sensing, geomorphology and
hydrology. Such links will broaden the base of expertise for each discipline, as
well as enrich participants from contributing domains.