* 0812338
* RI-Small: An Integrative Framework for Communication and Motion-planning in Robotic Networks Operating in Fading Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Yasamin Mostofi, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 08/31/2012
* USD 350,000.00

The objective of this project is to build a design framework for robust
functionality of mobile cooperative robotic router networks in realistic
communication environments. Most of the existing work on mobile cooperative
decision-making uses oversimplified models for communication links by assuming
either a perfect link or no link between any two agents. Such models do not
embrace realistic wireless communication effects such as fading, shadowing and
path loss and therefore will not be suitable for robust operation of robotic
router networks. We propose novel motion-planning strategies where the agents
constantly reconfigure themselves to optimally route the information through the
network. In addition, the theoretical results and algorithms will be implemented
on actual autonomous vehicles engaged in a wide range of tasks. By considering
realistic communication unreliability, our proposed framework will result in the
robust flow of information in the network. Emergency response, security and
surveillance are examples of applications that rely on robust and intelligent
operation of autonomous networks in harsh conditions and can benefit
tremendously from the proposed work. This project also has a significant
educational impact on the female high school students of Albuquerque by
organizing learning summer camps at the University of New Mexico.