* 0812458
* HCC-SMALL: High-Resolution RFID Tracking With Applications In Gesture Recognition And Human-Computer Interaction
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Kurt Manal, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2012
* USD 449,983.00

Current gesture recognition efforts, such as vision and direct sensing based
methods, are yet to be proven effective and practical. Similarly, human-computer
interaction (HCI) methods, despite considerable research efforts, remain
dominated by the traditional keyboard and mouse. Improving HCI is a critical
area of need, especially for individuals with disabilities who find traditional
methods cumbersome (at best) or unusable (at worst). The rapid development of
radio frequency identification (RFID) technologies holds the potential to
significantly advance current challenges in both gesture recognition and HCI.
Advantages of RFID approaches include miniaturization of passive tags, the
ability to safely implant tags, and the potential to remotely track multiple
tags; these characteristics combine to support the definition, recognition, and
development of interfaces based on (tagged) human movements, or gestures. The
PI's goal in this project is to explore RFID solutions for the most challenging
gesture recognition and HCI applications, including complex gesture recognition
and effective computer interfaces for individuals with severe motor impairments.
These objectives will be realized through a series of coordinated research,
development, and evaluation efforts. First, RFID localization algorithms will be
developed utilizing harmonic radar approaches and implemented using modified
commercially available components; this approach will yield significantly higher
resolution than current power loss techniques, and will be capable of tracking
multiple tags in cost-effective implementations. Next, implementations for small
and large workspace will be carried out. The small workspace implementation will
address tongue-based HCI for individuals with severe disabilities, while the
large workspace implementation will be used for hand gesture recognition and
computer control. Finally, the algorithms, hardware, and implementations will be
rigorously evaluated for fundamental accuracy, application performance, and user
efficacy. Fundamental accuracy evaluations will characterize the performance and
limits of spatial-temporal RFID tag tracking, while HCI and gesture recognition
capabilities will be assessed through application performance and user efficacy
evaluations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research addresses
fundamentally important interface and communications issues faced by individuals
with disabilities, and will include direct programmatic involvement by
individuals with disabilities. Project outcomes will afford individuals with
disabilities more effective interfaces and greater communications capabilities,
thereby providing greater independence and, ultimately, improved social,
educational, and economic opportunities. In achieving these objectives, the
project will lay the foundation for a fundamentally new approach to capturing,
characterizing, and exploiting human movement for HCI and gesture recognition
applications. The results will have significant impact beyond the targeted
applications, for instance in animal studies, human performance studies, and
even security (e.g., monitoring fine movements of objects).