* 0812470
* Computational Investigations of Compositional Heterogeneities in Lipid Membranes
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2014
* Mohamed Laradji, University of Memphis
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2014
* USD 200,000.00

TECHNICAL ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education in the study of nanoscale heterogeneities in biological membranes, so
called ''rafts''. Research on these lateral heterogeneities in biomembranes is
motivated by a need to know their physiological and structural functions. The is
extensive research indicating that mammalian cells exhibit compositional
heterogeneities in the form of small domains, called rafts, with diameter
ranging between 50 and 200 nm. Lipid rafts are believed to be highly dynamic,
rich in sphingolipids, which are mainly saturated lipids, and cholesterol. Lipid
rafts are also believed to play a role in a variety of physiological functions
including protein trafficking, lipid sorting, signal transduction, and
endocytosis. There are striking questions raised when studying living biological
systems in comparison to synthetic membrane. Numerous experiments on synthetic
lipid membranes, demonstrated the existence of domains, thus supporting the raft
model in biomembranes. However, lipid rafts in biomembranes, which are nanoscale
in size, are orders of magnitude smaller than the lipid domains in synthetic
membranes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The present research investigates raft
formation and dynamics of membrane heterogeneities through systematic and large
scale mesoscale numerical simulations. Computer simulations allow the study of
phase behavior of multicomponent membranes and investigate possible mechanisms
leading to the stability of nanoscale lipid rafts in biomembranes. Using coarse-
grained molecular dynamics (CGMD) simulations of a recently developed model, the
PI will investigate the phase behavior of ternary lipid mixtures composed of a
saturated lipid, an unsaturated lipid and cholesterol, with a particular focus
on the two-phase liquid-liquid coexistence, which is relevant to the lipid rafts
in biomembranes. A more coarse-grained model based on soft-core interactions
will be developed for self assembled amphiphiles and will be used to investigate
three-component lipid membranes in the two-phase liquid-liquid coexistence. The
model will be used in conjunction with a hybrid approach combining dissipative
particle dynamics (DPD) with semi-grand canonical Monte Carlo technique.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond the basic research, the award has educational
implications and potential broader impact in other areas. Due to its
multidisciplinary nature, the research will have a broad impact on both the
physical and life sciences. Graduate and undergraduate students are involved in
this research. The computational nature of this proposed research makes it
particularly accessible to undergraduate students. This research will also
benefit the new Computational Physics Concentration at the University of
Memphis. The research will be integrated with the current educational agenda of
the University of Memphis which has a significant minority student population.
The senior undergraduate biophysics course and the graduate computational course
at the University of Memphis benefit from this program by the proximity of an
active research program which can relate the character of research activities in
this area. The PI is also teaming up with other faculty members at the physics
department to create a high school physics internship program in which a number
of students will be selected every year from the Memphis area high schools and
will be involved in research experience
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical research and education in the study of molecular
clustering in biological membranes, so called ''rafts''. Research on these
molecular groupings in biomembranes is motivated by a need to know their
physiological and structural functions. The is extensive research indicating
that all animal cells form these small domains, called rafts, with small
diameter of around 1/100th the size of the cell. Lipid rafts are believed to be
highly dynamic and mainly saturated lipids, and cholesterol. Lipid rafts are
also believed to play a role in a variety of physiological functions, including
transfer of materials into and out of a cell. There are striking questions
raised when studying living biological systems in comparison to synthetic
membrane. Numerous experiments on synthetic lipid membranes, demonstrated the
existence of domains, thus supporting the raft model in biomembranes. However,
lipid rafts in biomembranes are a hundred times smaller than the lipid domains
in synthetic membranes. This is only one aspect of rafts that is investigated in
this research. &lt;br/&gt;The present research investigates raft formation and
dynamics of membrane composition through systematic and large scale numerical
simulations. Computer simulations allow the study of membrane composition and
investigate possible mechanisms leading to the stability of lipid rafts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond the basic research, the award has educational
implications and potential broader impact in other areas. Due to its
multidisciplinary nature, the research will have a broad impact on both the
physical and life sciences. Graduate and undergraduate students are involved in
this research. The computational nature of this proposed research makes it
particularly accessible to undergraduate students. This research will also
benefit the new Computational Physics Concentration at the University of
Memphis. The research will be integrated with the current educational agenda of
the University of Memphis which has a significant minority student population.
The senior undergraduate biophysics course and the graduate computational course
at the University of Memphis benefit from this program by the proximity of an
active research program which can relate the character of research activities in
this area. The PI is also teaming up with other faculty members at the physics
department to create a high school physics internship program in which a number
of students will be selected every year from the Memphis area high schools and
will be involved in research experience projects.&lt;br/&gt;