* 0812610
* RI-Small: Collaborative Research: Dispatcher's Assistant for Emergency First Response
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Gokhan Tur, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2009
* USD 16,500.00

Last Modified Date: 07/23/08 Last Modified By: Tatiana D. Korelsky Abstract In
crisis response domains, emotional manifestations are very complex and extreme
emotions are common. While speech technologies have shown significant progress
over the years, recognizing and understanding emotional speech in noisy
environments is still a big challenge. Understanding such language is daunting
given fragmented and ungrammatical utterances in addition to errors from
automatic speech recognition (ASR). Furthermore, there is little research on the
analysis of the relationship between emotion detection and language
understanding which have traditionally been viewed as parallel independent
tasks. Even when the output of one of these tasks is used as an input feature to
the other, typically, during training a "true" classification is used instead of
the "estimated" classes (as would be the case if the system were to be used in a
real-setting) resulting in a mismatch and degraded performance. This project
attempts to overcome such a limitation of current approaches by focusing on
analyzing the degree of the dependencies between emotion and intent and
investigating joint classification methods via multitask learning for language
understanding and emotion detection tasks.

The primary intellectual merit of the project is integrated research on
developing an end-to-end information processing system that has the potential to
very significantly impact the crisis response process. For speech processing,
communucation between individuals and emergency dispatch personnel as well as
communications during responders during response pose a big challenge since
callers are typically very emotional and the language used reflects that.
Processing such speech requires significant research, and this project can is a
first step toward this genre.