* 0812677
* III-COR-small: Harvesting Concept Hierarchies from Social Data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Kristina Lerman, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Vasant G. Honavar
* 08/31/2012
* USD 482,000.00

The Social Web is changing the way people create and use information.
&lt;br/&gt;Sites like Flickr, Del.icio.us, Digg, and others, enable users to
&lt;br/&gt;publish and organize content and participate in communities.
&lt;br/&gt;The information they create while interacting with content and
&lt;br/&gt;other users is called social metadata. Tags, one example of social
&lt;br/&gt;metadata, were introduced as a means for individuals to organize
their &lt;br/&gt;content by assigning freely-chosen keywords to it. Some Social
&lt;br/&gt;Web sites now also allow users to organize content hierarchically.
&lt;br/&gt;The photosharing site Flickr, for example, allows users to group
&lt;br/&gt;related photos in sets, and related sets in collections.
Although&lt;br/&gt;social metadata lacks formal structure, it captures the
collective &lt;br/&gt;knowledge of the community. Once extracted from the traces
left by &lt;br/&gt;many users, such collective knowledge will add a rich
semantic layer &lt;br/&gt;to the content of the Social Web. This project will
develop a &lt;br/&gt;probabilistic framework to combine diverse types of social
metadata &lt;br/&gt;to construct a common concept hierarchy. In addition, the
methods &lt;br/&gt;developed by the project will use social relations, in the
form of &lt;br/&gt;community participation, to discover community-specific
vocabularies &lt;br/&gt;and concepts, and identify facets of multi-dimensional
concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the future, Social Web sites and data
management tools will allow &lt;br/&gt;users to express ever richer types of
knowledge, including complex &lt;br/&gt;predicates and semantic relations. The
ability to aggregate &lt;br/&gt;individually expressed knowledge into a unified
whole will &lt;br/&gt;transform the way people use information. Global concept
hierarchies, &lt;br/&gt;for instance, can help users visualize how their content
relates &lt;br/&gt;to that of others and allow for more efficient browsing,
search &lt;br/&gt;and discovery. By linking content to a common concept
hierarchy, &lt;br/&gt;the methods developed by the project could also be used to
integrate &lt;br/&gt;disparate data and align it across domains. The proposed
work, &lt;br/&gt;therefore, addresses one of the more important emerging
questions &lt;br/&gt;in AI, namely, how to harness the power of collective
intelligence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For further information about this project,
please see the project &lt;br/&gt;Web site at
http://www.isi.edu/~lerman/projects/folksonomy.html.