* 0812513
* Quasi-isometric geometry of groups
* MPS,DMS
* 07/31/2007,06/30/2009
* Jason Behrstock, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2009
* USD 47,482.00

&lt;br/&gt;Most of this proposal lies under the umbrella of a vast program
proposed &lt;br/&gt;by Gromov: classify finitely generated groups by their
quasi-isometric &lt;br/&gt;geometry. One way to study the geometry of a group is
via a space called &lt;br/&gt;the asymptotic cone; in several important cases,
interesting algebraic &lt;br/&gt;structure of groups has been found encoded by
the topology of their &lt;br/&gt;asymptotic cones. Through a study of asymptotic
cones, the PI will work &lt;br/&gt;towards understanding the geometry of several
particular classes of &lt;br/&gt;groups, including mapping class groups,
relatively hyperbolic groups, and &lt;br/&gt;three-manifold groups. In
particular, the goal of the project is to &lt;br/&gt;develop new geometric
invariants with an eye towards proving one of the &lt;br/&gt;main geometric
conjectures concerning mapping class groups, namely &lt;br/&gt;quasi-isometric
rigidity. This conjecture asserts that no other groups &lt;br/&gt;geometrically
look like mapping class groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Groups are an
algebraic way of encoding the symmetries of a space. It &lt;br/&gt;turns out
that an important class of groups (the finitely generated ones) &lt;br/&gt;are
themselves associated with a certain geometric object. This object is
&lt;br/&gt;built by taking each symmetry to be a point and declaring the
distance &lt;br/&gt;between a pair of points to be the number of simple
symmetries one has to &lt;br/&gt;apply to get from one to the other. In the
study of finitely generated &lt;br/&gt;groups, insight into their geometry can
often be gained by looking at the &lt;br/&gt;group from ``infinitely far away''
-- this notion can be made &lt;br/&gt;mathematically precise and yields what is
called an asymptotic cone of the &lt;br/&gt;group. The PI proposes certain ways
to study groups from this asymptotic
&lt;br/&gt;viewpoint.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;