* 0812027
* III-COR-Small:  Managing Discoveries in Visual Analytics
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Matthew Ward, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2013
* USD 477,849.00

The goal of this project is to develop technology in support of the visual
analytics process. The complex process of analysis in domains from scientific
discovery to homeland security consists of cycles of hypothesis generation,
evidence gathering, evidence organization, and hypothesis resolution. The
developed discovery management technology provides support, both visually and
computationally, not only for all analysis stages in isolation, but also for
tight integration among them. The computational infrastructure enables analysts
to capture, visualize, manage, analyze, and interactively explore patterns and
discoveries ("nuggets") of the visual analytics process. Tools for the modeling
and management of nuggets and their complex interrelationships form the
foundation of the infrastructure. Methods for nugget generation include explicit
identification and confirmation by user, implicit capture based on analysis of
user logs, and automated discovery using statistical and data mining
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational and interactive visual methods
enable analysts to efficiently validate, annotate, classify, organize, and purge
nuggets over time. Visual representations of hypotheses, evidence, and nuggets
help analysts explore their data, manage their discoveries, and organize their
reasoning processes. The resulting technology enables analysts from diverse
domains ranging from biomedical discovery to homeland security to visually
explore data, to form hypotheses, and to swiftly manage their discoveries as the
exploration process proceeds. Project insights are infused back into an
educational agenda using a rich repertoire of mechanisms, ranging from special-
topics courses to undergraduate and K-12 project-based student activities. The
project Web site (http://davis.wpi.edu/~xmdv) is used for results
dissemination.&lt;br/&gt;