* 0812753
* LTREB, Collaborative Research: The Next Decade in Continuing Long-term Demographic Research on Florida Scrub Plants
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2013
* Pedro Quintana-Ascencio, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 07/31/2013
* USD 100,002.00

This project continues a long-term study of the population biology of plants in
Florida scrub, an endangered habitat supporting many species found nowhere else
in the world. The past research includes 20 years of data on the locations,
sizes, growth, and survival of &gt; 47,000 plants, coupled with numerous
experiments on plants, seeds, and the scrub habitat. The goals of this research
are to expand data collection, including data on many more species collected
over larger landscapes, and to answer questions in basic ecology and applied
conservation. Specific topics include the effects of various fire management
strategies on risks of extinction, how populations respond to variation in the
vegetation structure and weather, and how introduced populations in ecological
restorations can provide insight into basic biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many
environmental issues can only be addressed with the perspective of long-term
data and with data-sharing, both outcomes of this research. For example, long-
term data on plant population responses to the direct and indirect effects of
weather can be useful in assessing the effects of climate change on these
endangered ecosystems. This research will also provide access to students
(including members of under-represented groups) from, high school to graduate
school, to diverse scientific methods and studies. Moreover, this research has
immediate practical applications that will be encouraged through continuing
interactions with a diversity of conservation professionals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;