* 0812272
* III-COR-Small: Extending and Leveraging Probabilistic Databases for New Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Christoph Koch, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Gia-Loi Le Gruenwald
* 08/31/2010
* USD 331,999.00

Probabilistic databases have many important applications in areas such as crime
fighting, data cleaning and integration, moving object tracking, and science,
and have recently moved into the limelight of data management research.
Probabilistic databases are expected to allow for new data management
applications to arise that currently require substantial bootstrapping and
development effort, if they are feasible at all. Probabilistic databases allow
for very flexible ways of representing and managing incompleteness and are a
possible foundation for a new breed of more encompassing and powerful data
integration systems. Probabilistic databases could give rise to more effective,
lazy integration systems, in which the input is initially inserted into the
database with a high degree of uncertainty, which is subsequently reduced using
various forms of corpus data, evidence, and probabilistic mappings and rules.

The primary goal of this project is to perform foundational research and develop
a probabilistic database management system that can support such applications.
The first aim of this project is to work on efficient query processing
techniques, with a particular focus on the essential problems of computing tuple
confidence values and the closely related problem of conditioning a
probabilistic database. Both are known to be computationally hard, and efficient
techniques are expected to have to make use of the state of the art in
algorithms for constraint satisfaction. In some applications, such as ad-hoc
query processing for decision support, exact query results are not necessary.
Previous work has pointed out efficient approximation techniques for simple
queries, namely for the ranked retrieval of results of conjunctive queries
together with their confidences; however, there is currently no work on
approximating queries that themselves make use of confidence values, for example
in selection operations.

Approximating expressive, compositional queries on probabilistic databases is a
second main focus of the planned project. Thirdly, nearly all previous work on
probabilistic databases has focussed on designing representation systems and
query languages and laying the foundations for efficient query processing. For
real data management applications to use probabilistic database systems in the
future, it must also be possible to update such databases, and to run
transactional programs on them. While no work on this exists in the literature,
uncertainty in the data poses a number of fundamental challenges to be addressed
as the third main aim of the project.

The homepage of the MayBMS project which is the subject of this proposal can be
found at http://www.cs.cornell.edu/database/maybms/ .