* 0812838
* Eco-DAS: Ecological Dissertations in the Aquatic Sciences
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2008,12/31/2014
* Paul Kemp, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 12/31/2014
* USD 621,307.00

Ecological Dissertations in the Aquatic Sciences (Eco-DÂS) continues the series
of symposia established through the DIALOG (Dissertations Initiative for the
Advancement of Limnology and Oceanography) program, but takes that series in new
directions. Key elements of Eco-DÂS include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Fostering
sustained, cross-disciplinary interactions among the top new researchers in
ecological oceanography and limnology.&lt;br/&gt;2) Increasing the success rate
of new researchers seeking funding to build their research programs, by
familiarizing them with the diversity of available research opportunities, and
introducing them to representatives of funding agencies with whom they will
interact in future.&lt;br/&gt;3) Increasing the likelihood of professional
success for these new researchers by highlighting their initial work through
high-visibility, open-access publication of a formal symposium proceedings
volume; focusing that volume on interdisciplinary and collaborative aspects of
their work; and establishing mentoring relationships between participants and
established scientists.&lt;br/&gt;4) Enhancing U.S. science through preferential
selection of participants who are current U.S. residents, or demonstrably have
specific plans to conduct research in the U.S. or with U.S. scientists in the
near future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There will be three symposia at roughly 24
month intervals, the first - Eco-DÂS VIII to be held in October 2008. The
following two will be held in fall 2010 and fall 2012. The Eco-DÂS symposium
series will be held at the East-West Center immediately adjacent to the
University of Hawai`i, Mânoa campus. The East-West Center conference facility is
physically designed to facilitate workshops and conferences in which
communication and interaction are particularly important. It is conveniently
located near the internationally recognized School of Earth and Ocean Science
and Technology (SOEST). Two other symposium series, the Dissertations Symposium
on Chemical Oceanography (DISCO) and the Physical Oceanography Dissertation
Symposium (PODS), have employed this venue with great success. The facility can
easily accommodate symposium participants as well as mentors and observers, and
provides for breakout rooms for focus groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts are significant and far reaching. The symposium series will encourage
and foster interdisciplinary collaborations among early career scientists from
diverse subdisciplines, to the benefit of both the science and the researchers.
The symposium series will also provide valuable feedback to funding agencies.
The symposium participants represent the latest additions to the national
research effort and are likely to become leading scientists in future. They will
be challenged to identify needs and recommend directions for future research in
ecological oceanography and limnology. Furthermore, a professional evaluation
will assess whether the symposium series has achieved its objectives. Evaluation
will include tracking of participants throughout the course of the proposed
program (and ideally, over a longer period), and evaluating their professional
success, their interactions with other participants, and the impact of the
symposium series on the fields of ecological oceanography and limnology.