* 0812558
* RI-Small: Structured Duplicate Detection: A New Approach to External-Memory and Parallel Graph Search
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Eric Hansen, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* Todd Leen
* 07/31/2012
* USD 332,943.00

This project will develop a new approach to scaling up state-space heuristic
search based on structured duplicate detection, which leverages graph locality
and structure to improve the effciency of duplicate detection. Structured
duplicate detection provides a foundation for (a) a new approach to external-
memory graph search which aligns the memory hierarchy with the search space, so
that for example, only a small fraction of already-explored nodes need to be
stored in RAM at any time in order to perform duplicate detection, (b) a new
approach to parallel graph search in which an abstract representation of the
state space that preserves graph locality is used to partition stored nodes
among processors, and (c) a new approach to creating and learning larger and
more accurate pattern database heuristics by storing part of the pattern
databases on disk and distributing them among multiple
processors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The search algorithms developed in this project
will be tested on two challenging applications of practical importance: domain-
independent planning and explicit-state model checking. But because state-space
graph search is a pervasive technique in AI and other branches of computer
science, the new techniques developed under this project have the potential to
benefit many applications areas, including bioinformatics and computational
group theory. Finally, this research project integrates AI and high-performance
computing, thus providing an excellent opportunity to train students in both
areas.