* 0812204
* New Numerical and Theoretical Methods to Analyse Disordered Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Stefan Boettcher, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2012
* USD 246,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational and
theoretical research on the low-temperature properties of spin glasses and
models inspired by strongly disordered materials. The research is based in part
on advances made on a project supported through the Information Technology
Research initiative. &lt;br/&gt;This project involves developing, applying, and
communicating new methods to probe structural and dynamical properties of
disordered systems and networks, utilizing the renormalization group and the
results of research on the Extremal Optimization heuristic. Thrusts of the
research include: 1) Frustrated lattices requiring up to a billion variables
above and near bond percolation will be simulated to predict low-temperature
exponents with the accuracy essential to reveal scaling relations and to tightly
constrain theoretical models. 2) New meta-heuristics will be developed; these
are indispensable for low-energy properties of glassy materials, combinatorial
optimization, or complex networks. 3) Investigating statistical models at the
transition between low-dimensional and mean-field behavior using numerical and
analytical techniques to elucidate scaling and critical dimensions in glasses,
and small-world properties in networks. The PI will explore a wide range of
applications for his heuristics and new network
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the education of students,
whose academic training provides the future backbone of our information
technology infrastructure. The PI plans to develop sophisticated software in a
web-based environment, utilizing a student-administered cluster-computer. All
results and software products will be disseminated widely through publications,
presentations, and the internet. The projects will provide students with
education and research experience in the study of statistical physics. Ties with
researchers at Los Alamos National Laboratory will provide students further
real-life research experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational and theoretical
research at the interface of statistical physics and computer science. The
research is inspired by disordered materials in which atoms or the smallest
units of magnetism cannot usefully be viewed as being arranged in a regular
crystalline array. The models that are believed to contain essential physics of
these materials are examples of complex systems known both to materials research
and computer science. Included in this class of problems are how proteins find
the optimum configuration of atoms for biological function, circuit design, and
the seemingly simple problem of finding the minimum distance a salesman must
travel to visit each city of a list of cities only once. These are difficult to
solve as they contain conflicting constraints and are characterized by many
almost correct solutions. The PI has developed a computer algorithm that may
elucidate the properties of disordered magnetic materials at low-temperatures.
This award supports a continuation of that work and the more general application
of the PI?s computer algorithm to a wider class of problems known as
optimization problems. The research is based in part on advances made on a
project supported through the Information Technology Research initiative.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the education of students, whose
academic training provides the future backbone of our information technology
infrastructure. The PI plans to develop sophisticated software in a web-based
environment, utilizing a student-administered cluster-computer. All results and
software products will be disseminated widely through publications,
presentations, and the internet. The projects will provide students with
education and research experience in the study of statistical physics. Ties with
researchers at Los Alamos National Laboratory will provide students further
real-life research
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;