* 0812194
* III-COR: Modeling and Querying Moving Objects in Unconstrained and Constrained Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Markus Schneider, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 09/30/2012
* USD 449,754.00

The research objective is the theoretical and practical design and
implementation of new computational data models and query languages for the
trajectories (both historical and predicted) of moving objects in both
constrained and unconstrained environments. One aspect is to include the
modeling and querying of current and predictive movement (e.g., the prediction
of the future evolution of hurricanes and wild fires) into databases. This
especially introduces the inherent feature of uncertainty of moving objects,
incorporates the database support of prediction models independent of
applications, and includes a homogeneous and seamless integration of both
historical and predictive moving objects in unconstrained environments that
allow free movement. Another aspect relates to the special situation of moving
objects in constrained environments, and here especially in spatial networks
(like vehicles in transportation networks). The main issues here are how spatial
networks as well as moving objects in them can be designed, queried, and
implemented within a database system. The solution approach is based on three
fundamental algebras or type systems that are embedded into database systems:
(i) the Moving Balloon Algebra (MBA) for predictive moving objects in
unconstraint environments, (ii) the Network Algebra (NETALG) for geometric
networks in spatial databases, and (iii) the Moving Object in Network (MONET)
Algebra for moving objects in spatial networks.

The resuls of this research are expected to have applications in areas where
dynamically evolving spatial objects -- which change their location, shape, and
extent over time -- play a role. Examples are meteorology, hurricane research,
fire management, disaster management, navigation systems, environmental
monitoring, transportation and distribution, emergency services,
telecommunications, to name only a few. The educational component of this
project includes specialized classes that focus on important aspects of this
project, the creation and use of new GIS educational materials, and the
involvement of students in interdisciplinary research. The project Website
(http://www.cise.ufl.edu/~mschneid/Research/FundedResearchProjects/NSF-
IIS-0812194/)is used for the dissemination of research results, educational
material, publications, generated data sets, produced software, and other
information of interest.