* 0812893
* RUI: Equilibrium, Stability, Dynamics, and Transport Physics for Electron Plasma in a Toroidal Magnetic Field
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2012
* Matthew Stoneking, LAWRENCE UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN
* Continuing Grant
* Steven J Gitomer
* 06/30/2012
* USD 168,800.00

Prior NSF support was used to design and construct a new high performance
toroidal trap for non-neutral plasmas (i.e. plasmas with a single sign of
charged particle). In the past year, construction of the experiment was
completed and early experiments conducted in a portion of the torus produced
nearly steady state plasma conditions (several second confinement times). The
present award permits the P.I. and his undergraduate students to explore the
physics of long-lived toroidal non-neutral plasmas in much greater detail. The
non-uniform character of the toroidal magnetic field in this experiment is
predicted to ultimately limit the confinement to times on the order of ten
seconds. Experiments will be conducted to identify the loss mechanism predicted
by this as yet untested theory. Additional experiments will be conducted to
identify the effect of the curved and non-uniform toroidal magnetic field on the
natural modes of oscillation (i.e. waves) that propagate in non-neutral plasmas.
In addition, the present award will fund development of instruments and
techniques necessary to transition from (and diagnose) experiments in a portion
of the torus, to confinement in the full torus.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experiments in which non-neutral plasmas are isolated for
long times so that they can be observed and manipulated provide excellent "wind
tunnels" for close testing of plasma and neutral fluid theories; helping refine
our fundamental understanding of naturally occurring fluid systems and plasmas
and of laboratory plasmas that find application in society. Non-neutral plasmas
can be generated reproducibly and confined for very long times in traps with a
simple geometry (i.e. a cylinder). However, until construction of the present
device was completed, attempts to trap non-neutral plasmas in more complicated
magnetic field arrangements (such as a torus) have resulted in very short
trapping times (of order 100 microseconds). No other existing experiment is
poised answer fundamental questions about the criteria for stable equilibrium
states, the toroidal effects on plasma dynamics, and the limitations on
confinement for such systems. The activity funded under this award will provide
research experiences (as well as scientific authorship and presentation
opportunities) for undergraduate students, inspiring some of them to pursue
graduate work in physics. The apparatus will also be used to recruit promising
high school students to the Lawrence University physics program and expose the
campus and local communities to the subject of plasma physics.