* 0812445
* DUSEL R&amp;D: Development of a Novel Scintillation Lattice Technology for a Low-Energy Solar Neutrino Spectrometer
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Mark Pitt, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 08/31/2012
* USD 514,792.00

The sun offers the highest matter density, the longest baseline, pure electron-
neutrino flavor at the source and the highest neutrino flux with the lowest
energies for studying neutrino flavor phenomenology and to pursue detailed
questions on solar astrophysics. A precision measurement of the neutrino
luminosity of the sun is possible only by the detection of low energy (less than
2 MeV) solar neutrinos that contain more than 99.9% of the flux. The development
of low energy neutrino detectors is one of three priorities set by the 2004 APS
Mutidivisional Study on Neutrinos.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One way to meet the
experimental challenge of real time low energy neutrino detection is the Indium-
based Low Energy Solar Neutrino Spectrometer (LENS). A key innovation is a novel
scintillation lattice design for a granular detector for locating nuclear events
and applying the space coincidence tag of the In neutrino capture reaction. With
this technology, the development of the Indium liquid scintillator, and with new
background suppression concepts, the physics objectives for LENS can be met in
125 tons of liquid scintillator containing 10 tons of In. The funds awarded for
the R&amp;D proposed here aim at the construction of a modest size prototype
detector, MINILENS, at ~1% the size of the full scale LENS. This proposal
specifically requests funds to develop the scintillation lattice technology and
to construct an optical lattice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact
includes the chemistry and engineering of In-loaded liquid scintillators with
work impacting applications such as neutron detection in industry and in
homeland security; and measurements of cosmogenic and other background radiation
effects relevant for low level counting techniques for forensic, national
security, archeological and atmospheric investigations.&lt;br/&gt;