* 0812576
* HCC-Small: Assistive Listening Devices and Voice Processing Platforms for the Deaf and Hard of Hearing
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Georgia Sadler, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2011
* USD 149,000.00

This research aims to develop assistive listening devices and voice processing
platforms that facilitate communication with the deaf and hard of hearing. To
achieve this goal, the PI and his team will both adapt existing technologies in
speech processing and pattern recognition, and lay the foundation for entirely
novel forms of human-computer interaction. Specific devices and platforms that
will be developed will be drawn from the following five categories. (1) A
dialogue interpreter that facilitates the inclusion of deaf users in dual or
multi-speaker conversations; the conversations are assumed to take place at a
table (in the home or office), which accommodates CPUs for speech recognition
and monitors for display. (2) A voice monitor that provides hard-of-hearing
users with immediate, subtle feedback on the level of their vocal projections;
without this feedback, inappropriate modulation can introduce awkwardness in
social interactions, leading over time to withdrawal and isolation. (3) A voice
compass that provides rapid directional notification during multi-speaker
conversation; such a device would assist deaf lip-readers who cannot otherwise
track the turns of different speakers (lip reading in this setting presumes the
ability to know where to look). (4) An audio event detector that recognizes
salient words, prompts, and sounds in the user's environment; such a device
could notify users with hearing loss to someone calling their name or to
important work-related sounds, thus reducing frustrations and boosting
employability. (5) A wearable transmitter/receiver that uses primitive speech
recognition to allow a user with speech and hearing to communicate simple words
to a late deafened love one; such a device would complement residual hearing,
gestures, and lip-reading.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Over 35 million
Americans have some form of hearing loss. Moreover, one-fifth of these cases are
estimated to involve severe or profound hearing loss. Incidence of hearing loss
increases with age: it affects roughly 2% of children under age 18 but over 30%
of adults over age 65. Thus, the percentage of affected adults will grow with
the aging of the baby-boomer generation. There is a tremendous need for better
integration of people with hearing loss in the home, community, and workplace.
Extreme barriers in communication often exist between members of the Deaf
community and the hearing population. Even within a single household, these
barriers can create a desperate sense of isolation for a family member who is
deaf. In the workplace, the members of the Deaf community are as able-bodied as
the rest of the population, but difficulties in communication create barriers to
optimal employment and retention in current positions.