* 0812515
* III-COR - Small: Searchable and Shareable Visually Observed Knowledge Base
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Chi-Ren Shyu, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2012
* USD 465,287.00

In fields where visually based tacit knowledge is central to decision-making,
such as image analysis within the medical or intelligence communities, the
difficulty of transferring hard-won expertise to novices is compounded by a lack
of sufficient knowledge transfer tools. Static media and current computational
approaches are not up to the task of capturing highly complex visually based
tacit knowledge. A visual knowledge infrastructure based on enhanced
computational approaches and robust tools must be developed that can harness the
extant wealth of visual-knowledge expertise&lt;br/&gt;and will facilitate the
rapid and effective transfer of that knowledge to and use by learners. Five
necessary computer science research goals must be reached in order to build such
a visual knowledge infrastructure. They include the development of a declarative
knowledge module for visual and textual content management, visual mining
algorithms for discovering associations in a multi-dimensional feature space, a
cognitive model for visual media analysts, a case-based reasoning system for
knowledge repositories and acquisition, and a digital library with a robust
knowledge exchange framework for interdisciplinary communities. The cognitive
model of visual media analysts proposed in the project has the ability to index
facts and production rules from associations among low-level visual features and
high-level semantics. To make the machine-readable visual knowledge accessible
and sharable by novices, the proposed case-based reasoning system will provide
the functions for knowledge retrieval. An efficient visual-knowledge
infrastructure is necessary to meet the needs of high quality and cost-effective
basic science research and health care. Other impacts include joint mentoring of
interdisciplinary students, and the creation of digital libraries for curriculum
design in multidisciplinary training, as well as the engagement of
underrepresented high school students and undergraduates in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;