* 0812045
* RI-Small: Robust Game Theory and Decision Theory with Resource-Bounded Agents
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2013
* Joseph Halpern, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Todd Leen
* 07/31/2013
* USD 403,150.00

Decision theory and game theory have proved to be remarkably useful as guides to
decision making and strategic thinking. However, people often behave in
predictable and systematic ways that are inconsistent with utility maximization
models of decision theory. Moreover, players who follow the recommendations of
game theory will do far worse than those who do not. These predictive failures
of current theories stem from a number of sources, including:

1) current theories implicitly assume that agents are perfect reasoners, who can
compute the consequences of their actions;

2) current solution concepts assume that computation is free, so do not take
into account the cost of computation;

3) equilibrium concepts implicitly assume that agents know what all other agents
are doing;

4) current approaches do not take language into account - they implicitly assume
that all agents playing a game (or making a decision) describe the game (or
decision problem) the same way, and have the same theory of the world;

5) all agents are assumed to be rational, according to the modeler of the
game/decision problem.

Most of these observations are not new (references to previous work are provided
in later sections). The time is now ripe to put all these observations together
and come up with more realistic foundations for game theory and decision theory.
The goal of this project is to construct such a foundation, by using a broad
range of techniques from logic, cryptography, and robust distributed computing,
and then apply the ideas to the problem of robust mechanism design (i.e., rules
for making choices).

The project explores new research directions in both computer science and game
theory, and the resulting synthesis should enrich both fields. It should have a
broader societal impact as well, including more robust design of mechanisms for
auctions; better design of peer-to-peer networks; more secure wireless networks;
better software agents, that make decisions more comprehensible to users and
that take into better account the actions of other users; and, more generally, a
deeper understanding of the actions of interacting agents.