* 0812138
* RI-Small: Adaptive Parameter and State Estimation on Groups with Application to Sensor-Based Control
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Louis Whitcomb, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Voyles
* 08/31/2012
* USD 400,000.00

This research seeks to develop adaptive methods that will enable sensor-based
systems to learn from their own sensory experience in order to improve their
perceptual precision and dexterity. We will investigate the problem of sensor-
based parameter estimation and state estimation on groups, with particular focus
on the group of rigid body transformations. These group-structured problems
naturally arise in three-dimensional sensing (e.g. range scanners such as laser
scanners and multi-beam bathymetric sonars; Doppler sonar; and vision based
state estimation) and dynamic state estimation (e.g. image-based state
estimation; vision based control; and multi-degree-of-freedom vehicle navigation
and control). Few identification techniques presently exist for the common
problem in which the unknown parameter set or state possesses group structure.
This is in contrast to the variety of well-known techniques (i.e. least-squares
and adaptive) for parameter and state estimation for the case in which the
unknown parameter or state appears linearly in the plant equations and the
unknown is an element of a linear vector space. The anticipated impact will be
robotic systems capable of adaptively learning to improve their navigation and
sensing accuracy. We will apply these approaches to actual real-world problems
arising in underwater vehicle sensing and control.