* 0812804
* Collaborative Research: International Nanofluid Properties Benchmark Exercise (INPBE)
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2008,01/31/2010
* Jacopo Buongiorno, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 01/31/2010
* USD 37,720.00

CBET-0812804, Buongiorno&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project partially supports
the International Nanofluid Properties Benchmark Exercise (INPBE), culminating
in a two-day workshop which will be held in the continental U.S. in the
September - November, 2008, time frame. The purpose of this workshop and
associated 'round-robin' testing is to reduce the great uncertainties
surrounding the thermophysical properties of nanoscale colloidal solutions,
popularly termed 'nanofluids.' Within NSF, funding is provided by both the
Thermal Transport Processes (TTP) Program and the Particulate &amp; Multiphase
Processes (PMP) Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to the intellectual
merit, progress in developing nanofluids for thermal and other applications is
hindered by a lack of fundamental understanding of their thermophysical
properties. A number of inconsistent experimental reports have plagued the
literature, making it difficult to formulate definitive models to describe
thermal transport in nanofluids. This collaborative workshop proposal addresses
these outstanding issues by proposing that a relatively large number of
interested laboratories around the world measure the thermal conductivity of
nominally identical nanofluid samples, prepared from a single batch by the same
manufacturer. Afterwards, representatives from the participating laboratories
will meet in a two-day workshop to discuss their results and to plan future
activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts include partial support
for a number of women and minority researchers to participate in this exercise,
and to attend the two-day workshop. Improved fundamental understanding of
nanofluids? transport properties may lead to their application in a number of
thermal systems, resulting in improved efficiencies and reduced energy
consumption. Since a number of the participating laboratories are located
outside the US, this project will also serve to enhance international
collaboration.