* 0812073
* III-CXT-Small: Collaborative Research: Structuring, Reasoning, and Querying in a Very Large Medical Image Database
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,10/31/2008
* Gang Tan, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Brandt
* 10/31/2008
* USD 26,871.00

Image data is of immense practical importance in medical informatics, and a
subject of strong interest to researchers in industry and academia. While
digital image databases are now prevalent in clinical and educational settings,
and traditional means for interacting with and querying such collections can
provide some level of useful functionality, there are few examples of systems
that attempt to bridge the ?semantic gap.? The work proposed in this grant is a
multi-institutional collaboration combining research in medical image
processing, machine learning and pattern recognition, knowledge representation
and querying, and evaluation by domain experts in the field, is intended to
advance the state-of-the-art in this direction. The archive of 60,000 cervigram
images assembled by the National Library of Medicine and National Cancer
Institute is an ideal collection for this purpose. The NLM cervigram archive
forms a narrow image domain that has a limited and predictable variability. In
such cases, explicit representation of domain knowledge alleviates the semantic
gap between the low-level sensory recordings of a scene (raw image data), and
objects and processes implied from images (semantic interpretation). This
research will follow an information hierarchy that proceeds from raw image data
to low-level image features, recognition of objects and tissue types, knowledge-
based reasoning about disease processes, and, finally, tools and visualizations
to support diagnosis decisions by clinical and NLM/NCI collaborators. The
research team will employ an underlying paradigm known as Computer-Assisted
Visual Interactive Recognition, or CAVIAR, which considers the domain expert an
integral part of the equation and attempts to optimize the performance of the
complete human-machine system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Image content understanding is still considered a vexing
open problem at the same time databases are growing rapidly in size and
complexity. It is anticipated that this work will have a positive impact in
areas relating to medical image analysis, including information extraction,
organization, representation, and querying, as well as in training.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the focus on
the NLM/NCI cervigram archive, this research may help advance the role of
cervicography as a more cost-effective procedure than pap smears and colposcopy
in screening for cervical cancer. Results from this targeted-domain project
could also illuminate gaps and help establish new priorities for research in
broader domains such as multimedia content structuring, understanding, indexing,
and retrieval.