* 0812946
* RUI: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: The ecology of Anaplasma phagocytophilum: Reservoirs, risk, and incidence
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2013
* Kathleen LoGiudice, Union College
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 07/31/2013
* USD 94,613.00

This research will investigate the ecology of human granulocytic anaplasmosis
(HGA), an emerging disease on three continents and examine the effects of
species diversity on disease transmission. HGA is caused by a rickettsial
bacterium, Anaplasma phagocytophilum, that is transmitted from host to host
through the bite of an infected ixodid tick. The research will include a
characterization of reservoir competence of wildlife hosts and determine whether
host reservoir competence is a function of coinfection with the bacterium that
causes Lyme disease. The researchers will build and test models to predict how
risk of human exposure to HGA will vary with changes in the diversity and
species composition of host communities. They also will experimentally evaluate
specific mechanisms underlying effects of variable diversity on risk by
manipulating key hosts in natural communities. Finally, they will educate local
health-care providers about this emerging disease and expand the HGA
surveillance capabilities of the local (Dutchess County, NY) health department.
The enhanced surveillance data will be used to test for spatial correlations
between ecological risk and human incidence. The project will train more than 40
undergraduates and provide for them an opportunity to conduct independent
research. Understanding disease transmission dynamics is crucial for the
appropriate management of communities and landscapes to reduce the total burden
of zoonotic disease.