* 0812956
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Research on Strongly Coupled Plasmas
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2008,06/30/2013
* Kenneth Golden, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* Steven J Gitomer
* 06/30/2013
* USD 190,475.00

A Collaborative Project of theoretical/computational research on strongly
coupled plasmas will be continued by Boston College (BC; Dr. Gabor J. Kalman,
Principal Investigator) and the University of Vermont (UVM; Dr. Kenneth I.
Golden, Principal Investigator).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The coupling strength of a
plasma is characterized by the ratio of the average Coulomb interaction energy
to the average kinetic energy. The plasma is considered to be strongly coupled
when this ratio is exceeds unity to the extent that the collection of charged
particles is in the liquid or solid phase, exotic states of matter that are in
marked contrast to the traditional gaseous plasmas studied in Tokamak fusion
devices and space physics. Strong Coulomb interactions are exhibited by a
variety of fascinating classical and quantum plasma systems, e.g., layered
charged-particle systems in semiconductor quantum wells, layered charged
particles confined in cryogenic traps, astrophysical plasmas (giant planetary
interiors, white dwarf interiors, the outer crusts of neutron stars, etc.), and
laboratory dusty plasmas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaborative UVM/BC Project
addresses issues central to the physics of strongly coupled plasma dynamics. Two
general objectives for continued progress in this field are set forth. The first
objective is to continue building up the theoretical framework for the
description of the dynamics of strongly coupled plasma liquids. The second
objective is the application of this understanding, gained in the study of
strongly coupled plasmas, to novel physical systems that are in the forefront of
condensed matter physics research. It is now recognized that the various guises
of the quantum Coulomb liquid in semiconductors exhibit behavior that is to be
understood within the framework of strongly coupled plasma dynamics while also
presenting some unique ramifications of the original issues (formation of
dipoles, ultra-relativistic-like behavior of graphene electrons, etc). The
analysis of the collective modes (natural frequencies) and response functions
pertaining to these novel semiconductor plasmas is the second main objective of
the Project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research, with its first-
principles microscopic and simulation approaches to the determination of the
dynamic properties of a wide variety of strongly coupled Coulomb systems, will
substantially add to the fundamental knowledge base of plasma and condensed
matter physics. This research will continue to provide new insights into the
borderline area between these two disciplines by highlighting the similarity of
the underlying physics that governs the behavior of plasma and condensed matter
systems. The experiments that can be carried out along the predictions of this
research can come from either discipline and are expected to be relevant to
both.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research program will continue to promote the
teaching and training of participating undergraduate and graduate students at
both academic institutions. It will also continue to provide cutting edge
research and learning opportunities to scientists (including postdoctoral and
graduate students) at foreign institutions (the Research Institute of Solid
State Physics and Optics of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences; Polytechnic
University of Valencia). The results of this research will continue to be
presented at international conferences (such as the 2002, 2005, 2008 Strongly
Coupled Coulomb Systems Conferences) and disseminated to the public through the
major outreach efforts made by the conference organizers