* 0812429
* HCC: Participation Lifecycles in Online Communities
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Clifford Lampe, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2011
* USD 449,515.00

Increased participation in social networking sites (e.g., MySpace, Facebook),
discussion sites (e.g., Slashdot, Digg), and contributory social media sites
(e.g., YouTube, Wikipedia) has raised questions about the user experience within
these online communities. This research will make conceptual contributions to
the emerging understanding of participation in online communities; how new users
of persistent online communities become integrated, how that participation is
sustained, the predictors of exit, and patterns of involvement over
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will engage in an in-depth, multi-method
analysis of Slashdot, a news and discussion site focused on technology issues,
and Everything2, a user-generated encyclopedia with an emphasis on creative
expression. Both sites are long-lived, with up to ten years of interaction
history, which enables an analysis of longitudinal patterns. Special site access
agreements afford an unusually comprehensive level of access to server logs and
user data. In the case of Everything2, the agreement also allows interface
modifications and creation of multiple experimental conditions within the site.
These field experiments will complement more traditional analyses of server
logs, user surveys, and interviews. Simultaneously examining two sites with the
same set of tools creates opportunities for greater generalization of results
and validated measures that can be applied to other online communities in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The growing prevalence of large-
scale online communities has changed how people collaborate, generate content,
share interest, discuss topics, and maintain relationships. However, little is
known about how the design of sites, terms of service, incentive structures,
norms or other socio-technical features affect the user experience. Given the
centrality that these types of online communities increasingly have in students'
online experiences, this project thoughtfully engages pedagogy at all levels
with the hook of social computing research. Ultimately the impact of this
research will be improved design and maintenance of online communities as robust
socio-technical systems.