* 0812258
* III-COR-Small: Efficient Matching for Large Real-World Schemas and Ontologies
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* Maria Cruz, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2014
* USD 504,995.00

III-COR-Small: Efficient Matching for Large Real-World Schemas and
&lt;br/&gt;Ontologies&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Maria
Cruz&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims at bridging across heterogeneous
data and will&lt;br/&gt;impact applications in multiple fields, including
emergency&lt;br/&gt;management, biomedicine, digital government, and
environment. In&lt;br/&gt;particular, this project extends the state of the art
in schema and&lt;br/&gt;ontology matching, and therefore in data integration, by
testing and&lt;br/&gt;evaluating methods and strategies that establish
relationships among&lt;br/&gt;semantically related concepts in heterogeneous
data sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The following research issues are addressed:
(1) Design of methods and&lt;br/&gt;algorithms for schema and ontology matching
that operate at different&lt;br/&gt;levels of granularity (e.g., concept,
structure); (2) Development of a&lt;br/&gt;prototype of an integrated system
that supports the visualization and&lt;br/&gt;manipulation of large schemas and
ontologies in addition to the&lt;br/&gt;developed matching methods and
algorithms; (3) Test and evaluation of&lt;br/&gt;the above methods and system
prototype in terms of their&lt;br/&gt;effectiveness, including accuracy
(precision, recall) and efficiency&lt;br/&gt;(execution time). From an
educational viewpoint, this project impacts&lt;br/&gt;the design of courses and
the research training of graduate and&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate students, and of a
postdoc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Further information about this project can be
found at:&lt;br/&gt;http://www.cs.uic.edu/~ifc/grants/SchemaOntologyMatching/&lt
;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;