* 0813541
* Responsive Virtual Human Museum Guides
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2008,11/30/2012
* William Swartout, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 11/30/2012
* USD 2,062,116.00

Proposal No.: DRL - 0813541 &lt;br/&gt;PI: Swartout, William
&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Southern California &lt;br/&gt;Title:
Responsive Virtual Human Museum Guides
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Southern
California's Institute for Creative Technologies and the Museum of Science,
Boston will create life-sized, 3-D Virtual Humans that will interact with
visitors as interpretive guides and learning facilitators at science exhibits.
Through the use of advanced artificial intelligence and intelligent tutoring
techniques, Virtual Humans will provide a highly responsive functionality in
their dialogue interpretation that will generate sophisticated interaction with
visitors about the STEM content related to the exhibit. The project exemplifies
how the confluence of science, technology, engineering, mathematics and
education can creatively and collaboratively advance new tools and learning
processes. The Virtual Human project will begin to present to the visitor a
compelling, real life, interactive example of the future and of the related
convergence of various interdisciplinary trends in technology, such as natural
language voice recognition, mixed reality environments, para-holographic
display, visitor recognition and prior activity recall, artificial intelligence,
and other interdisciplinary trends. The 3-D, life-sized Virtual Humans will
serve as museum educators in four capacities: 1) as a natural language dialogue-
based interactive guide that can suggest exhibits to explore in specific
galleries and answer questions about particular STEM content areas, such as
computer science; 2) as a coach to help visitors understand and use particular
interactive exhibits; 3) be the core focus of the Science behind the Virtual
Humans exhibit; and 4) serve as an ongoing research effort to improve human and
virtual human interactions at increasingly sophisticated levels of complexity.
The deliverables will be designed to build upon visitor experiences and
stimulate inquiry. A living lab enables visitors to become part of the research
and development process. The project website will introduce visitors to the
technologies used to build virtual humans and the research behind their
implementation. The site will be augmented with videos and simulations and will
generate user created content on virtual human characters. Project evaluation
and research will collect language and behavioral data from visitors to inform
the improvement of the virtual guide throughout the duration of the grant and to
develop a database that directly supports other intelligent systems, and new
interface design and development that will have broad impact across multiple
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;