* 0813777
* Thermal pathways in ultra-high resolution gamma-ray detector materials for nuclear material detection [10U08UDzink]
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2008,12/31/2011
* Barry Zink, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 12/31/2011
* USD 328,985.00

&lt;br/&gt;The illicit trafficking and production of special nuclear materials
(SNM) is a paramount global concern. Currently, scintillator detectors are used
to determine whether SNM are present in incoming vehicles or cargo at border
crossings. These detectors are cost effective and fast, but have a relatively
poor spectral energy resolution. As a result, they cannot discriminate dangerous
materials such as highly-enriched uranium (HEU) from common and innocuous
background radiation. Even high purity germanium detectors, the current state of
the art for gamma-ray detection, often do not have good enough resolution to
clearly separate HEU emissions from background. Cryogenic microcalorimeters are
a new class of detectors that provide resolution capable of separating these
lines from any interference. The overall goal of this project is to provide the
knowledge necessary to make these microcalorimeters an efficient and field
usable instrument that will help solve real-world nuclear security and forensics
problems. Specifically, we will design and implement measurements on the thermal
properties of these low-temperature detectors that will enable faster, more
efficient, array-compatible sensors with extremely high spectral resolution.
These experiments will be designed and implemented by a team that includes a
postdoctoral scholar, graduate and undergraduate student researchers, who will
also work collaboratively with scientists at the National Institute of Standards
and Technology and Los Alamos National Lab. The broader impacts of the project
encompass education and technical training of post-graduate, graduate, and
undergraduate students, and strengthening partnerships between the University of
Denver, NIST and LANL. In addition, much of our work focuses on development and
implementation of novel measurement techniques to probe thermal properties of
detectors and their micromachined constituent materials. Many of these new
techniques will be useful for a broad range of future experiments, and their
development provides opportunities for students to learn techniques relevant to
high-tech industry such as silicon micromachining and circuit design and
characterization. &lt;br/&gt;