* 0813649
* The Contribution of Variable Pressure Scanning Electron Microscopy (VPSEM) Coupled with Energy Dispersive X-ray (EDS) and Raman Spectroscopy (RS) to Anthropologically Oriented Arch
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2008,12/31/2009
* Ioanna Kakoulli, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2009
* USD 293,688.00

With National Science Foundation support the Laboratory of Materials Research in
Archaeology and Cultural Heritage (a joint venture between the Cotsen Institute
of Archaeology and the Materials Science and Engineering Department at UCLA)
will acquire a state of the art Variable Pressure Scanning Electron Microscope
(VPSEM) coupled with Energy Dispersive (EDS) and Raman Spectroscopy (RS) to
foster cutting-edge research in integrated forensic bioanthropology and
geoarchaeology. The combined capabilities of this instrument integrating imaging
and morphological observations at nano length scale with elemental and molecular
analysis of inorganic and organic materials provide a very powerful tool for the
study of archaeological materials to answer important questions relating to
production methods and material distribution reflecting the social structure and
organization of ancient populations.

The environmental capabilities of the VPSEM will allow archaeological artifacts
to be analyzed non-invasively and without modification of their structure or
chemistry. Archaeological materials that contain some moisture in their
structure will be analyzed without risking dehydration and structural
modifications. The versatile capabilities of this instrument will, undoubtedly,
provide a new perspective and a novel approach to material characterization to
answer anthropological questions regarding provenance of materials, production
centers and intercultural and interregional relationships. A broad range of
archaeological and cultural materials will be analyzed including ceramics,
stone, basketry, textiles, botanical and biological remains, to support dating
and provenance studies, the interpretation of environment change through time
and environmentally-induced weathering and other changes. Two project-based
examples of VPSEM/EDS/RS applications are: 1) the study of bioarcheological
specimens from Pre-Columbian mummies in Chile to assist in the interpretation of
the cultural and biological origins of the mid-valley prior to the Middle
Horizon Period (AD 500-1000); 2) variability and sourcing of glaze-paint recipes
of Ancestral Puebloan glazed-ceramics.

Driven by newly established interdisciplinary research and education programs
operating at the interface of science and archaeology, this instrument will be
used by faculty and students from UCLA to facilitate teaching and
multidisciplinary research in materials science based archaeology and to foster
national and international collaborations with museums and universities.
Research results will be disseminated through discussion groups, peer reviewed
articles and the creation of databases that can be accessed by scholars and the
broader archaeological community. The support from the National Science
Foundation will also provide seed funding for the development of courses for
graduate and undergraduate students on "technology applied to archaeological
method and theory" and on "microscopy and microanalysis for anthropologically
oriented archaeology". It will also assist at establishing further the outreach
activities of the LMR focusing on K-12 students of unrepresented communities
through interactive hands-on laboratory practical sessions and laboratory
visits.