* 0813285
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Identifying Environmental Determinants Favorable for the Presence and Transmission of Pathogenic Vibrios
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2008,11/30/2009
* Edward Laws, University of Southern Mississippi
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 11/30/2009
* USD 1,180,000.00

Bacteria classified by scientists as Vibrio are very common in the ocean and
some are capable of causing disease in humans. The three major causes of disease
are Vibrio cholerae, V. parahaemolyticus and V. vulnificus. Cholera and the so-
called non-cholera diseases or vibrioses are reportable to the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). All three of these vibrios cause
gastroenteritis and wound infections, and in the U.S. the most common agent of
disease is V. parahaemolyticus whereas the most lethal is V. vulnificus. Very
little is known about the environmental factors that determine the abundance and
distribution of these vibrios in their natural environments where they come in
contact with humans as a result of swimming or eating undercooked seafood. This
research will use the tools of modern molecular biology and chemical
oceanography to determine the environmental drivers of vibrio abundance and
distribution. Specifically, this project will measure vibrio levels in water,
bottom sediment, and oysters in three ecologically and geographically distinct
locations ? Chesapeake Bay, Gulf of Mexico and Puget Sound. These data will be
correlated with plankton densities and with the following environmental
determinants: sea surface temperature, chlorophyll, turbidity, salinity,
dissolved organic carbon, primary productivity, particulate organic carbon and
nitrogen, dissolved inorganic nutrients, and suspended particulate matter. By
linking the in situ measurements with remote sensing imagery, it will be
possible to more accurately describe these relationships when real-time
environmental sampling is not possible. In addition, this project will host an
annual Summer Research Institute to train eight high school students per year in
laboratory settings. It is expected that this research will result in a more
accurate description of the environmental determinants that influence vibrio
abundance and distribution.