* 0813656
* Use of Regional Atmospheric Modeling to Improve Short and Long-term Forecasting Capability of the North American Monsoon System
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2013
* Christopher Castro, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 06/30/2013
* USD 374,930.00

A regional atmospheric model, the Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) model,
will be used to improve short and long-term forecasting capability for the North
American Monsoon System. This study is motivated, in part, by the North American
Monsoon Experiment (NAME), which has the objectives of understanding and
predicting warm season convective processes in complex terrain and determining
the response of warm season precipitation to slowly varying oceanic and
continental surface conditions. In addition, physical understanding of how the
North American Monsoon may be affected by anthropogenic climate change is an
urgent question in the water-scarce Southwest United States and northwestern
Mexico. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific objectives of this project are: to
explain the physical mechanisms which lead to monsoon rainfall and determine the
sensitivity of numerical weather forecasts to data specification; to assess the
potential for improvement in seasonal climate prediction in North America for
the warm season; and to assess the potential effects of anthropogenic climate
change on the core monsoon region. These objectives will be addressed using WRF
as a numerical weather prediction and regional climate model and, in the
process, developing model applications, such as an adjoint modeling system and
spectral nudging capability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts are in the
societal value of improved forecasts of the North American Monsoon and
projections of how it may change in the future. This work will address the
identified priorities of the weather and climate community and societal needs,
as identified through collaborative links the PI maintains with these
stakeholders. The research and teaching responsibilities of the PI will
facilitate multidisciplinary interactions (including the development of a new
hydrometeorology program) and cooperation with Mexico. The project will provide
an example of Hispanic achievement and mentorship in the physical sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;