* 0813986
* Energy Nanotechnology International Conference
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2009
* Andrei Fedorov, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Theodore L. Bergman
* 04/30/2009
* USD 20,000.00

CBET-0813986&lt;br/&gt;Shi&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partial support is provided for
the 3rd Energy Nanotechnology International Conference, which will be held in
Jacksonville, Florida, on August 10 - 14, 2008. The purpose of this meeting is
to engage a broad spectrum of the nanotechnology research community to address
leading issues related to energy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to the
intellectual merit of the conference, a significant component of the conference
is the Workshop on Nanotechnologies for Solar and Thermal Energy Conversion and
Storage. The invited participants to this workshop will address current barriers
to solar and thermal energy conversion and storage, which are emerging as the
most significant barriers to widespread application of renewable energy. The
output of this workshop will be a roadmap describing future research directions
in this vital area. The workshop report will be published as a journal article,
allowing for broad dissemination of the findings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of the conference include support for women and underrepresented
minority participants. The conference, including the workshop discussed above,
addresses crucial research needs inhibiting sustainable energy conversion and
usage, and thus may lead to reduced consumption of fossil fuel resources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Thermal Transport
Processes (TTP) Program, of the Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and
Transport Systems (CBET) Division, by the Energy for Sustainability Program,
also of CBET, and by the Nanoscale Science &amp; Engineering Program, all within
the Directorate for Engineering (ENG).