* 0813842
* Symposium: Support for an International Symposium on Sequestered Defensive Compounds in Tetrapod Vertebrates, to be held August 17-22, 2008 in Manaus, Brazil
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2008,10/31/2009
* Mark Butler, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 10/31/2009
* USD 16,975.00

Many animals employ toxic chemicals to defend themselves against predators. Such
toxic compounds may be synthesized by the animal or acquired from an
environmental source, usually the diet, and stored (sequestered) in their
original toxic form. Such sequestered defensive toxins are widespread among
invertebrate animals, but few examples are known among vertebrates. In recent
years, however, several examples of sequestered toxins have been discovered in
vertebrates. Certain frogs obtain defensive toxins from ants and mites, and some
snakes obtain defensive compounds by consuming toxic amphibians. Additional
groups of vertebrates are suspected of sequestering defensive compounds from
prey, suggesting that this phenomenon may be more widespread than previously
recognized.&lt;br/&gt; This project will support participation by U.S.
researchers in an international symposium on sequestered defensive compounds in
amphibians and reptiles, which will be held at the Sixth World Congress of
Herpetology in Manaus, Brazil, August 17-22, 2008. The symposium will bring
together researchers from the several countries to present results of recent
studies on sequestered toxins. The participants will seek to identify common
patterns in the ecology and physiology of animals that rely on such toxins for
their defense. For example, recent observations suggest that snakes that
sequester amphibian toxins may be especially sensitive to ongoing amphibian
declines. Other studies reveal that the cellular mechanisms underlying tolerance
of prey toxins in some predators may provide insights into the physiological
processes involved in certain cardiovascular diseases.&lt;br/&gt; Importantly,
this symposium features a number of young scientists, whose work is transforming
this field of study; the majority of the funding will support these individuals.
By presenting this symposium at an international conference, especially in a
region of high biodiversity (Amazonian Brazil), the organizers seek to encourage
young researchers from many nations to pursue research on sequestered toxins in
previously unstudied groups of vertebrates.&lt;br/&gt;