* 0813513
* FETCH! with Ruff Ruffman Season Four
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Kate Taylor, WGBH Educational Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Valentine Kass
* 08/31/2011
* USD 2,799,998.00

FETCH with Ruff Ruffman is a daily half-hour PBS television series with
accompanying Web and outreach activities targeted to 6- to 10-year olds. The
program brings science learning to young children by uniquely blending live-
action with animation, game show convention with reality programming, and humor
with academics. The intended impacts are to 1) help the target audience develop
interest, knowledge and skills necessary to do science; 2) train afterschool
leaders to better facilitate science activities with kids; and 3) demonstrate
how media can be used to teach substantive science and share the results of
project evaluation with others in the field. The requested funds will allow the
project to expand the science curriculum with 20 new half-hour episodes and
expand the Web site, focusing on three new science themes that highlight topics
of interest to this age group. The Web site will include four new science-based
Web games that will allow kids to create and post content of their own design
and contribute to nationwide data collection. A new FETCH Online Training
resource will be created to help afterschool leaders to effectively engage in
FETCH's hands-on science activities. American Institutes for Research (AIR) will
conduct summative evaluation of the Online Training program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;