* 0813672
* Digital High-Speed Spectroscopic Lightning Studies
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Richard Orville, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 08/31/2013
* USD 412,051.00

A digital camera capable of 5400 frame-per-second time resolution will be
equipped with diffraction gratings previously built by the investigator to
document optical emissions from naturally occurring lightning flashes beneath
thunderstorms. Spectral data will be obtained in the 380-850 nm range from the
entire visible portion of lightning channels encompassing flash elements that
may include return strokes, stepped and dart leaders, M-strokes, and episodes of
"continuing current" (thought to be responsible for a disproportionate amount of
lightning damage to structures and equipment) at spatial and temporal
resolutions of 10's of meters and microseconds, respectively. These data will be
analyzed to provide measures of channel temperature, electron density, and other
thermodynamic information. Observing activities will be conducted during the
climatological springtime thunderstorm maximum at a primary site located at the
National Weather Center in Norman, Oklahoma, and during the off-season at the
principal investigator's home institution (Texas A&amp;M University) in southern
Texas. Extensive supporting meteorological facilities and special measurements
are available at the Oklahoma site, and include finely resolved (nanosecond-
scale) optical imaging of lightning channels recorded by another NSF-supported
investigator based at the University of Oklahoma. Both sites are encompassed by
the National Lightning Detection Network (NLDN) as well as more specialized
lightning mapping array (LMA) equipment. Together, these ancillary systems will
provide contextual 4D information on lightning channel location, geometry and
propagation (both visible and in-cloud), as well as the polarity, estimated peak
current and flash multiplicity (i.e. number of return strokes) for lightning
channels reaching the ground.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
this research centers upon improved understanding of the spectroscopically-
derived properties of natural lighting viewed at fine spatial and temporal
resolution, which will lead to improved understanding of the physics of natural
lightning. Additional insights are also possible concerning lightning's
contribution to key atmospheric chemical processes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this work will include training of
university graduate and undergraduate students, outreach to K-12 educational
institutions, and increased collaboration between multiple university and
government facilities involved in lighting research.