* 0813589
* Support for the Second Engineering Conference
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2008,01/31/2010
* Craig Partridge, Raytheon BBN Technologies Corp.
* Standard Grant
* C.  Iacono
* 01/31/2010
* USD 50,826.00

This grant funds the Second Engineering Conference, the second conference in a
projected series for designers and experimenters of a network science and
engineering infrastructure. The conference will be held over two days with a
"newcomers" session prior to the start of the conference. The conference will
consist of a mix of plenary sessions with invited speakers and working group
meetings. The particular goals of this second conference are:

1. To build on the sense of community that developed at the First Engineering
Conference held at the University of Minnesota in the fall of 2007; 2. Prepare
the Working Groups for a more aggressive pace of effort; and 3. Reconcile future
visions with concrete engineering challenges.

This conference and all subsequent conferences in this series are critical to
the design of infrastructure for network science and engineering. If such an
infrastructure is developed in the future, new kinds of network science and
engineering research will be enabled. Experiments that cannot be carried out on
today's testbeds promise to reveal new scientific insights and understanding of
network behavior, performance, design, security, and economics, for example. In
addition, new products will result as well as new opportunities for industry.
These conferences provide a place where industry, researchers, students,
international participants and agency program directors can discuss future
visions and how to most effectively manage the risks inherent in such an
endeavor. The funding from this grant will allow for increased diversity at the
Second Conference -- both in attendees and speakers -- and to educate new
attendees during a "newcomers" session.