* 0813624
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Investigating Terminal Preclassic and Classic Period Power and Wealth at K'o, Guatemala
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2009
* Francisco Estrada-Belli, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2009
* USD 14,987.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Francisco Estrada-Belli, John Tomasic will conduct
excavations at the Maya archaeological site of K'o. K'o is located in
northeastern Guatemala, and is one of several archaeological sites within the
region currently under investigation by the Holmul Archaeological Project. K'o
was occupied from 300 BC to AD 850, and previous research suggests public
construction activities peaked early in the site's history, and subsequently
declined during the final centuries of occupation. Long-term patterns in public
architectural construction have been used to estimate long-term levels of elite
power at K'o, and the decline in elite power is attributed to political
processes involving other sites within the Holmul Region. Mr. Tomasic's
dissertation will examine the degree to which these long-term patterns in power
at K'o correlate with long-term patterns in wealth. Tomasic's dissertation
research will focus on excavations within carefully selected elite and non-elite
households at K'o, and will recover data which will permit an assessment of
long-term levels of wealth at K'o. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is
significant because it examines long-term trends in wealth relative to power,
and it will demonstrate, rather than assume, the degree to which wealth and
power covary. It is expected that the degree to which power and wealth covary at
K'o will be dependent upon how wealth items were distributed within this past
economy. Furthermore, this research is important because it attempts to
determine the degree to which wealth items were distributed through elite
redistribution, reciprocal gifting among elites, and/or informal barter and
marketplace exchange. Scholarly disagreement exists regarding whether certain
goods were distributed through informal barter and market exchange or through
elite redistribution and elite reciprocal prestige goods networks. This study
contributes to this debate by examining how wealth items in elite and nonelite
households may have been distributed at K'o.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to
the contributions this research will make to our understanding of the
archaeology of the Holmul region, this study will advance our understanding of
how goods were distributed within all past economies. Furthermore, the results
of this research will contribute toward a more nuanced understanding of the
complex relationship between power and wealth in past societies. Finally, at a
more general level of significance, the results of this research can be used to
better understand the effects of political processes on contemporary Maya
peoples of Mexico and Central America as they actively participate in the modern
global economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader impacts, the results of
this research will be widely disseminated at national conferences and in
scholarly publications in both Spanish and English. In addition, both scientists
and laypersons will be able to freely obtain copies of all published materials
from the Holmul Archaeological Project's website. In this manner, this research
will advance our scientific understanding of this past society and will be
accessible to non-specialists. Furthermore, Mr. Tomasic, as well as
undergraduate and graduate research assistants at Guatemalan and U.S.
institutions, will gain training in the methods of archaeological research
mentioned above.