* 0813627
* Learning and Generalization of Scientific Information from Picture Books
* NONE,NONE
* 08/30/2007,11/30/2008
* Patricia Ganea, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* Gregg E. Solomon
* 11/30/2008
* USD 100,019.00

The focus of the proposed research is the process by which young children
acquire and extend new knowledge from picture book experiences, with the goal of
identifying factors that facilitate or impede that process. Parents and
preschool teachers assume that young children learn useful information from the
books to which they are exposed and assume also that they generalize that
information beyond the pages of the book. Surprisingly, little research has
examined these basic assumptions. One goal of the project is to examine the
effect of certain physical characteristics that are common in books designed and
marketed for young children (e.g., how realistic the pictures in the books are
and whether it matters if information is presented in an everyday context or a
fantasy context). A second goal concerns the extent to which features that are
known to facilitate or interfere with learning generally in young children
(e.g., analogies and complex elements that can be physically manipulated) affect
learning and generalization from books. A third goal is to examine book-centered
interactions between parents and their preschool children to see how parents use
books to communicate information to their children, with a particular focus on
assessing the extent to which parents encourage generalization to the real
world. Because joint book reading has the potential to serve as an excellent
source of early knowledge about scientific concepts, these questions will be
addressed in the context of children learning about various biological domains,
beginning with animal-environment relations. The results of the proposed
research should have clear and important implications for the selection and
design of picture books to serve educational goals. Because young children in
America are so frequently involved in picture book interactions, improvement in
the educational potential of the books available in homes and preschools could
have a broader impact across the social spectrum.

