* 0813741
* SGER: Fabrication of Innovative Cu/CNT Nanowires
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2008,07/31/2009
* Quanfang Chen, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 07/31/2009
* USD 100,000.00

CBET-0813741, Chen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Grant for Exploratory
Research (SGER) project is to develop an innovative Cu/CNT nanowire as potential
future interconnects to overcome current technology barriers including
electromigration and increased electrical resistivity. The continuous
downscaling of line widths has caused two technology barriers associated with Cu
interconnects including electromigration and largely increased resistivity. The
increased resistivity not only increases the RC delay in the computation but
also causes server electromigration as well as Joule heating related reliability
concerns. Therefore, it is important to identify solutions to counter increased
resistivity associated with nanoscale interconnects. The PI plans to combine
copper's large electron density together with carbon nanotube's large mean free
path (which is about 750 times greater than that of copper) to achieve potential
ultrahigh conductive Cu/CNT nanowires. To do so, he will develop a fabrication
process to realize: 1) good interfacial bonding (electrical contact) between CNT
and Cu to ensure electron redistribution between CNT and Cu), 2) smooth surface
to largely reduce electron-surface scattering. The PI's group has successfully
verified that good interfacial bonding between Cu and CNT can be realized by
electrochemical deposition in which negatively charged CNTs will attract
positively charged Cu ions to form tightly bonded double layers. The PI plans to
achieve smooth and uniform Cu coverage on CNT templates with a microchannel
reactor by means of a laminar flow and diffusion controlled
reaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the research proposal are: 1)
to develop a typical microchannel system - a chemical fabrication on chip system
for the fabrication of Cu/CNT nanowires; 2) to develop an electrochemical
deposition process for the fabrication of Cu/CNT nanowires that Cu will be
deposited uniformly onto CNT templates within the microchannel; 3) initiatively
investigate fabricated Cu/CNT nanowires, in terms size and morphology (shape and
surface condition) as well as electrical
conductivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Cu/CNT nanowire is
expected to produce ultrahigh electrical conductivity that is important to
counter technology barriers associated with nanoscale interconnects including
increased electrical resistivity and electromigration. The ultrahigh
conductivity is ensured by the combination of large free electron density (from
Cu) and large mean free path (from CNT). Electron redistribution between Cu and
CNT will be realized by a tight binding fabrication of electrochemical
deposition. Uniform and smooth surface of Cu/CNT nanowires will be fabricated in
a microchannel chemical reactor in which lamina flow and diffusion controlled
chemical reaction will take place. The success of this SGER project will put
PI's group in a good position to compete for larger scale
support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad Impacts: The success of this proposed
research will make significant impacts on nanoscale interconnects as well as on
chemical factory on chip (CFOC) for fabrication of nanomaterials.
Nanoelectronics will benefit from the success of this work on ultrahigh
conductive nanowires (Cu/CNT) and high anti electromigration potentials. These
Cu/CNT nanowires are important as building blocks for assembling advanced
interconnects for future ICs. In addition, these conductive Cu/CNT nanowires can
also be used as advanced electrodes for biological and chemical applications.
Educational impacts will be realized through student training and integration of
the research with education.