* 0813758
* Marine Geoscience Leadership Initiative:  A New Leadership Symposium for Early Career Researchers
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2008,04/30/2010
* Catherine O'Riordan, Consortium for Ocean Leadership, Inc
* Standard Grant
* William I. Ridley
* 04/30/2010
* USD 177,868.00

Ocean Leadership will organize a symposium, the Marine Geoscience Leadership
Initiative (MGLI) intended to draw the science discussion and professional
development elements from those of previously held dissertation symposia, such
as DISCO, PODS, DIALOG, etc. Applicants may be from any subfield of marine
geology and marine geophysics. The symposium participants could be sedimentary
geologists, geochemists, marine geophysicists, microbiologists, marine
seismologists, paleooceanographers, tectonophysicists, volcanologists,
hydrogeologists, or igneous petrologists, A selection panel will be formed and
charged with selecting scientists on the cutting-edge of their fields, involved
in compelling research, and who want to broaden their view of how science
interacts with policy, the media, and the public. The symposium will be limited
to 25 early career researchers, with invitation to participate being a sign of
high achievement. The group will be large enough to have several representatives
from each discipline, yet small enough to enable close relationships and form a
cohort. Special attention will be paid to diversity with efforts included in the
planning and marketing of the program to attract under-represented groups from
the U.S. The symposium will also be open to scientists from outside the U.S.
(approximately 20%).&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
symposium is to increase the effectiveness of early career cientists as they
enter the community of marine geoscientists. Through targeted training in skills
that extend beyond the classroom and laboratory, these early career researchers
can become leaders in their communities and contribute to a geoscience-literate
public. Participants will be inspired to become involved in science planning and
speaking with the media and with policy makers, further expanding the impact of
the symposium.