* 0813641
* Graduate Student Travel Support Program for the 2008 V.M. Goldschmidt Conference in Vancouver, British Columbia, July 13-18, 2008
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2008,01/31/2009
* Maureen Feineman, The Geochemical Society
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 01/31/2009
* USD 30,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;The 2008 V. M.
Goldschmidt Conference in Vancouver, BC, will provide an unparalleled
opportunity for young geochemists to share their research with the scientific
community, learn about cutting edge research taking place around the world, and
interact with senior scientists specializing in their specific realm of
interest. Thematic issues to be addressed at the conference span a broad range
of sub-disciplines in low- and high- temperature geochemistry, including Early
Solar System Geochronology, Planetary Geochemistry, Early Earth, Continental
Crustal Evolution, Mantle Dynamics, Mantle Geochemistry, Experimental Petrology,
Fluids in the Crust and Mantle, Subduction Processes, Magmatic Processes,
Thermochronolgy, and Resource Geochemistry. In addition to oral and poster
presentation sessions, students will have an opportunity to participate in field
trips to outstanding geological destinations in British Columbia including the
Canadian Cascades, Wrangellia Flood Basalts, and Vancouver Island, as well as
short courses on geochemical analytical techniques including Laser Ablation ICP-
MS in the Earth Sciences and Quality Assurance in Analytical Geochemistry. This
proposal puts forth a method for fairly selecting and distributing travel
support funds to the most qualified student applicants, in order to ensure that
30 or more have an opportunity to benefit from all the resources to be assembled
at the conference. In addition to the funding requested from NSF, the
Geochemical Society will contribute $10,000, bringing the total number of
student opportunities to 40.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;International scientific meetings are the primary networking
outlet for researchers of all experience levels. For graduate students, these
meetings are often the first opportunity to interact with members of the
international scientific community. As the premier international geochemical
conference, the Goldschmidt Conference plays a critical role in introducing
young researchers to the world of geochemistry beyond their home institutions.
The lingering effects of such an international learning and networking
experience can be life-changing for a graduate student struggling to gain a
foothold in the scientific community. The proposed student travel support
program will enable the best and brightest senior graduate students from the US
and US Territories, students who might otherwise be unable to attend due to
financial constraints at their home institutions, to benefit from all the
advantages this meeting has to offer at this turning point in their respective
careers. Every effort will be made to encourage women, under-represented
minorities, and people with disabilities to apply for funding, and to ensure, as
much as possible, that the full range of demographic diversity sampled by
today's geosciences graduate student community is represented among the
awardees. It is our sincere hope that encouraging participation by under-
represented groups in international events such as the Goldschmidt Conference
will increase the diversity of the core group of senior geoscientists in the
years to come.