* 0813066
* Collaborative Research: Identifying Environmental Determinants Favorable for the Presence and Transmission of Pathogenic Vibrios
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2008,04/30/2014
* Rita Colwell, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 04/30/2014
* USD 725,000.00

Crystal N. Johnson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal number
EF-0813285&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Identifying
Environmental Determinants Favorable for the Presence and Transmission of
Pathogenic Vibrios"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bacteria classified by scientists as
Vibrio are very common in the ocean and some are capable of causing disease in
humans. The three major causes of disease are Vibrio cholerae, V.
parahaemolyticus and V. vulnificus. Cholera and the so-called non-cholera
diseases or vibrioses are reportable to the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC). All three of these vibrios cause gastroenteritis and wound
infections, and in the U.S. the most common agent of disease is V.
parahaemolyticus whereas the most lethal is V. vulnificus. Very little is known
about the environmental factors that determine the abundance and distribution of
these vibrios in their natural environments where they come in contact with
humans as a result of swimming or eating undercooked seafood. This research will
use the tools of modern molecular biology and chemical oceanography to determine
the environmental drivers of vibrio abundance and distribution. Specifically,
this project will measure vibrio levels in water, bottom sediment, and oysters
in three ecologically and geographically distinct locations ? Chesapeake Bay,
Gulf of Mexico and Puget Sound. These data will be correlated with plankton
densities and with the following environmental determinants: sea surface
temperature, chlorophyll, turbidity, salinity, dissolved organic carbon, primary
productivity, particulate organic carbon and nitrogen, dissolved inorganic
nutrients, and suspended particulate matter. By linking the in situ measurements
with remote sensing imagery, it will be possible to more accurately describe
these relationships when real-time environmental sampling is not possible. In
addition, this project will host an annual Summer Research Institute to train
eight high school students per year in laboratory settings. It is expected that
this research will result in a more accurate description of the environmental
determinants that influence vibrio abundance and
distribution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;