* 0813767
* High Temporal-Resolution Analysis of Electrical Activity in a Severe Hailstorm Scanned Using Phased Array Radar
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Pamela Heinselman, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 06/30/2011
* USD 56,783.00

Unique high-resolution lightning and radar data have been acquired from a
nonsupercell, hail producing summer thunderstorm over the Great Plains. The
Principal Investigator will analyze the relationship between the storm's
lightning activity and its dynamics and evolution; particularly to investigate
the timing of lightning relative to precipitation growth, the lightning response
to the production of large hail, and clues to the reasons why the polarity of
the storm's electrical structure was not inverted. This hailstorm is one of the
first to have been probed by the National Weather Radar Testbed Phased Array
Radar (NWRT PAR), which supports rapid sampling (26 s to complete a sector
volume scan) of the thunderstorm's radar reflectivity signatures. The radar
reflectivity and velocity data reveal unprecedented detail of storm evolution,
far superior to that provided by the traditional Weather Surveillance Radar
1988-Doppler (WSR-88D) Volume Coverage Patterns (VCPs). The Oklahoma Lightning
Mapping Array (LMA) captured high-resolution lightning location data in three
dimensions. The hailstorm evolved rapidly and was ideally placed for observation
by both systems throughout its lifetime. Furthermore, it produced a clear three-
body reflectivity spike that can be used to track the advent and descent of
large hail. Thus, it will be possible to examine relationships of lightning to
other evolving storm properties with unmatched temporal and spatial resolution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The study will examine a number of
questions relating to lightning in storms. In particular, the researchers intend
to examine why the storm had an apparently normal electrical polarity instead of
the abnormal, inverted type that has been observed in other similar storms.
Additionally, the relationship between hail and lightning activity and
electrification will be investigated, as well as the relationship between
significant lightning activity sometimes observed to precede severe weather at
the ground. Other questions relating to the onset of lightning in relation to
the initial storm dynamics are anticipated to be revealed using the higher
temporal-resolution radar data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: It is
anticipated from this analysis that evidence can be found for the credibility of
whether lightning activity can be used in some situations as a precursor to
imminent severe weather. Hypotheses about this will be directly examined and may
have implications for severe weather nowcasting and the issuing of advanced
warnings. More generally, this study will help in developing techniques to
combine three-dimensional lightning and high-temporal resolution radar data for
both research and practical applications.