* 0813743
* Rapid Evolution and the Dynamics of Complex Ecological Communities
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2013
* Stephen Ellner, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 06/30/2013
* USD 539,957.00

Ecological processes and evolution have long been viewed as occurring on
radically different time scales, but studies over the last three decades have
compellingly shown that evolutionary change often occurs at the same time and
pace as ecological dynamics. Species as diverse as algae, annual plants, birds,
fishes, insects, and sheep have quickly undergone evolutionary changes when
their environments change or when they invade a new habitat. This project will
use mathematical and statistical studies of model ecological food webs to
understand how the coupling of ecology and evolution affects the temporal
dynamics of species and their ability to persist in ever-changing environments,
and how loss of genetic variability and the capacity for rapid evolutionary
response may affect the robustness and stability of ecological systems.
Statistical methods based on techniques for estimating smooth functions will be
developed to infer evolutionary dynamics from observational population data such
as ongoing monitoring of harvested or threatened species.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Becoming somebody's dinner, or the factory for replicating
a virus, is very strong natural selection. It is hard to imagine these occurring
without immediate evolutionary consequences, but exactly that thinking is
embedded in the ecological theory now underpinning environmental and natural
resource management. Implications of this research are therefore extremely
broad, including resource management, biodiversity conservation, invasive
species management, and ecosystem responses to environmental change. Broader
impacts also include training graduate students and a postdoctoral researcher,
and using established contacts with environmental agencies to promote
consideration of evolutionary dynamics in conservation planning and response to
changing environments.