* 0813598
* SGER: Fundamentals of Kinetic to Electrical Energy Conversion via Magnetic Fluids
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2009
* John Tichy, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Horst Henning Winter
* 07/31/2009
* USD 50,000.00

CBET-0813598 Borca-Tasciuc

Although there are several ambient energy sources suitable for energy scavenging
applications including solar, thermal and kinetic energy sources, mechanical
vibration energy harvesting is often most appealing as vibrations are
ubiquitous. However, environmental vibrations are in the low frequency range
(<200 Hz). This makes difficult the development of efficient microscale
converters based on the harmonic oscillator approach since the fundamental
frequency of these devices is orders of magnitude higher. The research outlined
in this study focuses on proof-of-concept demonstrations of a novel concept for
kinetic to electrical energy conversion via magnetic fluids (suspensions of
magnetic particles in a liquid). The idea is to employ the motion of a liquid
induced by mechanical vibrations in order to actuate a periodic change in the
net magnetic moment of a collection of magnetic particles suspended in the
liquid. In the proposed mechanism of power harvesting, the liquid motion
periodically rotates the particles along with their magnetic moment and the
collective effect gives rise to an electromotive force in a nearby coil. To
provide the collective effect, alignment of the magnetic moments of the
particles in the fluid is obtained by subjecting the fluid to a uniform magnetic
field. Wireless, autonomous sensor networks could enable continuous, pervasive
monitoring and control in numerous applications such as equipment diagnostic and
control, motor vehicle, plane and structure monitoring, in-vivo, real time
biomedical monitoring, smart clothing as well as intelligence and surveillance
operations. Furthermore, a rapidly emerging application of wireless sensors and
actuators which is of critical importance is home automation networks, where
they play a key role in the management of power consumption. Essential to the
successful implementation of any microsensor network is developing local,
microscale energy sources to provide electrical power to individual
sensors/actuators, since in many cases using batteries is not a viable solution.