* 0813677
* Mathematical models of protein receptor trafficking in dendrites
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Paul Bressloff, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 07/31/2012
* USD 270,000.00

Neurons are amongst the largest and most complex cells in biology. Their
intricate geometry presents many challenges for cell function, in particular
with regards to the efficient trafficking of newly synthesized proteins from the
cell body or soma to distant locations on the axon or dendrites. In healthy
cells, the regulation of protein trafficking within a neuron provides an
important mechanism for modifying the strength of synaptic connections between
neurons, and synaptic plasticity is generally believed to be the cellular
substrate of learning and memory. On the other hand, various types of
dysfunction in protein trafficking appear to be a major contributory factor to a
number of neurodegenerative diseases associated with memory loss including
Alzheimer?s. This project involves the mathematical modeling and analysis of one
important aspect of protein trafficking, namely, the transportation of glutamate
receptors in dendrites. These receptors mediate the majority of excitatory
synaptic transmission in the central nervous system, and changes in the number
of synaptic glutamate receptors contribute to the most studied forms of synaptic
plasticity, namely, long term potentiation and depression (LTP and LTD).
Building upon recent work of the PI, the research will consider a novel
reaction-diffusion model of receptor trafficking that combines diffusion along
the surface membrane of the cell membrane with biochemical processes within
individual synapses. This mathematical model will be used to investigate the
regulatory mechanisms that control the distribution of glutamate receptors along
a dendrite under basal conditions, during synaptic plasticity and during
neurodegeneration. A quantitative understanding of these regulatory mechanisms
could help to identify important molecular and cellular processes underlying
learning and memory in healthy brains, as well as memory-loss in diseased
brains. The work will have a broader impact through its interdisciplinary
training of graduate students and through the University of Utah?s Brain
Institute, which plays a major educational role in promoting awareness and
understanding within the local community.