* 0813000
* NeTS-NBD: A High-Performance Control Plane for Mesh Networks: Theory and Implementation
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/2007,08/31/2010
* Ness Shroff, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Min Song
* 08/31/2010
* USD 553,417.00

Control protocols for wireless mesh networks must carefully deal with the cross-
interactions within the network in both the vertical (i.e., across protocol
layers) and the horizontal direction (i.e., across network nodes). These cross-
interactions offer both an opportunity to use cross-layer/network-wide
optimization to achieve high capacity, and the challenge to maintain scalable,
robust and modular solution architecture. The goal of this project is to develop
a high-performance mesh-network control plane (MCP) that is loosely-coupled,
i.e., only a minimal amount of information is exchanged between layers and
network components to optimize network efficiency, and further, if changes,
errors, or inefficiencies occur at one layer/component, the overall solution
shows graceful degradation. Thus, this new control plane achieves both
efficiency and modularity. The PIs will develop a solid theoretical framework
for such a loosely-coupled MCP across multiple protocol layers, based on which
robust, decentralized, and easy-to-implement algorithms and protocols will be
developed to address challenges in congestion control, admission control, link
scheduling, multi-access, power control and routing. The solution will be
implemented and evaluated on the Mesh@Purdue testbed.

Broader Impact: The results will have a broad impact on wireless industry
sectors by providing new fundamental insights, novel control structures,
distributed algorithms, and practical protocol stacks. Through the Center for
Wireless Systems and Applications (CWSA) at Purdue, the PIs will actively share
their findings with industrial collaborators. Students supported on this project
will have a balanced exposure to a wide variety of theoretical and applied
techniques, which will be valuable in their future careers.