* 0813630
* SGER: Realistic 3-D Microstructure Simulations for Microstrucutral Science: Implications for Microstructure-Based Materials Design
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2008,03/31/2010
* Arun Gokhale, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Ardell
* 03/31/2010
* USD 199,900.00

TECHNICAL: Representation, modeling, and simulations of microstructures at
relevant length scales are of central importance for understanding fundamental
relationships between processing, structure, and properties of materials as well
as for development of microstructure-based materials design and development
methodologies. Unfortunately, a significant roadblock in the development of
predictive quantitative materials science and efficient microstructure-based
materials design methodologies is our inability to mathematically represent and
numerically simulate the geometry of realistic multi-phase multi-scale three-
dimensional (3-D) stochastic material microstructures and incorporate them in
the models and simulations of material properties and performance. Accordingly,
the objective of this research is to develop the required methodology for
simulations of realistic multi-phase multi-scale stochastic three-dimensional
microstructures and to implement them in the computational models of materials
behavior. The methodology will be developed through its applications to (i)
powder metallurgy processed and extruded 3-D microstructures of discontinuously
reinforced Al-alloy (DRA) composites containing spatially clustered SiC
particles and pores of complex shapes, (ii) multi-phase multi-scale
microstructures of cast Mg-alloys that are of current interest for automotive
applications, and (iii) microstructures of solid oxide fuel cell (SOFC) cathodes
containing three phases. The research is of high-risk nature because numerous
conceptual and computational issues need to be successfully addressed to develop
the required methodology. On the other hand, if successful, the modeling and
simulation methodology will be transformative of the way materials scientists
study processing-microstructure-properties relationships, and will lead to a new
paradigm for efficient microstructure-based materials design on the basis of few
experiments and large simulated properties data sets obtained from virtual
experiments. NON-TECHNICAL: The quantitative and predictive microstructure-based
materials design approach would be of high interest not only to the Metals
community, but would also benefit other branches of Materials Science. The
correlations among the simulation parameters and the process conditions can be
used to identify a range of process conditions that is likely to yield the
material with the required microstructure that has a desired combination of
properties. The high-resolution large-volume multi-phase multi-scale simulated
material microstructures generated in this research will be made available to
the materials research community via an FTP site or website. In addition, the
work would support two graduate students.