* 0813783
* SGER: Effects of an extreme flood event on fish populations in Tabasco, Mexico
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2008,07/31/2009
* Ingo Schlupp, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 07/31/2009
* USD 24,667.00

Extreme natural events, like major floods, are very rare and difficult to
document because they are unpredictable. It is clear, however, that they must
have profound effects on many facets of geology, flora and fauna. Large-scale
floods are of obvious importance for aquatic ecosystems. The amount of water and
the force with which it is flowing temporarily will physically destroy or
displace many aquatic organisms. Only if one has relevant data from just before
a flood and is able to collect comparative data right after a flood, can one
take advantage of such a situation. This research builds on a long-term study of
fish communities and population genetics of fishes from several sites in
Tabasco, Mexico that have recently been impacted by the large flood that
occurred in the region in November 2007. The extensive data from before the
flood provides an unparalleled opportunity to examine the impacts on fish
communities and population abundance and genetic structure using modern
morphological and molecular genetic techniques. This study will investigate the
consequences of the flood on species richness and population abundance of fish
at several previously sampled sites and examine population genetic consequences
for Poecilia mexicana.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will contribute to our
understanding of how large-scale weather events impact communities and
populations. The frequency of such weather events are predicted to increase with
global change. In addition, this study will provide international research
experiences for undergraduate students and will foster international
collaboration with Mexican scientists. &lt;br/&gt;