* 0813733
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Conceptualizing Classic Maya Polities: Regional Settlement Patterns in Northwestern Petén, Guatemala
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2008,04/30/2009
* David Freidel, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2009
* USD 14,999.00

Under the direction of Dr. David Freidel, Damien Marken will undertake an
extensive and intensive regional study of the settlement surrounding the ruined
royal city of El Perú-Waka', northwestern Petén, Guatemala. He will do this by
means of the analysis of satellite imagery, full-scale ground survey, and test
excavations in residential compounds. The main site and its ambient settlement
present an excellent opportunity to investigate the long-term changing
relationships between the rulers of a large, regionally strategic, Maya polity
and their local sustaining population. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Settlement pattern
studies play an integral role advancing archaeological conceptions of Classic
period (200-900 AD) Maya sociopolitical organization. Processes of polity
growth/contraction and settlement distribution are quite variable between sites
and sub-regions in the Maya lowlands of southeastern Mexico and Central America.
This research will document the range of settlement groups within the El Perú-
Waka' polity to identify how families of farmers, tradesmen, craftspeople, the
social building blocks of Maya kingdoms, articulate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;El
Perú-Waka' is located in the southern portion of the Laguna del Tigre Nation
Park (PNLDT) in northwestern Guatemala. The PNLDT is the largest national park
in the country and contains the largest protected wetlands of Central America.
The difficult terrain, dense vegetation, and seasonal climate have left large
sections of this area unexplored or lightly surveyed. At present, El Perú-Waka'
has received the greatest archaeological attention in the PNLDT. Initial survey
and reconnaissance of outlying areas indicate that a wide range of settlement
types existed in the vicinity of El Perú-Waka', from isolated mounds to smaller
monumental centers, some with architecture suggesting that they, at times,
functioned as "outposts" of the El Perú-Waka' polity (Marken
2007b).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data from coeval hieroglyphic texts suggest El
Perú-Waka' played an important role in Classic period inter-polity political,
military and commercial alliances. Inscriptions indicate that the royal dynasty
provided key vassals to ambitious military overlords in the antagonistic
relationship between the major regional capitals of Tikal and Calakmul from
500-800 C.E., repeatedly shifting allegiance throughout its history.
Furthermore, geographic, ceramic, and epigraphic evidence suggest that El Perú-
Waka' was situated along two important overland trade routes, one running north-
south, between the site of Calakmul and the Petexbatun region, and one east-
west, between Tikal and the Usumacinta River. The research will study the
interplay between several processes within the polity. These include the
relation between settlement and environment, relations between central and
peripheral settlement, and how these combined to affect and alter the natural
and social landscape.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This archaeological field work
provides local people with jobs and the larger El Perú-Waka' project has
functioned as an important collaborator in ecological and cultural conservation
efforts within the PNLDT. Maintaining a scientific presence within the park
facilitates infrastructural and informational support of conservation and
government personnel stationed in the region. From a cultural heritage
conservation perspective, the proposed research will document the archaeological
resources and evidence of their destruction within an important national park
and natural reserve in Guatemala. By mapping looters' trenches encountered in
survey the extent and intensity of illegal excavation in the PNLDT can be
assessed. This information is highly useful to conservation and security
personnel within the park. Results will be disseminated locally in the form of
improved guidebooks supplied to aspiring tour guides in the community of Paso
Caballos, nationally through formal reports and presentations at the annual
symposium in Guatemala City, and internationally through articles in peer
reviewed journals.