* 0813956
* Special Projects (CNS):   National Center for Women and Information Technology
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2014
* Lucinda Sanders, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 06/30/2014
* USD 7,519,489.00

Inspiring and enabling more women to choose careers in information technology is
a compelling solution for the nation?s innovation, global competitiveness, and
workforce sustainability. Yet realizing the contributions of women depends on
overcoming the complex of enduring social and cultural processes that limit
their participation in computing. Supply-side factors affect the number of girls
and women interested in learning about computing or pursuing an IT career.
Demand-side factors reduce the effectiveness of organizational efforts to
attract and retain women. In addition, the broad influence of cultural
stereotypes about gender and technology suggest to women and those who influence
them that they are less likely than men to have talent or interest in creating
computing technology. These stereotypes lead girls, parents, counselors, and
educators to overlook or reject computing as a career and to ignore the
educational system that reinforces the problem. The National Center for Women
and Information Technology (NCWIT) was formed three years ago to address these
issues in an innovative and systematic way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In its first
three years, NCWIT has established an alliance-based infrastructure with the
goal of uniting all current efforts, accelerating their progress, and extending
their reach. NCWIT now seeks extension funding to drive the utilization of this
national infrastructure. NCWIT comprises more than 100 prominent corporations,
academic institutions, government agencies, and non-profit organizations
cooperating to increase women's participation in information technology (IT).
Four alliances address IT reform along the entire educational and career
pipeline, with programs in K-12 education, college-level outreach and curriculum
reform, corporate recruitment and retention, and entrepreneurial ventures.
Alliance members share their reform efforts, learn about and pilot best
practices, recycle what works and discard what does not, influence policy,
participate in IT image and reform campaigns, and serve as local change
agents.&lt;br/&gt;National, bi-annual NCWIT workshops address topics such as
innovation, diversity, K-12 education, and promising practices focused on
recruiting, retaining, and advancing women in IT. Top-notch materials and
resources give people the tools to raise awareness within their organizations,
reach out to targeted populations, implement and evaluate reforms, and share
their results. NCWIT is also actively collaborating with several other high-
profile organizations to improve the public image of computing using a research-
driven marketing campaign. Extensive, ongoing internal and external evaluation
results in refinement of NCWIT methods and efforts and has resulted in a culture
of introspection and self-analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
uniquely situated for successfully overcoming the complex and lingering
conditions that hinder women?s participation in computing. The NCWIT
infrastructure is in place, alliances are growing, and alliance members are
eager to implement interventions in their local organizations and share results
with the national community. NCWIT has built a robust and highly-respected
effort that has engaged the broad computing community, forming a culture based
on evidence-based practices. NCWIT is the only organization creating a national,
capacity-building infrastructure focused on reform of the entire IT educational
pipeline, as well as the culture of IT organizations.&lt;br/&gt;Increasing
women?s participation in IT has far-reaching national consequences. Not only do
information and computing technologies pervade all aspects of our everyday lives
in an unprecedented way, but all engineering and science discovery and
innovation are now dependent on computational science. Increasing the pool of
qualified computing professionals supports the goals of national initiatives
(e.g., nanotechnology, the Cyberinfrastructure Initiative) and our economic,
security, defense, and health care systems are computing-centered. Increasing
the participation of women not only supports national goals, but improves the
development and design of computing systems, applications, and products through
the integration of diverse ideas while helping to overcome economic disparities
for women.&lt;br/&gt;