* 0813819
* SGER: Test Excavations at Little Delta Dune Site, Central Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Ben Potter, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 08/31/2011
* USD 91,039.00

&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project consists of test
excavations at the Little Delta Dune Site, a Late Pleistocene-Early Holocene
site in central Alaska. The cultural remains consist of stone tools and animal
remains associated with hearth features. At least four prehistoric occupations
are deeply buried in well-stratified contexts, the oldest dating to over 13,300
years ago. The geological context (inactive loess-mantled sand dune) is unique
for a site of this age in Alaska. Preliminary testing indicates well preserved
remains of waterfowl, small mammals, and large mammals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project is designed to evaluate site formation and post-occupation
disturbance, as well as prehistoric technology and subsistence strategies.
Considerable ambiguity exists in our understanding of this time period in the
Western Hemisphere. These test excavations have the potential to contribute
valuable data to inform current debates about Late Pleistocene technological
variability, subsistence economies, and land use strategies in Northwest North
America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide empirical data on early
components within well-stratified and securely dated contexts. The well-
preserved faunal remains and apparent lack of post-occupation disturbance
indicates good potential for evaluating spatial organization. The PIs anticipate
that the site may predate the Clovis Complex sites in lower North America,
considered by many to represent the earliest colonizers of the Americas. These
test excavations will build on initial results by the PI and a geoarchaeology
PhD student in anticipation of a more comprehensive multi-disciplinary research
program for this site and the region. The results of this test excavation will
be of great interest to many researchers across local, regional, and
international scales, and to the general public interested in the first peoples
of Alaska and the Americas.