* 0813666
* Travel Fellowships for the 22nd International Congress of Theoretical and Applied Mechanics; held in Adelaide, Australia, August 24-30, 2008
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2008,09/30/2008
* Lois Peterson Kent, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 09/30/2008
* USD 31,305.00

The 22nd International Congress of Theoretical and Applied Mechanics (ICTAM)
will be held August 24-30, 2008, in Adelaide, Australia. The U.S. National
Committee on Theoretical and Applied Mechanics (USNC/TAM) of the National
Academies proposes a fellowship program to support U.S. scientists and
researchers presenting papers at the congress. Priority will be given to younger
faculty, allowing them to gain from this international experience. A
subcommittee of USNC/TAM will select the fellowship recipients from among
eligible applicants. Every effort will be made to select a scientifically
diverse group of recipients that will represent all areas of theoretical and
applied mechanics. The availability of funds will be advertised nationally
through the committee network ? especially the member societies, on the
committee website, and through e-mail notification. These congresses provide a
forum for researchers from around the world, working in federal and nonfederal
research laboratories, industry, and academia, to present and discuss recent
research findings and to define directions for future research work. The
increased involvement of all researchers, both junior and senior, from the
United States that this grant will enable will strengthen U.S. mechanics
research and help build the future of the discipline. Graduate students and
young researchers are the foundations on which future technological advances and
the technical well being of the nation rest. Their attendance at the Congress,
assisted with funding from this program, will expose them to the latest
developments in theoretical and applied mechanics, enable them to interact with
many of the leaders and pioneers in the field, help strengthen their
understanding of basic principles, implant seeds for the future growth and
development of theoretical and applied mechanics, and enable them to establish a
more personal relationship with their peers. &lt;br/&gt;