* 0813617
* Collaborative Research:  Determination of Nitrous Acid and Nitrogen Dioxide Flux and Concentration Over Forest Canopies Using Quantum Cascade Laser Absorption Spectroscopy
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2012
* Mark Zahniser, Aerodyne Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 06/30/2012
* USD 206,172.00

The production and loss mechanisms, and the magnitude of nitrous acid (HONO)
fluxes to the atmosphere, will be investigated by constructing improved
instrumentation capable of fast response measurements suitable for eddy-
covariance flux, and by deploying the new sensor to field test it by making
detailed measurements of HONO concentrations and fluxes and their covariance
with other nitrogen oxides, oxidants, and environmental conditions. Photolysis
of nitrous acid (HONO) is a major source of OH radicals in the boundary layer
but poorly understood. The PI's will (1) construct and test a 2-channel Quantum-
Cascade laser absorption spectrometer (QCLAS) capable of high frequency
measurement of HONO and NO2, (2) measure HONO, NO, NO2, and NOy at a suburban
site influenced by vehicle emissions, and above a forest canopy at a rural site,
and (3) interpret the concentration and flux observations within a photochemical
model framework, based on GEOS-Chem, to provide new insights into the processes
controlling HONO in the boundary layer.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;These research
activities will enhance existing research infrastructure by providing instrument
development and supporting research partnerships. The instrument addresses a
critical societal need for a reliable fast-response instrument to measure HONO
in continuous operation to assess pollution impacts. The HONO-NO2 QCLAS will
enable participation in a variety of future field measurement campaigns to
examine HONO production and loss. This work will directly support a graduate-
student thesis project and will serve as a research topic for two undergraduate
students and a high school teacher at the Harvard Forest LTER as part of
Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program and Research Experience for
Teachers (RET) summer programs.