* 0813918
* Student Support for Electron Backscattered Diffraction Topical Conference
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2008,03/31/2009
* Laurel Goodwin, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 03/31/2009
* USD 5,000.00

0813918&lt;br/&gt;Goodwin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will partially support
a conference focused on Electron Backscattered Diffraction (EBSD) planned for
May 20-22, 2008, at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, under the sponsorship
of the Microbeam Analysis Society. EBSD is an important technique that utilizes
the diffraction of high-energy electrons to determine the orientations of
crystals in natural and synthetic materials. Diffraction patterns, which are
collected with a sensitive camera, can be indexed and combined with a variety of
imaging techniques to analyze spatial variations in the texture of single phase
and polyphase materials. The resulting data can yield information about both
crystal structure and orientation. This approach has major applications in both
material science and geology related to understanding everything from
crystallization processes to microstructures that record material histories and
affect material properties (such as strength and
conductivity).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A meeting of this type has never been held
in the U.S., though it occurs annually in Europe, bringing practitioners (and
newcomers) together from a variety of fields to exchange information about, and
experiences with, EBSD. The first day of our conference will be an all-day
tutorial aimed at beginners (students and others) who wish to get up to speed
with this technique. The next two days will consist of invited and contributed
talks, with a goal being significant interaction among the participants. Poster
sessions will be organized and highlighted during the session, allowing
additional involvement, particularly by students and post-doctoral researchers.
NSF funds will be used to subsidize student participation in the
conference.&lt;br/&gt;