* 0813494
* International travel support for US researchers to attend '60 Miles,' London, July 2008
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2008,03/31/2009
* Sandor Kovacs, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Bruce E. Sagan
* 03/31/2009
* USD 25,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference 60 Miles brings together the
highest caliber speakers in an unusual density and broadness. It is arguably the
ultimate algebraic geometry event of 2008.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Miles Reid has
been one of the main original architects of the revolutionary Minimal Model
Program (MMP) starting in the 1980s and continuing today. This conference
celebrates his 60th birthday, but beyond that occasion, perhaps more
importantly, it brings together the best of the best in higher dimensional
algebraic geometry. The fact that this conference is related to the birthday of
one of the leaders of the field is assurance that the list of speakers and
participants is truly spectacular.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MMP was developed as
a tool in the classification of algebraic varieties (geometric objects defined
by algebraic equations). The theory for curves was already known to Riemann and
his contemporaries and for surfaces the classical Italian school. The surface
theory was completed by Kodaira in the 1960s. Due to results discovered in the
1970s, it was believed that a similar theory was not possible in dimensions
higher than two. That view was altered by the work of Miles Reid and lead to
groundbreaking results by Reid and Mori as well as by Kawamata, Kollar and
Shokurov. For his contribution to the theory, Mori received the Fields Medal in
1990 reflecting on the importance the theory plays in algebraic
geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MMP was completed for 3-folds in the 1980s
and most of it was developed in arbitrary dimension at that time, leaving one
central problem open for a quarter of a century. Recently Hacon and McKernan
achieved an extraordinary breakthrough on that open problem which created a buzz
and rekindled interest in the development of the theory (interest in its
applicationa never faded).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference features 12 world
famous speakers including most of the major figures in MMP, 2 Field Medalists at
least 9 ICM speakers. The present grant's main purpose is to make it possible
for junior researchers, including some graduate students to participate in this
unique event.&lt;br/&gt;