* 0813901
* Multiscale numerical modeling of multiphysics systems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Ivan Yotov, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2011
* USD 264,546.00

This project focuses on multiscale and stochastic numerical
methods&lt;br/&gt;for complex multiphysics problems. A parallel computational
framework&lt;br/&gt;for modeling various multiscale applications will be
developed. The&lt;br/&gt;models of interest will be based on coupling the Stokes
or the&lt;br/&gt;Navier-Stokes equations with single phase or multiphase Darcy
flow.&lt;br/&gt;The flow system will be coupled with reactive transport. The
research&lt;br/&gt;approach is based on a multiblock domain decomposition
methodology.&lt;br/&gt;The simulation domain is a union of subdomains (blocks).
Each block&lt;br/&gt;is associated with a physical, mathematical, and
numerical&lt;br/&gt;model. Physically meaningful interface conditions are
imposed on the&lt;br/&gt;discrete level via mortar finite elements. The
formulation provides&lt;br/&gt;great flexibility for multiphysics and
multinumerics&lt;br/&gt;couplings. Furthermore, this domain decomposition
approach, combined&lt;br/&gt;with coarse scale mortar elements, provides a
multiscale approximation&lt;br/&gt;and an efficient way to solve the coarse grid
problem in parallel.&lt;br/&gt;Uncertainty in the physical characteristics is
modeled via stochastic&lt;br/&gt;partial differential equations. Approximation
in probability space is&lt;br/&gt;achieved using stochastic finite element and
collocation methods. The&lt;br/&gt;main components of the research will be 1)
development of multiscale&lt;br/&gt;mathematical models, identifying appropriate
interface conditions, and&lt;br/&gt;analysis of the well-posedness of the
models; 2) novel discretization&lt;br/&gt;techniques for stochastic partial
differential equations; 3) a&lt;br/&gt;posteriori error estimates and adaptive
mesh refinement algorithms in&lt;br/&gt;physical and stochastic space; and (4)
efficient parallel domain&lt;br/&gt;decomposition solvers and
preconditioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research methodology can be applied
for the design, analysis, and&lt;br/&gt;implementation of computational methods
for a large class of problems&lt;br/&gt;arising in science and engineering
applications. The project will&lt;br/&gt;emphasize accurate, robust, and
efficient numerical methods for&lt;br/&gt;problems exhibiting behavior on a wide
range of scales in space and&lt;br/&gt;time. The research also aims to quantify
uncertainty in the prediction&lt;br/&gt;due to to uncertainty in the input
parameters through stochastic&lt;br/&gt;modeling. The research results will be
applied to two main&lt;br/&gt;application areas: couplings of surface water with
groundwater flows&lt;br/&gt;and modeling complex multiscale processes occurring
in the&lt;br/&gt;inflammatory response in the human body. Computer modeling
of&lt;br/&gt;subsurface and surface flow and transport has a major economic
impact&lt;br/&gt;on environmental and energy industries. Due to the proximity
of&lt;br/&gt;groundwater and surface water systems, contamination of rivers,
lakes,&lt;br/&gt;and wetlands can lead to contamination of aquifers
and&lt;br/&gt;vice-versa. Simulating these complex interactions is a
major&lt;br/&gt;computational challenge. Acute inflammation, which occurs in
response&lt;br/&gt;to trauma or infection, may lead to a systemic inflammation
or&lt;br/&gt;sepsis. Sepsis frequently leads to organ failure and death (with
more&lt;br/&gt;that 500,000 fatal cases per year in the U.S.). Effective
treatments&lt;br/&gt;are lacking, due to the complexity of the process.
Mathematical and&lt;br/&gt;computer modeling is becoming a more common tool in
the effort to gain&lt;br/&gt;insight of the dynamics and spatial characteristics
of the&lt;br/&gt;inflammatory process.&lt;br/&gt;