* 0813747
* Co-registered Vibrometry and Imaging: A Combined Synthetic-Aperture Radar and Fractional-Fourier Transform Approach [29U08UNMhaya]
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Walter Gerstle, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2012
* USD 1,006,959.00

The objective of this project is to introduce a revolutionary approach for
synthetic-aperture-radar (SAR) imaging that uniquely combines co-registered
vibration sensing with high-resolution imaging. The SAR platform is a natural
fit to the problem because (1) it has already been proven as a highly effective
imaging technology and (2) it is inherently capable of sensing vibration-induced
Doppler shifts in the electromagnetic returns from objects. A powerful signal-
processing tool, called the fractional Fourier transform (FRFT), is exploited in
this project as a framework to design a novel multi-pulse, multi-chirp SAR
imaging strategy that yields a spatial map of vibration frequencies
(spectrograms) superimposed on high-resolution SAR imagery. New subspace-based
estimation algorithms will be developed that employ the FRFT framework to obtain
high-resolution chirp-rate and center-frequency estimates that are statistically
consistent and asymptotically optimal; these estimates translate, in turn, into
estimates of the instantaneous velocity of the vibrating objects that are
illuminated by a SAR imaging system. A simple laboratory platform to demonstrate
the proposed sensing concept will be developed. The inverse problem of
identifying structures based upon signatures generated by the proposed approach
will also be studied.

During this project, one undergraduate student will be nominated to receive the
NCMR Undergraduate Scholarship and effort will be made through our collaboration
with the Sandia National Laboratories to create internship opportunities for our
students. Research results will be integrated into two current courses at the
University of New Mexico: a graduate-level Digital Signal Processing course and
a senior-level elective course titled Radar Signal Processing.