* 0813671
* Equipment Replacement Under Continuous and Discontinuous Technological Change
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2007,07/31/2010
* Joseph Hartman, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Russell Barton
* 07/31/2010
* USD 187,780.00

This grant provides funding for research into the modeling and solution of
equipment replacement problems that incorporate both continuous and
discontinuous technological change. Continuous technological change refers to
the gradual improvement in assets available over time for replacement. These
generally coincide with the manufacturer periodically releasing new models,
which are more efficient than previous models. Discontinuous technological
change refers to breakthroughs in technology, often accompanied by jumps in
productivity when compared to previous models. We assume breakthroughs define a
new vintage of asset that gradually improves in subsequent model releases of the
same vintage. In either case, the economic impact of the technology may not be
known until it arrives. Stochastic dynamic programming is will be used to solve
this problem under various scenarios of technological, capital budgeting
constraints, and multiple suppliers. Due to the large state space of the system,
approximation techniques will be used to allow for the solution of longer
horizon problems, ensuring (near) optimal time zero decisions.

The expected benefits of this work lie in the ability to determine optimal or
near optimal policies for consumers of technological assets, such as hospitals.
To verify these insights, Lehigh Valley Hospital has offered data on over 24,000
pieces of medical equipment. This information will allow for the application of
the developed models. Extensions of this work will more closely examine how to
influence consumers' choices concerning technological change. For example,
manufacturers may offer maintenance contracts or specialized warranties in order
to entice purchases while sharing the risk of using newer technologies and
governments may offer incentives for manufacturers to adopt newer technologies
with greater investment. These policies can be examined by analyzing the optimal
replacement policies under differing conditions. The benefits of these analyses
will be in designing methods (policies and contracts) that foster capital
investment and technological innovation.