* 0813825
* Mathematical and computational modeling of fluid-structure-control interactions with multidisciplinary applications in science and engineering
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2007,06/30/2010
* Padmanabhan Seshaiyer, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2010
* USD 108,152.00

The efficient solution of modeling the complex nonlinear interaction of a fluid
with a structure has remained a challenging problem in computational
mathematics. Such applications often involve complex dynamic interactions of
multiple physical processes which present a significant challenge, both in
representing the multiphysics involved and in handling the resulting coupled
behavior. If the desire to control and design the system is added to the
picture, then the complexity increases even further. The focus of the proposed
research will therefore be to sytematically develop non-conforming finite
element methods tuned to high performance computing applied to several
computatationally challenging multidisciplinary applications involving fluid-
strucuture-control interaction. The thrust will be to mathematically and
computationally investigate the stability, convergence and control of a variety
of non-conforming finite element techniques and use this information to develop
an efficient and general solution methodology for fluid-structure-control
applications. More specifically, the proposed research will explore the
robustness of this methodology by investigating (a) computational stability and
convergence of fully-coupled algorithms; (b) computational stability and
convergence for iterative coupling and; (c) theoretical and computational
investigation for shape, boundary and distributed control applications. The
performance of the compuational algorithms developed as a part of this research
will be applied to two realistic fluid-structure applications: (a) Blood flow in
a parent-artery-aneurysm multistructure and (b) Computational aeroelasticity of
micro-air-vehicles.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research aims to develop
optimal computational algorithms for fluid-stucture-control interaction problems
arising in science and engineering applications. The proposed work is highly
multidisciplinary and the algorithms developed as a part of this research can be
quickly adopted to a wide range of engineering and medical applications. For
instance, this research may be used to better understand the rupture of
aneurysms which are responsible for significant morbidity and mortality in the
country. This work may also be used to develop enhanced and efficient design of
micro air vehicles with flexible aircraft wings, that may be used for a variety
of missions such as reconnaissance and surveillance, targeting, tagging, bio-
chemical sensing and many more. Integrated with the research component is also
an educational plan that will encourage interdisciplinary research, that will
involve the pedagogical implications of the proposed research in curriculum
development and that will contribute to the scientific development of graduate
students, undergraduate students, high school students and teachers. More
specifically, the proposed research will be used to develop learning modules
that will be used to train students and teachers on the efficient use of
compuatational mathematics to solve multidisciplinary problems in science and
engineering. The research will also greatly encourage women and underrepresented
minorities to pursue careers in computational mathematics, especially in
interdisciplinary areas that bridge the biological, mathematical, and
compuational sciences.&lt;br/&gt;