* 0813597
* XV Brazilian School of Differential Geometry, July 2008, Fortaleza, Brazil
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Wolfgang Ziller, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Maria H. Noronha
* 06/30/2009
* USD 35,738.00

This award will supply travel from the US to Fortaleza for approximately 20-25
mathematicians (with emphasis on graduate students and recent Ph.D.'s), to
attend the XV Brazilian School of Differential Geometry, which will take place
in Fortaleza, Brazil, July 14 to July 18, 2008. It is organized jointly by the
Federal University of Ceara (UFC) and the Institute of Pure and Applied
Mathematics (IMPA). The XV Brazilian School of Differential Geometry is
dedicated to the 80th birthday of Manfredo do Carmo, the grandfather of
differential geometry in Brazil, who has established a flourishing group of
geometers all over the country. The School of Differential Geometry is a major
event in Brazil which takes place every two years in various parts of the
country, most recently in Niteroi, Goiania Sao Paulo, and Salvador. Its purpose
is to describe recent developments in Differential Geometry through research
talks and lecture series by national and international experts. Two advanced
surveys this year will be by Ko Honda on "Contact geometry" and by Frank Pacard
on "Nonlinear PDE methods in geometry".

The geometry school has a tradition of giving lecture series that take place at
several different levels. Some are for advanced undergraduates and some for
graduate students in order to encourage them to go into Differential Geometry.
Others are at a more advanced level geared towards research mathematicians and
advanced graduate students, giving a survey of recent subjects of particular
interest. This year there are surveys on contact geometry and on geometric
analysis. In addition there are research talks by Brazilian and international
experts. The conference will thus provide a rich environment in which US
graduate students and recent Ph.D.'s can learn about new developments in
geometry, There is a tradition of interaction between mathematicians in the US
and those in Brazil. A second goal of this grant is to foster new interactions
between younger mathematicians and their Brazilian counter parts. Participation
by women and minorities will be actively sought and encouraged.





