* 0813766
* Haldane's rule in plants? A test using Silene species both with and without sex chromosomes
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Lynda Delph, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 08/31/2013
* USD 371,291.00

Haldane's rule (HR) is the most universal observation in speciation research on
animals, wherein hybridization between species leads to lower viability or
fertility in either males with XY sex chromosomes or females with ZW sex
chromosomes. Since its inception, an animal-centric perspective has dominated
work on HR. This study will test for HR and its genetic basis using five
flowering plant species in the genus Silene. Three experiments involving
between-species crosses, together with quantitative-genetic analyses, will allow
documentation of (1) whether HR occurs in plants for either viability or
fertility, (2) the extent to which the autosomes, X and Y chromosomes,
cytoplasmic genetic elements, and their interactions are involved in HR, and (3)
whether genes controlling male reproductive traits evolve relatively fast and
contribute to reduced male fertility. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this
study will address fundamental aspects of how reproductive isolation leads to
speciation and will therefore be of general interest to most biologists. By
working with plants with relatively young sex chromosomes, the research will
address the important question of the generality of HR and the timing of the
reproductive incompatibilities that lead to HR. The work will allow the training
of numerous undergraduate and graduate students in speciation research and
evolutionary genetics.