* 0813896
* Collaborative Research:    Optimization of Intensity Modulated Radiation Therapy with Time Varying Delivery Plans and Fraction Constraints
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2007,08/31/2010
* Ronald Rardin, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Russell Barton
* 08/31/2010
* USD 121,213.00

Radiation therapy is prescribed for over half of cancer cases. Modern intensity
modulated radiotherapy (IMRT) uses multiple non-homogeneous beams to tailor the
dose distribution delivered over 30-60 daily sessions called fractions.
Fractionation exploits relative differences in the sensitivities of tumor and
normal tissues to the dose per session. This research extends IMRT planning
methods which optimize only over constraints on dose accumulated over the entire
treatment, to include also desired limits on dose per fraction. The challenge is
to do this in a computationally efficient way given planning over one entire
period already taxes modern optimization tools. The strategy is to divide
treatment into a series of epochs of identical fractions. Methods will either
compute all plans assuming static conditions or step through epochs with a
rolling horizon that can incorporate changing circumstances and beam angle
sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each one percent rise in tumor dose can improve local
control by about 1.5 percent, potentially offering meaningful gains to thousands
of patients if organ tolerance limits can be satisfied. An obstacle is
satisfying rules on total dose and dose per fraction simultaneously. Substantial
dose shortfalls in tumor or violations of fraction size limits can appear if
plans are optimized with respect only to cumulative dose and then evenly divided
into daily sessions. Time varying solutions are required to meet fractionation
constraints and respond to changing conditions over the treatment course.
Success with time-varying optimization opens the door to emerging methods of
image guided radiotherapy recording changes in tissue geometry throughout the
treatment course.