* 0813897
* Using Combined-Evidence Phylogenetics to Inform a Revised Classification of Spittlebugs (Insecta: Hemiptera: Cercopoidea)
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/2007,08/31/2011
* Jason Cryan, New York State Education Department
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Lydeard
* 08/31/2011
* USD 328,616.00

The insect superfamily Cercopoidea (commonly called spittlebugs) is a group of
plant-feeding insects found ubiquitously in most terrestrial ecosystems.
Worldwide, spittlebugs inflict heavy economic damage on grass crops such as
sugar cane, corn, rice, and improved pasture grasses, causing up to 70%
reduction in agricultural yields in infested areas. Despite this importance, the
evolutionary history of this insect group is virtually unknown. This project
represents a large-scale investigation into the evolution of spittlebugs using
both traditional comparative morphological methods and modern DNA sequencing
technology. The results of this project will include a reconstruction of
evolutionary relationships among the major lineages of spittlebugs,
interpretations of observed patterns of worldwide spittlebug geographical
distribution and hostplant affiliations, and improved, internet-accessible tools
for spittlebug identification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The understanding of
spittlebug evolution generated by this research will be of particular importance
to the control of several known crop pests, as well as for the control of future
outbreaks of novel spittlebug pests. This work will provide a framework for
integrating the considerable number of scientific studies that have been
conducted on the biology and ecology of individual spittlebug species. The
identification tools to be developed will be of considerable value to scientists
studying these insects, as well as workers in agriculture environments affected
by these insects. Additionally, the cutting-edge evolutionary analyses carried
out through this research will serve as a model for similar studies on other
plant and animal groups. This project will provide training for several students
at virtually all academic levels, adding to the next generation of experts in
systematic entomology.&lt;br/&gt;