* 0813481
* Enhancing STEM Student Learning through Faculty Development:  Workshops for New Physics and Astronomy Faculty
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2008,04/30/2015
* Theodore Hodapp, American Association of Physics Teachers
* Continuing Grant
* Joyce B. Evans
* 04/30/2015
* USD 1,003,967.00

The goals of the workshop are to: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Reach a large
fraction of the physics and astronomy faculty in tenure-track positions prior to
their receiving tenure; &lt;br/&gt;2. Help participants develop knowledge about
recent developments in physics and astronomy pedagogy and the assessment of
changes in pedagogy; and &lt;br/&gt;3. Work with participants to integrate
workshop ideas and materials into their classrooms in a way that has a positive
impact on their students' learning, their departments and their own professional
development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Physics and astronomy
faculty who enter the professorate directly from graduate school or from a
postdoctoral position typically have not had experience with the type of
teaching that physics and astronomy education research (PER and AER) has shown
to be effective. The New Physics and Astronomy Faculty Workshops, with a
combination of plenary sessions and small breakout groups run by national
leaders in physics education, introduce participants to pedagogical methods that
research has found to be effective in actively engaging students in learning.
Most of these pedagogical methods have been developed with NSF funding, and the
workshop provides an important means of disseminating these effective teaching
strategies to a large fraction of new tenure-track physics and astronomy
faculty. Further, the workshop introduces new physics and astronomy faculty to
the scholarship of teaching and to methods of assessing and evaluating student
learning within a framework of general professional development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The five-year project expects to engage
approximately 600 new physics and astronomy faculty members, or 40-50% of all
new faculty, in about 60% of physics and astronomy departments. External
evaluation of the project carried out in 2006-2007 shows that the New Faculty
Workshop has had a positive impact on the workshop participants' students, the
students' learning, and their departments. A number of the workshop participants
from the early years of the project have served as chairs of their departments,
and their experience with the New Faculty Workshop has positively influenced the
courses taught in their departments and changed departmental views on what
constitutes effective teaching. In addition, the New Physics and Astronomy
Faculty Workshops are being used as models for developing similar programs by
other scientific societies. All of these activities taken collectively can play
a transformative role in enhancing undergraduate STEM education.