* 0813748
* Women In Theory Workshop
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2009
* Boaz Barak, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Beigel
* 04/30/2009
* USD 10,000.00

The purpose of the workshop is two fold: first to deliver an
invigorating&lt;br/&gt;educational program and second is to provide an
outstanding&lt;br/&gt;opportunity to bring together women students from
different departments,&lt;br/&gt;across the country (and possibly
internationally), so as to foster a&lt;br/&gt;sense of kinship and camaraderie.
And to provide access to the role&lt;br/&gt;models in this area by having senior
and junior faculty present.&lt;br/&gt;Further enhancing this initial
relationship with a long time mentoring&lt;br/&gt;program which will be
organized by Anne Condon. Our long term goal is&lt;br/&gt;that these efforts
will help widen the pipeline of women doing theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While
there are groups for "Women in Computer Science" and "Women
in&lt;br/&gt;Engineering" at both the university and national level, our
objective in&lt;br/&gt;creating a "Women in Theory" workshop is to enable
meaningful technical&lt;br/&gt;interactions among the participants. There will
be significant overlap&lt;br/&gt;in research interests in this group to
facilitate a technical program&lt;br/&gt;that is interesting to
everyone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;List of confirmed technical
speakers:&lt;br/&gt;Dorit Aharonov, Hebrew University, Shuchi Chawla, University
of Wisconsin,&lt;br/&gt;Madison, Julia Chuzhoy, TTI,&lt;br/&gt;Irit Dinur,
Weizmann Institute, Cynthia Dwork, Microsoft Research,
Joan&lt;br/&gt;Feigenbaum, Yale,&lt;br/&gt;Shafi Goldwasser, MIT and Weizmann
Institute, Tal Malkin, Columbia&lt;br/&gt;University, Eva Tardos,
Cornell,&lt;br/&gt;Lisa Zhang, Bell-Labs&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will also have
talks by the participating students and sessions&lt;br/&gt;devoted to
discussions on issues that are especially relevant to&lt;br/&gt;female
scientists such as finding a job and salary
negotiations,&lt;br/&gt;communicating with your advisor, and work-life balance,
etc.&lt;br/&gt;