* 0813930
* Further Studies on the Meteorology of Western Equatorial Africa
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Sharon Nicholson, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 07/31/2012
* USD 549,417.00

The overall goal of this project is to further our understanding of the factors
that govern rainfall and its interannual variability in western equatorial
Africa. The work will focus on the mean climate and general circulation in the
region, the African Easterly Jet of the Southern Hemisphere, wave activity,
mesoscale convective systems, and interannual variability. It will be primarily
observational. A pervasive theme is the role of topography. The role of El Niño-
Southern Oscillation (ENSO) and the Atlantic will also be emphasized as possible
factors in interannual variability. The significance of this work is that it
will help to fill in two major gaps in our understanding of African meteorology.
One is the knowledge gap concerning its equatorial sector. The other gap is the
"black box" of atmospheric circulation that transmits the influence of sea
surface temperatures (SSTs) to African rainfall variability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will have many broader impacts. The knowledge
generated will provide a basis for studying equatorial processes on a global
basis. The results of this study can potentially benefit society via their
application to understanding/forecasting of droughts and floods in Africa. Also,
this region is the source of water for many semi-arid regions. A better
understanding of regional meteorology will have implications for water supply in
these adjacent regions. In addition, the project will also have educational
impacts on under-represented groups.