* 0813750
* Analog-to-Digital Conversion:  Mathematics and Algorithms
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Yang Wang, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2011
* USD 190,000.00

The advent of computer and digital information technologies and there
development have greatly changed the world we live in. Today digital
technologies are everywhere in our lives. A key step that makes all those
technologies possible is to convert analog data into digital ones, a process
known analog-to-digital conversion, or A/D conversion. With demand for higher
precision and more cutting-edge technologies, the mathematics of A/D conversion
algorithms plays a key role in this quest. The research proposed in this
proposal focuses mainly on the mathematics and algorithms of A/D conversion.
Given that analog devices are to different degrees imprecise by nature,
robustness is extremely important if high precision is desired. The proposal
will focus on robust A/D conversion algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal the PI will address two of the main
sources of imprecisions: imprecise quantizations and imprecise multiplications.
The proposed encoders are the first encoders to be completely robust against
quantizer and multiplier imprecisions. The PI proposes to study both the
algorithms and the mathematical questions that arise from the study. The PI also
studies ways the encoders can be extended and refined, along with many related
and often challenging mathematical problems. The core of this project is a novel
class of analog-to-digital conversion algorithms. These algorithms have the
advantage that they are robust against quantization errors (imprecisions) and
multiplication imprecisions. The novelty of these A/D algorithms comes from the
use of Golden Ratio based expansions of real numbers related to the Fibonacci
numbers. More general algorithms involve a class of algebraic integers and
matrix encoders. The PI and his collaborators have already built a circuit of an
A/D converter based on one of our algorithms, which has yielded outstanding
result. A main objective of this proposal is to study these algorithms in
greater depth, particularly concerning the stability and robustness of these
algorithms. Equally important is that the study of these A/D algorithms has
raised a number of interesting and challenging mathematical questions. Graduate
students will be involved in the project. In addition, the proposed research
lends naturally to collaborations between mathematicians and the engineering
community.