* 0813581
* SGER: Establishing the Parthenogentic "Marmorkrebs" Crayfish as a Model Organism in North America
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2008,03/31/2009
* Zen Faulkes, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* James Deshler
* 03/31/2009
* USD 22,332.00

In the late 1990s, a remarkable animal was discovered in the aquaria of German
fish hobbyists: a type of crayfish that could generate eggs even if they had
grown up in isolation from other crayfish. This crayfish was nicknamed
"Marmorkrebs" in German, which roughly translates as "marbled crab", the species
has yet to be given a formal scientific name. Marmorkrebs are unique among
crayfish, lobsters, shrimp, and crabs: every individual is female and can
reproduce without sex. Marmorkrebs are closely related to North American
crayfish, but no Marmorkrebs have been found in the wild in North America, so
the source of these crayfish remains a mystery. Marmorkrebs have since been
introduced into the waters of Europe and Madagascar. Because Marmorkrebs
reproduce rapidly (every individual can generate eggs), they could be a serious
pest species whose introduction could threaten native species. In addition to
their mysterious origin and potential to be an ecological threat, Marmorkrebs
are an excellent new model organism for lab research. Marmorkrebs are easy to
care for and reproduce at high rates. More importantly, because they reproduce
without sex, daughters are genetically identical to their mothers. Thus, any
genetic change made to a mother (e.g., mutation, transgenic techniques) will be
passed along faithfully to the daughters, which would allow stable strains to be
established for specific types of research. That all individuals are genetically
identical is also highly desirable, as it removes genetic variation as a factor
that has to be accounted for in experiments. For example, the white lab rats
that many people know are white because they have been inbred in an attempt to
make them as similar as possible. Marmorkrebs are highly promising for
laboratory studies of development, gene expression, neurobiology, and ecological
physiology. This project will help introduce Marmorkrebs to North American
researchers.