* 0813831
* Symposium on Computation and Journalism
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2008,02/28/2013
* Irfan Essa, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 02/28/2013
* USD 20,000.00

ABSTRACT

Title: Symposium on Journalism and Computation

PI: Irfan Essa

Institution: Georgia Institute of Technology

Symposium on Computation + Journalism

Fundamentally, journalism is aimed at collecting news information and
disseminating that information with a layer of contextualization and
understanding provided by journalists. Recent advances in computational
technology are rapidly affecting how news information is gathered, reported and
distributed. Furthermore, new avenues for aggregating, visualizing, summarizing,
consuming, and collaborating on news are increasingly becoming popular and
challenging traditional practices of Journalism. Following the success of text
search, image and video search questions are now poised to make a bigger impact
to journalism and other related fields. Computation and Journalism individually
share a deep routed interest in Information, and the value it provides to
society. The concept of Information Quality, the measure of the value that the
information provides to the user of that information, brings these two
disciplines together. In computing and information sciences, information quality
is used to describe the degree of excellence in communicating knowledge or
intelligence and is composed of different facets such as accuracy, reliability,
comprehensiveness, currency, and validity. In journalism, where the conveyance
of quality information is paramount, principles such as accuracy, fairness,
thoroughness, and transparency guide journalists in communicating quality
information.

Traditionally, journalism has also entailed an ethos of working on the side of
the citizenry to provide them with quality information they need to make
informed decisions in the process of their daily lives. However, the plethora of
un-vetted blogs, podcasts, videos and other online media, generated by users or
by corporations with subjective biases have led to significant compromise in
information quality. Collaborative knowledge generation (wikipedia), and citizen
journalism, are showing new ways of how information and (global) news can be
shared. However, as the Web and the Internet continue to grow and as computing
technologies pervade through the planet, a thorough study of the process of
journalism and the deep computational aspects of such processes need to be
undertaken.

To this end, the PI's research group at Georgia Institute of Technology is
interested in understanding how computational advances impact the field of
journalism. The long term aim is to make novel contributions by developing
computational technologies to better support the goals of journalism. To launch
this effort, they are organizing a Symposium on Computation + Journalism at GA
Tech, in Atlanta, GA, February 22-23, 2008. The goal of this symposium is to
bring together stakeholder from the all aspects of Journalism, Media, and
Computation. Participants in panels, presentations and breakout groups will
discuss these issues and create a roadmap towards answering these questions that
bring together computation and journalism.