* 0813650
* Corneal Topography for Biometry: A Unique Method for Authenticating Individuals [50U08UAschw]
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Jim Schwiegerling, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2012
* USD 453,500.00

Preliminary studies indicate that corneal shape is a highly unique identifier
that is well suited for biometry. In this application, the team will develop on
this foundation to a more sophisticated implementation of the technology. This
will illustrate its scalability and broad applications. Specifically, this
application transitions the corneal geometry comparison algorithms from a simple
correlation of shapes to a sophisticated description of unique and readily
comparable corneal features. This new technique will allow a compact description
of corneal shape, allowing scalable comparisons to large databases of
individuals. Furthermore, this application proposes to develop an automated
corneal topography measurement system, thus removing the requirement of a
trained operator. The new device will be validated against a commercial
operator-driven topographer. Finally, the possibility of extending the corneal
biometry concept to long-range applications is explored. The culmination of
these efforts will demonstrate a flexible biometric system that can be deployed
in a variety of security environments. The impact of the proposed technology is
an expansion of available technologies for authenticating individuals. All
biometric measurement systems have conditions under which they cannot reliably
measure an individual. Expanding the available technologies for performing
biometry allows security personnel to tailor the technology to the specific
environment and application.