* 0813562
* 2008 International Symposium on Adaptive Motion of Animals and Machines, June 1-6, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland Ohio
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2008,03/31/2009
* Hillel Chiel, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Kirk
* 03/31/2009
* USD 12,000.00

Animals as simple as cockroaches and slugs and as complex as humans all possess
similar ways to control how they walk, crawl, swim or fly through earth's many
complex environments. Engineers have turned to these natural systems for
inspiration in developing robots, hoping to attain the same ease of movement and
ability to adapt to any environment on earth (or off of it). The goals of animal
motion studies and robotics are clearly complementary and benefit greatly from
extended interaction. Although many meetings have limited sessions dedicated to
such discussions, the International Symposium on Adaptive Motion in Animals and
Machines (AMAM) is uniquely dedicated to intense week long interaction among
engineers and biologists. The funds from this proposal will be used to bring
young U.S. scientists and engineers (especially female and underrepresented
minorities) to AMAM 2008 this June 1-6 at Case Western Reserve University in
Cleveland, Ohio. Funds will also be used to support web-based distribution of
the meeting to members of the international community and educators who cannot
attend the meeting in person. The potential impacts of this meeting include: 1)
use of robots as hardware models to promote a greater understanding of how
animals (including humans) control their movement through their complex worlds,
2) creation of new walking, crawling, swimming and flying robots that more
closely capture properties of animals, and 3) introduction of young developing
scientists and engineers to an area of research that relies heavily on
collaboration of people with many different skills from many different areas for
success. The ultimate goal of this work is to provide highly functional robotic
devices to serve human needs, such as search and rescue, environmental
monitoring, surveying and many others, as well as greater understanding of
animal movement.&lt;br/&gt;