* 0813744
* Young Investigator Symposium at the Annual Steroid Workshop,in Key Largo, FL,  April 8-12, 2008
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2008,03/31/2011
* Susan Fahrbach, Wake Forest University
* Continuing grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 03/31/2011
* USD 27,405.00

This award provides funding for five talented young scientists to present their
original research in the Young Investigator Symposium at the annual Workshop on
Steroid Hormones and Brain Function in 2008 and 2009. The goals of this workshop
are to provide an informal setting for the exchange of new data on steroid
hormone action in the nervous system, to encourage the development of research
collaborations, and to provide a forum for outstanding young
neuroendocrinologists. Five competitively chosen senior graduate students or
postdoctoral fellows are invited not only to present their research in the Young
Investigator Symposium, but also receive financial support to attend the entire
workshop. This award therefore nurtures the next generation of
neuroendocrinologists by helping them build a substantial professional network
of contacts as they begin their transition to independent researchers. The 2008
awards reflect the breadth of contemporary basic and especially comparative
research in neuroendocrinology, with a strong emphasis on nonmammalian model
systems, including bird song, amphibian courtship, neuromuscular systems for
copulation in reptiles, and neural plasticity in the honey bee. Without funds
provided by the National Science Foundation, it is unlikely that these young
investigators could attend the annual workshop.