* 0813665
* Conference - 2008 CO2 Assimilation in Plants: Genome to Biome Gordon Research Conference, to be held at the University of New England in Biddeford, ME on August 17-22, 2008.
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2009
* James Moroney, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Mark R. Brodl
* 05/31/2009
* USD 15,000.00

James V. Moroney &lt;br/&gt;NSF Proposal number: IOS-0813665&lt;br/&gt;Title:
2008 CO2 Assimilation in Plants: Genome to Biome Gordon Research
Conference&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves support for the Gordon
Research Conference entitled "CO2 Assimilation in Plants: Genome to Biome" to be
held at the University of New England in Biddeford, Maine on August 17-22, 2008.
The international organizing committee has developed a timely program consisting
of nine formal sessions and three contributed poster sessions
(http://www.grc.org/programs.aspx?year=2008&amp;program=co2). Consistent with
the field's advancing science, the sessions are designed to encourage
participants to think beyond their specific research interests. Thus, under the
general theme of photosynthetic CO2 assimilation, the 2008 conference covers
basic plant research from the molecular through the ecological and environmental
levels. As such, the meeting provides a rare opportunity for integration among
molecular, cellular and ecological studies and a single venue for researchers
from the various sub-disciplines of the 'carbon-side' of photosynthesis. Also
included in the program are sessions that address the central role of carbon
assimilation by plants for developing a bio-based and carbon-neutral planet. In
addition, the program includes an entire session of short talks by early career
scientists. The speakers chosen for this session will have the opportunity to
present new data and to 'test drive' their hypotheses in a collegial atmosphere.
Thus, a critical goal of this conference is to provide support to early-career
plant scientists, including graduate students, advanced undergraduate students,
postdoctoral researchers and scientists just establishing their laboratories.
The participation of junior scientists should be of immense professional benefit
to them and will enhance the dynamic, cutting-edge nature of this conference.
The information exchange that will occur among the participants is expected to
foster exciting new advances in this important field of plant biology; advances
that can enhance the sustainability of crop productivity and the preservation of
ecosystems facing significant climate changes.