* 0813771
* Doctoral Consortium and Student-Author Travel For Petra-08 Conference
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2009
* Fillia Makedon, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 04/30/2009
* USD 27,562.00

This is funding to support a Doctoral Consortium of approximately 12 promising
doctoral students from U.S. institutions of higher learning along with 8
distinguished research faculty, to be held in conjunction with the 1st
International Conference on PErvasive Technologies Related to Assistive
Environments (PETRA08), which will take place July 15-19 in Athens, Greece. The
goal of the PETRA08 conference is to bring together experts from diverse domains
to address an important social and healthcare issue, namely that as the world's
population ages there is an urgent need to develop solutions for in-home care of
the elderly, as well as of people with Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, and other
disabilities or traumas. PETRA08 will provide a unique venue that focuses on
combining wireless computing, sensors, and other pervasive computing
technologies to assistive environments; unlike traditional computer science
conferences, it will create a channel for applying basic CS principles to the
service of millions of humans in need. More information about PETRA08 may be
found at www.petrae.org; the organizers hope the conference will become an
annual event. The goals of the Doctoral Consortium are to increase the exposure
and visibility of the participants' work within the community, to help establish
a sense of community among this next generation of researchers, and to help
foster their research efforts by providing substantive feedback and guidance
from a group of senior researchers in a supportive and interactive environment.
Student participants in the Doctoral Consortium will make formal presentations
of their work and will receive feedback from a faculty panel; the feedback is
geared to helping students understand and articulate how their work is
positioned relative to other research, whether their topics are adequately
focused for thesis research projects, whether their methods are correctly chosen
and applied, and whether their results are appropriately analyzed and presented.
Doctoral Consortium attendees will have short papers on their work included in
the Conference Proceedings, and a summary report on the event will be posted on
the conference website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The PETRA08
Doctoral Consortium will bring together some of the best students, researchers
and practitioners in relevant fields, and will thereby afford the younger
participants a unique opportunity to gain wider exposure for their innovative
ideas while also receiving reinforcement for the importance and value of
conducting research with societal impact. The workshop will also allow the
junior participants to create a social network both among themselves and with
senior colleagues. Since the conference is expected to host a diverse group
along several dimensions (such as nationality, scientific discipline, and
research specialization), participants? horizons will be broadened and new
collaborations will emerge, to the future benefit of the field.&lt;br/&gt;