* 0813575
* Collaborative Research:  The Dark Energy Survey Data Management System
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2008,01/31/2012
* Joshua Frieman, Fermi Research Alliance, LLC
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 01/31/2012
* USD 99,639.00

AST-
0813534/0812790/0813575&lt;br/&gt;Mohr/Jarvis/Peoples&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Dark Energy Survey (DES) is an intermediate term survey, in the years 2011-2016,
that will address the nature of dark energy using four independent and
complementary techniques: (1) a galaxy cluster survey in collaboration with
NSF's South Pole Telescope Sunyaev-Zel'dovich Effect mapping experiment, (2) a
cosmic shear measurement, (3) a galaxy angular clustering measurement within
redshift shells to z=1.35, and (4) distance measurements to approximately 2000
type 1a supernovae (SNe Ia). The DES will produce about 170Tb of raw data,
processed into science-ready images and catalogs and co-added into deeper,
higher quality images and catalogs. In total, the DES dataset will approach 2Pb.
This data volume and the survey duration require a new type of data management
system with a high degree of automation and robustness, including integrated
quality assurance testing. The present collaborative project will build the DES
Data Management (DESDM) system. DESDM has been designed and tested, using both
simulated data and real data from the Mosaic2 camera. The project team has
created working prototypes of many elements of DESDM and will now transform
those prototypes into the production version of the DESDM
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DES is a complex international, multi-agency
project, with far-reaching foreign and domestic impacts. It is organized into
DESDM and two other themes. These are the Dark Energy Camera (DECam), to be
installed at the 4-meter Blanco telescope of the Cerro Tololo Interamerican
Observatory (CTIO), and the facilities improvement and integration project at
the CTIO (CTIOFP). The CTIOFP is supported by CTIO, a component of NSF's
National Optical Astronomy Observatory, and DECam is supported by the Department
of Energy (DoE) and by international and institutional partners. DESDM is
supported by NSF and also by the project partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
DESDM project is working collaboratively with other large scale imaging projects
to develop common solutions, and will be making all produced software available
to the community. Students will play important role, developing expertise in
aspects of scientific data management, high performance computing, and the
development of science analysis tools. The DESDM system will archive the DES
data, enabling public access and science analyses (after a one year proprietary
period) through a provided scientific analysis interface that will use high
performance computing resources at the NSF's National Center for Supercomputing
Applications (NCSA), operated by the University of Illinois. A separate part of
the project not covered by this award is a DECam Reduction Portal, supporting
non-DES users of the DECam to reduce their own data.