* 0813773
* Cell-Based Olfactory Sensing for Biometrics [48U08UMDabsh]
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2008,09/30/2014
* Elisabeth Smela, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2014
* USD 391,000.00

The gold standard against which chemical sensors are compared is the dog?s nose.
However, dogs are expensive to train and can only be used a few hours per day.
By detecting the electrical signals produced by olfactory sensory neurons
(OSNs), it should be possible to achieve high-sensitivity, high-specificity,
high-speed, stand-off detection of trace amounts of compounds associated with
volatile human compounds characteristic of gender, stress, individual
?fingerprint?, and various medical conditions. The team plans to develop a
miniaturized system for human biometric characterization using, initially
immortalized cell lines for detection of human compounds and then developing
techniques for direct detection of airborne odorants using artificial mucous,
thin membranes, continuous perfusion with water or a combination. Cell-based
chemical sensors will have broad societal benefits through diverse applications,
outside of biometric detection: explosives detection, monitoring food and air,
odor-based medical diagnosis, drug detection in airports, and screening of
pharmaceuticals, to name a few. This project will support two full time graduate
research assistants. The PIs are actively engaged in educating graduate and
undergraduate students and interdisciplinary curricular development. The PIs
have demonstrated strong track records of mentoring and supporting students from
underrepresented groups and of developing and supporting programs that train and
promote these students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;