* 0813829
* Investigations in Optimality Theory: Typology, Learning, and Modeling
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* John McCarthy, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* William Badecker
* 08/31/2013
* USD 462,989.00

Conflicting principles are at work in language. For example, talking faster
requires less precise articulation, but being clear requires more precise
articulation. How are these conflicts resolved? This project studies two
competing hypotheses: absolute priority versus compromise. How do humans make
these decisions? Again, this project studies two competing hypotheses: all at
once or one at a time. Different fields that study language -- linguistics,
computer science, and psychology -- take different views of these
hypotheses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methods used in this project are drawn from
all three of these disciplines. The method of typology comes from linguistics:
How do different languages resolve conflicts among the same principles? The
method of computer modeling comes from computer science: Develop programs that
resolve conflicts or learn how conflicts are resolved in some language. The
method of naturalistic data analysis comes from developmental psychology: Use
data from young children learning English to test and refine the learning model.
Two further features of the project are the creation of publicly available
computational tools for doing this work, and the recruitment of future linguists
by hiring undergraduate research assistants from the economically and ethnically
diverse population of students at a large public university.