* 0813742
* SGER: Distinguishing the Genomics of Female Mate Choice from Receptivity: a Test with Swordtails
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2008,08/31/2009
* Molly Cummings, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* daniel wiegmann
* 08/31/2009
* USD 81,075.00

Molly Cummings&lt;br/&gt;IOS-0813742&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SGER: Distinguishing
the genomics of female mate choice from receptivity: a test with
swordtails&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of this proposal
is to dissect what part of female mate choice behavior is driven by hormones
versus other neural and genomic pathways in the brain. For years, reproductive
biologists have understood how hormones influence female willingness to mate.
However, we know far less about how hormones influence female choice when
selecting between reproductive partners. This study will use a model animal
system in sexual selection, the swordtail fish, to identify the neural response
during mate choice events and to detect what part of that response is driven by
hormones, such as estrogen, and what is hormone-independent. The researchers
will build on earlier work in the Cummings lab that has identified candidate
genes involved in preference behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will
first conduct a behavioral study that examines the relationship between
hormones, candidate gene expression, and preference behavior in a group of
swordtail females. The researchers will then test whether specific genes
regulate preference behavior independent of hormones by conducting an estrogen-
manipulation experiment. Swordtail females will have their estrogen levels
blocked or augmented and their preference and gene expression subsequently will
be quantified. If mate preference is independent from receptivity, then these
manipulations should have little effect on preference behavior or preference-
associated gene expression. The results will provide novel insights into the
neural and genomic pathways that are specific to choosing mates, and to what
degree some of the behavior and/or genomic pathways are under hormonal
influence. This innovative study will affect the fields of Animal Behavior,
Evolution, and Reproductive Biology. The educational impacts are broad, as the
PI integrates this research into her undergraduate classes as well as recruits a
number of minority students into her lab to conduct the behavioral and molecular
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;