* 0813932
* Workshop for Coordination of OpenMI and HIS Development in England, spring 2008
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2008,02/28/2009
* Richard Hooper, Consortium of Universities for the Advancement of Hydrologic Sci
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 02/28/2009
* USD 19,306.00

This proposal seeks to advance hydrologic science by providing travel support to
help create an international collaboration between leaders in data access and
model integration systems from Europe and the United States. The U.S. contingent
includes hydrologists developing the Consortium of Universities for the
Advancement of Hydrologic Science, Inc. (CUAHSI) Hydrologic Information System
(HIS) Project, which is supported by the National Science Foundation
(GEO-06-22374), and other researchers developing similar community modeling
systems. These U.S. scientists will meet with the European scientists and
engineers that have developed the Open Modeling Interface (OpenMI), a software
environment for integrating hydrologic simulation models. The workshop will
result in a report written by U.S. scientists that evaluates the data access
approaches that can be used with a mature modern modeling platform, as well as
describing the capabilities of OpenMI. This report will contribute to improved
understanding of the technical challenges to providing data access to modeling
systems that will be considered by CUAHSI for a community hydrology modeling
platform.&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this workshop is to establish a
dialog and to share experiences between the OpenMI developers and U.S.
hydrologists. The European scientists have gained valuable experience at
integrating hydrologic simulation models over more than five years of effort on
this project. This experience, in particular the standards and tools resulting
from the OpenMI development, could offer technological insights into modeling
platforms. The objectives of this workshop include both evaluation of OpenMI as
a modeling platform and the use of web services as a means to provide data
access for community modeling platforms.&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this
project include establishing transatlantic collaboration and networking for
hydrologic scientists toward the eventual goal of cyberinfrastructure for the
hydrologic scientists. It is clear that, through efforts like the CUAHSI
Hydrologic Information System and the OpenMI, U.S. and European scientists have
much to offer one another in terms of integrating heterogeneous data and
modeling resources. The report resulting from this workshop will help to inform
both sides as to the current undertakings, remaining challenges, and future
directions for hydrologic modeling in the U.S. and Europe