* 0813799
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Spatial Land-Use Change and Ecological Effects (SLUCE): Interactions of Exurban Land Management and Carbon Dynamics.
* GEO,GEO
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Dawn Parker, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Ruth
* 08/31/2009
* USD 7,554.00

Abstract Exurban residential development is widespread, constituting one of the
major forms of land-use and land-cover changes in the Eastern US and elsewhere.
This sprawl has large impacts on natural and rural landscapes, ecosystem
services, and quality of life for millions of people. This project investigates
the processes linking dynamics of land-atmosphere carbon budgets in exurban
residential areas, preferences for land-cover types and patterns on these lands,
and land-management activities of residents and developers. The goal of the
project is to obtain a clearer understanding of the relationships between carbon
dynamics, land-management activities, and market and non-market values of land-
uses and land-covers ? focusing on how carbon dynamics might respond in a non-
linear fashion to various management and policy options for land-cover
management. Building on the extensive data resources developed under a precursor
project, the researchers will use dynamic agent-based models (including a new
land-market sub model) to examine a range of exurban land-cover patterns that
might be expected to result from market and policy drivers These models will be
linked to homeowner preferences and landscape management behaviors from surveys.
The outputs of the models will be coupled with a spatially explicit model of
biogeochemistry, with inputs derived from remote sensing and field-based
sampling within Southeastern Michigan. The researchers will explore the
relationship between decision processes by various actors and the resulting
changes in biogeochemical processes. We will look for the existence of
ecologically significant thresholds (e.g., large, nonlinear land-atmosphere
carbon exchange in response to small changes in policy, preferences or
behaviors) that are revealed in the coupled system. The study will identify both
modeled micro-level dynamics and macro-level patterns in space and time,
building on data and model resources developed from previous projects, while
creating a complementary new dataset to support modeling of land-market
interactions that includes land transactions, biogeochemical processes, cultural
preferences and management practices affecting land covers,

The complex feedbacks explored in this project, that both drive and result from
exurban sprawl, will provide new insights into how policy can be used to guide
and manage this landscape change. Coupled computer models will be used to
evaluate policy scenarios that may be spatially-targeted (e.g., zoning) or
aspatial (e.g., carbon credits) and are designed to affect carbon dynamics
through mechanisms built on an understanding of the incentives created by
markets and preferences and behaviors of residents, developers, and local
governments. Field and modeling work on soil and vegetation carbon dynamics will
provide much needed insights into the effects of exurban development on carbon
storage, which, given the growth of exurban development, has important
implications for the atmospheric carbon budget. The project strengthens
scientific capacity and integration by bringing together scientists from a wide
range of fields including landscape architecture, ecosystem science, economics,
geographic information science, and complex systems science. The project will
produce results that improve our ability to model (a) carbon cycling in the
heterogeneous landscapes that humans inhabit, (b) the economic incentives
inherent in our management exurban landscapes, and (c) the linkages between
peoples? preferences and their behaviors and ecological landscape function.
Models developed for the project will be used to generate both formal and
informal educational materials for both graduate and undergraduate instruction
on environmental science, policy, and design, in order to improve student
understanding of how complex coupled human-environment dynamics can complicate
decision making about ecosystem services, and how spatial and dynamic modeling
can improve our understanding of alternative options in such settings.