* 0813521
* Group Travel Support for the 10th International Conference on Inorganic Membranes in Tokyo, Japan
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2008,01/31/2009
* Timothy Ward, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 01/31/2009
* USD 15,750.00

CBET-0813521 Ward

International travel support is requested for U.S. academic participants to
attend the Tenth International Conference on Inorganic Membranes (ICIM 10),
which will be held in Tokyo, Japan, August 18-22, 2008. The Conference brings
together inorganic membrane researchers from around the world to present and
discuss their results on the science and technology of inorganic membranes. The
conference includes an extensive program of platform presentations, as well as
poster sessions and plenary speakers. Papers address the synthesis,
characterization, theory and application of a wide range of inorganic membranes,
including zeolite, metallic, carbon-based, proton and ion-conducting ceramic,
and inorganic-organic hybrids. This conference is a worldwide gathering focused
on inorganic membranes, and is held every two years, normally alternating
between the U.S., Europe and Asia. For this meeting, papers will be published
via a CD-ROM. Although the research activity in the U.S. in inorganic membranes
has been growing steadily for more than a decade, there is also impressive
growth in inorganic membrane research and development in Europe and Asia.

A strong representation of U.S. researchers at the Conference is useful in
maintaining U.S. competitiveness in the many important areas of inorganic
membrane technology. Some the key technology areas addressed by inorganic
membrane technology include oxygen and hydrogen separations, both of which are
critical to new energy technologies, solid oxide fuel cell electrolyte
membranes, and novel membrane reactor concepts. It is expected that there will
be approximately 15 U.S. academic participants, with a similar number coming
from industry and national labs. The total number of participants is expected to
be around 300, with probably 30-40 from the U.S., 60-80 from Europe and the
remaining 180-210 from Japan, China, Australia and the other Asian countries.
This grant will support roughly 30% of anticipated travel costs for the
qualified U.S. academic participants and may provide for additional
international collaborative opportunities.