* 0813976
* SGER: Phylogenies, gene conversion, concerted evolution, and ancestral sequence reconstruction
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Katharina Dittmar, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 08/31/2009
* USD 10,360.00

Gene conversion (a process that can occur during genetic recombination and
result in altered DNA sequence information) is an important mechanism
contributing to both the maintenance of genetic information and the creation of
genetic diversity. It is also a mechanism known to be essential for the
evolution of certain biomaterials (e.g., silk). However, gene conversion can
also cause the accumulation of genetic repeats, which result in common
debilitating diseases (e.g., Myotonic Dystrophy and Parkinson's Disease). This
project will explore novel methods, including an experimental mathematical
modeling approach, for addressing the effects of gene transfer on ancestral DNA
sequence reconstruction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mathematical reconstruction
of ancestral sequences will allow researchers to recreate intermediate
representations of a particular protein through time. This, in turn, will enable
researchers to physically reproduce certain extinct protein phenotypes, and
experimentally test their behavior. This will be useful for both basic and
applied research and will catalyze the understanding of structural and
functional protein evolution, and the discovery of new biomaterials.
Additionally, results may help elucidate the evolution of devastating mental
diseases.