* 0813608
* Travel Support to the 6th International Conference on Borate Glasses, Crystals, and Melts (BORATE 2008), Osaka, Japan, August 17 - 23, 2008
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2009
* Steven Feller, Coe College
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 06/30/2009
* USD 17,537.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;This grant will support ten students, at
the undergraduate and graduate level, to attend the Sixth International
Conference on Borate Glasses, Crystals, and Melts. This triennial meeting will
take place August 18-22, 2008 at Egret Himeji, Hyogo, Japan. These students,
from several colleges and universities across the nation, will make
presentations and be full participating members of the conference. There are a
number of advantages for the American public that result from this activity.
Borate glasses have manifold practical uses and improve our standard of living.
Examples of this include dental implants that closely match natural teeth, safe
radioactive waste storage within highly stable borosilicate glasses, and high
lithium containing borate glasses that are excellent candidates for new
generations of solid state battery materials. Students attending the meeting
will be able to learn the latest advances within the field from scientists from
over 20 nations.&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;The technical
content of the meeting will be well focused and timely. Papers will be presented
on: Short and intermediate range order in borate glasses and melts; Structure
and physical properties; Computer simulation and modeling; Phase separation and
inhomogeneities; New spectroscopic techniques; EPR, XAFS, XPS, IR, NMR, and
diffraction studies of borates; Novel borate glasses and crystals; Mineralogical
crystals; Local thermal properties; Thermodynamics of borate systems; Industrial
applications of borate and borosilicate glasses; Biomedical applications;
Optical properties and materials; Superionic systems and ionic conductivity. In
addition, before the conference, these students will visit the Spring8
Synchrotron Radiation Lab (a sponsor of the conference) and a modern Japanese
Glass Company. Since the meeting will not have concurrent sessions the students
will be able to fully immerse themselves in all aspects of the current science
of borates. Furthermore, overall student participation is high making it likely
that significant scientific dialogue will take place between the students we
will bring and their counterparts from other nations.