* 0813837
* RIG: Ecosystem Impact of the Invasive Shrub Lonicera Maackii (Amur Honeysuckle) on Forest Remnants of Southwestern Ohio
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2010
* Brent Blair, Xavier University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 08/31/2010
* USD 172,145.00

&lt;br/&gt;Non-native plant species are an ever-present part of forests today
and often negatively influences their adopted natural habitat by reducing
survival of native plant and animal species. The present study will investigate
the impact of Amur honeysuckle, an invasive non-native shrub, on the forests of
Southwestern Ohio. The research will focus on nutrient cycling within this
ecosystem by examining the relationship between organic inputs (e.g., fallen
leaves), soil nutrients, and soil microbial diversity and composition (bacteria
and fungi). These parameters strongly influence how fast nutrients are cycled
through an ecosystem and may be an important predictor of what species will be
most successful in an area. The study will elucidate differences between
forested sites with and without honeysuckle and examine the potential for and
time-scale of recovery of below-ground resources through honeysuckle removal
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research will provide new
insights that may enhance forest restoration efforts. By integrating research
and education the project will enhance undergraduate education through hands on
research experiences and encourage broader participation by underrepresented
groups in the sciences. To achieve these goals the project will, create summer
research positions for college students from underrepresented groups, develop an
exciting inquiry based laboratory that will introduce students to forest ecology
through engaging them in actual field research, and conduct short-term summer
classes for K-12 students from local public schools.&lt;br/&gt;