* 0813194
* Learning from SL9: Realistic Modeling, Phase 2
* MPS,AST
* 01/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Joseph Harrington, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas S. Statler
* 06/30/2011
* USD 323,891.00

AST 0606809&lt;br/&gt;Harrington&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Harrington and
colleagues are developing a linked series of 3D hydrodynamic and chemical models
for the impact, plume blowout, and plume flight/splash phases of the Shoemaker-
Levy 9 (SL9) events. These models include tracer particles, whose temperature
(T) and pressure (p) histories will drive chemical and grain models. Chemical
and grain results will be re-inserted into the splash model to calculate
realistic light curves and impact-site images. A prior grant (Phase 1) has been
focused on impact modeling, and the first of several papers is in publication.
This award will be used for modeling the blowout and plume flight/splash phases,
and to perform preliminary chemical modeling. Spectroscopic (and more chemical)
modeling is contemplated for future work, so the current models calculate the
necessary data to drive those models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, Dr.
Harrington and his colleagues will create the first self-consistent,
observationally-constrained model of a large impact and its aftermath. The model
is required for full interpretation of the puzzling SL9 data, and will yield
basic information about Jupiter's atmosphere and comet composition. Several
investigations will be carried out with the models, which run on a cluster
supercomputer constructed with a prior award. The models will test theories for
the expanding rings seen by the Hubble Space Telescope. Each theory depends on
different fundamental Jovian parameters, some unmeasured, such as an elevated
oxygen abundance. The composite model will distinguish among the competing
theories by replicating each one's physics and determining whether it both
couples to the impact energy and produces synthetic images that match the HST
observations. These researchers will adjust the viscosity in the splash model
until the outer part of the plume re-entry shock matches the expanding infrared
rings. The project will test the hypothesis that the plumes had a strong density
enhancement at their maximum velocity that produced the expanding infrared rings
and the third precursor and flare in the infrared light curves. This vanguard
makes stronger re-entry shocks, which increase the damage a given-sized
terrestrial impactor could produce. Existing SL9 chemical models only do a
moderate job of matching observations, particularly for sulfur: models produce
oxidized sulfur (and carbon), but only reduced sulfur was observed. With
realistic T and p histories (including multiple shocks) driving the models, the
researchers expect to improve the match to data dramatically. They will address
whether a comet with heterogeneous composition is required to produce the sulfur
results. Models run with Saturnian conditions will make predictions that may aid
Cassini data interpretation and will determine whether Earth-based observers
should have seen evidence of such frequent impacts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
is the first observationally-constrained 3D radiative-hydrodynamic-chemical
model of all phases of a cometary impact. The models and model grids will be
archived with the Planetary Data System so that they will be quickly available
for use in planning observations of the next impact, be it 10 or 500 years from
now. The models will make predictions for Cassini. Several observers hold SL9
main event spectra that they cannot interpret. A model of this sophistication is
required to drive a line-by-line, slant-path radiative transfer code to produce
synthetic spectra for comparison to observations; this task is contemplated for
a follow-on proposal. Since this is the only ongoing atmospheric SL9 modeling
effort, it is important if the significant remaining puzzles are to be solved.
Public interest in impacts is high, so results will appear in both the
scientific literature and in popular science
magazines.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;