* 0813936
* Coarse Contingencies
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2008,06/30/2010
* Larry Epstein, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2010
* USD 59,641.00

Intellectual merit: When an individual chooses an action under uncertainty, she
cannot be sure of the ensuing outcome. Following Savage, it is standard practice
to model this uncertainty by means of a set of states of the world. These
describe the individual's ex-ante perception of the contingencies that may
influence the outcome. The outcome of any action is uniquely determined by the
state that is realized. It follows that each state necessarily provides a
complete description of the environment. Thus this modeling approach assumes
that the decision-maker has in mind a complete list of all relevant and finely
detailed contingencies. The assumption of a forward-looking agent who conceives
of future contingencies seems relatively uncontroversial. However, in realistic
settings, the following description of the agent seems more plausible: she
conceives of some relevant contingencies or states of the world but she is aware
that these contingencies are coarse--they leave out some details that may affect
outcomes. Though she may not be able to describe these finer details, she is
aware that they exist and this may affect her behavior. This project is
concerned with modeling such an agent.

The agent just described is not "boundedly rational" or unsophisticated--quite
the contrary. Outside of artificial laboratory-style settings, it would seem
impossible for any decision-maker, or for an outside observer, to identify all
relevant and finely detailed contingencies. It is a sophisticated agent who is
aware of her limited foresight and who takes it into account in decision-making.
In contrast, an individual who uses a Savage-style state space and acts as
though her conception of the future is complete seems naive.

Coarseness of perceptions is relevant only if it can be identified from economic
data. The axiomatic method to be adopted takes only behavior (or preference) as
observable and characterizes that behavior which can be thought of as if it were
based on coarse perceptions.

Broader impact: There are potentially many broad-ranging applications of a model
with coarse perceptions. State space modeling is pervasive in economics and
finance. But if agents use coarse contingencies rather than Savage-style states,
then their behavior will differ from predictions of standard models. The project
will explore the behavioral implications of coarseness in a range of applied
settings, including asset markets, consumption/savings contexts, and strategic
settings. Think, for example, of a portfolio choice setting. An investor may
identify some factors that are likely to influence returns to financial
securities. However, few investors would believe that they have identified all
possible relevant factors. Awareness that their conceptions are missing some
details would presumably affect the choice of portfolios. Implications for asset
pricing theory would follow.