* 0813866
* Conference: Student Travel and Activities Grant:  International Society for Salt Lake Research Conference, May 11 -17, 2008, Salt Lake City, Utah
* BIO,EF
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2009
* Jasmine Saros, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 04/30/2009
* USD 9,100.00

This award supports up to thirteen graduate students and/or postdoctoral
trainees to attend The 10th International Society for Salt Lake Research (ISSLR)
Conference, May 11-17,2008 in Salt Lake City, Utah. The triennial conference
brings approximately 100-250 scientists together from around the world in an
environment that encourages interdisciplinary exchanges between microbiologists,
geologists, geochemists, toxicologists, limnologists and ecologists. The primary
goal of the meeting is to share the advances from each of these fields with the
hope of fostering interdisciplinary research that will advance understanding of
the chemistry, geology and biology of hypersaline environments in a mutually
beneficial forum that brings students and senior researchers together. The
meeting will also provide activities that will facilitate student networking and
the overall scientific training experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The venue for
ISSLR provides a number of opportunities (e.g. meals, poster sessions, mid-
conference field trip) for students to interact with scientists from all over
the world; these interactive meetings that foster collegiality can play an
important role in recruiting and retaining a diverse pool of students. Student
recruitment will target underrepresented groups by advertising via the American
Society of Limnology and Oceanography's Multicultural Program and the American
Society for Microbiology online (including the Minority Affairs online
newsletter), the Microbe magazine,&lt;br/&gt;and distribution via the NIH list-
serv focused on to minority scientists. This broad coverage will reach various
levels of scientist in addition to women and minority scientists. Additionally,
each chair of the special sessions will also send out a call for participation
that highlights the student activities and awards at the meeting, and will
specifically encourage participation&lt;br/&gt;by underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;