* 0813631
* BRIGE: Development of Controlled Release Polymers for Environmental Remediation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Stephanie Luster-Teasley, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Ted A. Conway
* 08/31/2011
* USD 175,000.00

EEC-0813631&lt;br/&gt;Luster-teasley&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BRIGE awards maintain
global competitiveness by increasing the diversity of ENG researchers, who are
initiating research programs early in their careers. BRIGE awards further the
broaden participation of engineering researchers by increasing the number of
engineering graduates, by improving the representation of women and minorities
in engineering, and by understanding how to improve recruitment and retention of
engineering students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This BRIGE award will investigate
controlled-release polymers for subsurface soil remediation. The PI plans to
utilize chemical oxidation to inject highly reactive liquids or gases into a
contaminated zone. The chemical oxidants rapidly react to oxidize and breakdown
subsurface contaminants to less toxic byproducts. The research will investigate
a new method of chemical oxidant delivery that is expected to provide
significant advantages over methods currently in use. The investigator will test
a novel delivery system that uses biodegradable polymers to encapsulate a solid
oxidant. The basic concept is to encapsulate an oxidant in biodegradable
polymers in the form of solid pellets that slowly release the oxidant after
application. Like an "environmental pill", the oxidants can be placed subsurface
to slowly deliver treatment to the environment. This new method effectively
extends the ability to provide chemical oxidation treatment for remediation in a
fashion similar to drug formulations delivered using biodegradable medical
implants which provide controlled and extended release of their active
components&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More than 200,000 sites in the United States
require some form of environmental remediation. Of these sites, the most
difficult to remediate are locations in which contaminated subsurface soils and
groundwater are present. This research will benefit society as a whole by
providing a safer method to treat subsurface contamination and a new method to
protect and treat water and soil. This research will serve as an example for
using biomaterials to improve water and soil treatment practices in
environmental engineering. Additionally, this project will provide research
opportunities to minority undergraduate and graduate students from the
underrepresented populations served by North Carolina A&amp;T State University.
The PI will also develop an environmental engineering module for this research,
environmental remediation, and novel uses for biodegradable polymers for an on-
line education program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This BRIGE grant will broaden the
participation of and increase opportunities for all engineers including those
from groups underrepresented in the engineering disciplines. This BRIGE grant
will also encourage the PI to become actively and competitively engaged in
research as an independent investigator.