* 0813893
* Algorithms and Numerical Analysis for Nested Approximations of Stochastic Particle Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2008,12/31/2011
* Petr Plechac, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 12/31/2011
* USD 250,179.00

The ever-increasing computational power has instigated rapid development of
computational techniques for simulating large stochastic interacting particle
systems. Growing computing capabilities have helped to obtain unprecedented
insight into numerous problems ranging from physical phenomena in materials,
chemical reactions, and biological processes to image processing. However, as is
common in the initial development of simulation methodologies the rapid
emergence of new computational techniques far outstrips theoretical
understanding of the algorithms. From the computational point of view, balancing
the competing aims of numerical accuracy and computational efficiency still
remains one of the central problems in simulations of large multi-scale systems.
The proposed research outlines a framework for the numerical analysis and
implementation of simulation algorithms based on coarse-graining of the
microscopic system. In the proposed work we view coarse-graining as numerical
approximation of coarse observables which would have to be estimated from
computationally expensive microscopic simulations. The goal of the proposed work
is to develop numerical tools for assessing the quality of the approximation and
to use error indicators in order to implement reliable simulation algorithms.
Understanding approximations and their limitations is particularly important in
the context of stochastic simulations, since even a convergent simulation may
not provide any reliable insight into simulated phenomena (e.g., phase
transitions, critical phenomena). Furthermore, the computational complexity can
be substantially decreased if a trade-off between accuracy and efficiency is
properly adjusted. In simulations of systems with a large number of interacting
entities we often end up estimating average values of certain observables that
depend on randomly distributed microscopic configurations of the system. In the
proposed approach we apply hierarchical microscopic-macroscopic computational
paradigms and explore their potential for improving efficiency, reliability, and
algorithmic complexity of methods used for sampling probability measures on
high-dimensional spaces. We aim at developing tools suitable also for
approximating transient behavior which may not be properly captured, on
experimentally relevant time-scales, by sampling the equilibrium distribution.
The proposed framework will derive nested approximations of the underlying
multi-scale system with optimal interactions between different scales. This
scale decomposition strategy will be applied to the development of parallel
algorithms for simulating stochastic systems composed of a large number of
degrees of freedom. The proposed work is in the intersection of numerical
analysis, stochastic processes, and statistical mechanics. The potential impact
of the proposed mathematical topics encompasses a wide range of applications in
physics, chemistry, materials science, and other fields where large multi-scale
simulations are used. Therefore, one of the objectives is to implement flexible
tools that can be tailored to specific problems and existing packages within a
short learning curve.