* 0813563
* RUI, Collaborative Research:  Optimal Control Studies for Cholera Outbreaks
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Katherine Fister, Murray State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2012
* USD 100,000.00

This cholera project focuses on treatment strategies to effectively reduce the
clinical symptoms that the bacterium, Vibrio cholerae, inflicts on infected
individuals. Efforts to control a cholera outbreak, including oral cholera
vaccination, antibiotic treatment, and sanitation efforts, are considered in
successive deterministic susceptible, infected, and recovered disease models.
The research team includes senior personnel from Murray State University,
Marymount University, Old Dominion University, and the University of Tennessee
with expertise in the areas of modeling, computation, and optimal control of
differential equations as well as multiple undergraduate and graduate students
from the four institutions. The team will develop, and test via simulations
viable treatment strategies that balance the cost and efficacy of the multiple
control options and that consider age-specific population and disease dynamics.
The intricacies of the parameter sensitivities in the systems of complex
equations that describe the disease dynamics will be investigated, as well as
the numerical and analytic solutions of the optimal control strategies for
ordinary and partial differential equations with and without age
classes.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This study seeks the discovery of viable
vaccination and therapeutic strategies to mitigate cholera outbreaks through the
analysis of systems of differential equations. The novel and potentially
transforming concept is the investigation of optimal control theory applied to
the interdependent equations to provide strategies to effectively reduce the
costliness of cholera outbreaks both in terms of human wellness and financial
burden. A unique aspect of this project is the collaboration of four female and
one male investigator with complementary mathematical backgrounds. These
individuals have the ability to attract a diverse group of students from
different regions of the country. The findings of the teams will be disseminated
through presentations at local, regional, and national conferences as well as
through peer reviewed publications. The undergraduates will have the benefit of
ongoing research discussions with graduate students and faculty from multiple
institutions, and thus the advances made will simultaneously promote teaching
and facilitate research goals for each group by allowing for a vertically
integrated collaborative environment. &lt;br/&gt;