* 0813421
* 2008 Frontiers of Engineering Symposia (U.S., Japan-America, and German-American)
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2009
* Janet Hunziker, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 07/31/2009
* USD 100,000.00

This award partially supports a series of three national and international
Frontiers of Engineering (FOE) Symposia by the National Academy of Engineering:
U.S. FOE (September 18-20, 2008, in Albuquerque, NM), German-American FOE (April
25-27, 2008, in Irvine, CA), and Japan-America FOE (November 17-19, 2008, in
Tsukuba, Japan).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each symposium focuses on four topical
areas. Topics for 2008 include cognitive engineering, natural language
processing, emerging nanoelectric devices, biotechnology and healthcare, drug
delivery systems, nanotechnology for medical therapies, understanding and
countering the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
micromanufacturing/microprocessing engineering, alternative energy, energy
harvesting, advanced imaging technologies, and sensors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Between 60 and 100 outstanding early career scientists and
engineers particpate in each symposium. Sessions consist of presentations by
speakers on leading edge research, emerging technologies, and opportunities for
collaboration across science and engineering fields. The symposia foster
interdisciplinary and international collaborations and serve as a reference
point for many of the emerging frontiers in research and innovation in the U.S.
Presentations from the U.S. FOE seminar will be posted on the NAE FOE web site.