* 0813870
* Metamaterial and quantum dots enhanced radiation and trace chemical detection [54U08UAHguo]
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2010
* Junpeng Guo, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 06/30/2010
* USD 119,000.00

Colloidal semiconductor nanocrystal quantum dots (NQDs) for
novel&lt;br/&gt;radiation detectors will be investigated. The team draws upon
their expertise in the synthesis of PbSe/PbS NQDs and their integration in
optoelectronic devices to advance the technology of NQD-enhanced radiation
detection. Nanostructure hererojunctions containing conductive polymers and PbSe
NQDs will be investigated to develop gamma-ray PN-diode detectors. The proposed
project will be groundbreaking as it will be the first time that the gamma-ray
detection with PbSe QDs is investigated. The high-Z PbSe/PbS NQDs in the
&amp;#947;-ray detector configuration will provide the ultimate solution to the
desired sensitive, high resolution, and room-temperature detection of low-level
radioactive signals.&lt;br/&gt;These meta-metal materials do not exist in
nature. Overcoming barriers to the growth of sensitive, room-temperature
radiation sensor technology by employing colloidal compound QDs in the PN-diode
device structure is a major step. A technical breakthrough such as low-level
gamma ray detection will have a profound impact on national security and
radioactivity-monitoring. The proposed studies will also provide focused
research and learning experience to graduate and undergraduate students by
involving them in experimental laboratory work, and bridge the fundamental
nanoscience and engineering with the real-world applications.