* 0813555
* CAREER: A Design of Multi-granular Switching Framework for Optical Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2007,04/30/2012
* Xiaojun Cao, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 04/30/2012
* USD 324,127.00

To meet the bandwidth demand from the traffic explosion from emerging Internet
applications like IPTV, VoIP, P2P, e-business and e-healthcare as well as large-
scale science applications such as high energy nuclear physics, grid computing,
and remote experimentation, optical networks using wavelength-division
multiplexing (WDM) technology, which divides the enormous fiber bandwidth into a
large number of wavelengths, is the foremost solution. The rapid advances in
dense WDM technology with hundreds of wavelengths per fiber and world-wide fiber
deployment have brought about a tremendous increase in size of the photonic
switches or cross-connects, the cost and difficulty associated with controlling
such large cross-connects. This project investigates developing a multi-granular
switching framework to reduce the complexity, cost, and size of both electronic
and optical switches. The key efforts involve the investigation of reliable
waveband switching, multi-granular services, and related theoretical modeling.
In particular, the project will explore design of multi-layer and single-layer
photonic cross-connect architectures, optimal wavelength grouping (or
wavebanding), waveband protection/restoration schemes, and reliable dynamic
provisioning of multi-granular services. The project seeks to yield a
fundamental understanding of multi-granular optical networks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the results
from this research will advance the state-of-the-art knowledge in wavelength-
division multiplexing (WDM) networks, they may also be extended to other
networks (e.g., with time or code division multiplexing technology) providing
multi-granular switching. The proposed project will develop and transfer
technology to stimulate the optical networking industry. By involving both
undergraduate and graduate students in the research, incorporating research
agenda into both undergraduate and graduate lectures and course projects, and
disseminating findings at technical conferences and journals, the project will
also help train the future scientists and engineers in high demand fields
related to optical networking. The course materials developed in this project
will establish a new paradigm for integrating research and education in high-
speed networking.&lt;br/&gt;