* 0813552
* Integrated Optofluidic Photonic Crystal (PhC) Resonant Fluorescence Enhancement Biosensors - 06U08WVUdaws
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2008,05/31/2012
* Aaron Timperman, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2012
* USD 270,465.00

Bench-top fluorescence emission signature analysis instruments are commonly used
for environmental and biomedical diagnostics in counter-bioterrorism,
DNA/protein identification and classification, agricultural sciences, and many
other applications requiring excellent selectivity and sensitivity. Phoyonic
crystal-based biosensors that operate within the visible spectrum are well
suited to provide integrated optical sensing solutions that can be employed to
increase the utility and portability of analytical instruments that perform
fluorescence emission signature detection. The overall objective is to develop
an integrated optofluidic biosensor that employs photonic crystals for
resonance-enhanced fluorescence emission detection of single-molecule event
signatures in the visible spectrum. By employing PhC point defects fabricated in
a GaN photonic crystal slab waveguide as flow channels for analytes containing
low concentrations of fluorescing molecules that are produced by upstream
chemical and/or biochemical processes new environmental detectors will be
produced. The geometry of the point defect flow channel fabricated within the
2-D air lattice will be engineered to act as an optical resonant cavity for
fluorescent emission wavelengths, enhancing emission intensity up to 15x and a
providing a bandpass filter with &lt;2nm full width half maximum bandwidth,
effective at rejecting most background fluorescence noise sources. The
educational aspect of the proposed program addresses the 2007 American
Competitiveness Initiative report that calls for increasing the number of STEM
professionals to improve future American economic competitiveness. The proposed
work will directly support one (1) postdoctoral researcher and (2) graduate
students. Well-established undergraduate research programs, a central goal of
which is to increase the participation of underrepresented minorities and women
in nanoscience and engineering will be utilized to provide opportunities for
undergraduate student involvement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;