* 0813718
* Integration and Commercialization of Micro and Nano Systems International Conference
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2008,01/31/2009
* Zhuomin Zhang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Theodore L. Bergman
* 01/31/2009
* USD 20,000.00

CBET-0813718, Zhang

This award partially supports the 2nd Integration and Commercialization of Micro
and Nano Systems International Conference, which will be held in Hong Kong,
China, on June 3-5, 2008. The purpose of this meeting is to bring together an
international group of researchers and business people, including small
businesses, to discuss frontier nanotechnology research and business
opportunities. Within NSF, funding is provided by both the Thermal Transport
Processes Program and the Industrial Innovation & Partnerships Program.

With respect to the intellectual merit of the conference, numerous directions
are emerging for nanotechnology research. The Asian Rim nations are particularly
active in this field, both in terms of research and in terms of
commercialization opportunities. This meeting will allow a highly diverse group
of individuals, representing the research and the business communities, to
interact and to explore how nanotechnology science and technology advances can
be translated into new products ready for commercialization.

The broader impacts of the conference include partial support for a number of
US-based junior researchers and students, with women and minority attendees
especially encouraged to attend. This meeting presents a vital opportunity for
engineering researchers and business people, from around the world, to interact
so that new research discoveries can be commercialized and brought to the market
more quickly than what typically occurs.

