* 0813721
* Conference - Auxin 2008: Biology of the plant hormone auxin, to be held on October 4-9, 2008, at the Club Palmeraie Eldorador in Marrakech, Morroco
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2009
* Mark Estelle, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Mark R. Brodl
* 05/31/2009
* USD 13,972.00

Mark Estelle, IOS 0813721, Auxin 2008: Biology of the Plant Hormone
Auxin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The plant hormone auxin regulates virtually every
aspect of plant growth and development including many agronomically important
traits such as plant stature, seed development, and fruit development and
ripening. During the last ten years, there has been dramatic and exciting
progress in our understanding of auxin biology. Scientists around the globe have
contributed to this rapidly developing field. In order to maintain this pace, it
is essential that the members of the auxin community have opportunities to
exchange and discuss their most recent results. In addition, it is very
important to train the next generation of auxin biologists. The achieve these
goals, the PI and his fellow organizers, have planned an international
conference of scientists working on diverse aspects of auxin biology. The
conference will be held on October 4th to 9th, 2008 in Marrakech Morroco. The
program includes 39 speakers from 10 countries. Twenty-one percent of the
speakers are women and 38% of the speakers are postdoctoral fellows or starting
assistant professors. In addition, funds are available to support the attendance
of graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference will have broader
impact in two areas. First, the active participation of graduate students and
postdocs will make a significant contribution to their training. Second, the
conference will promote cooperation and collaboration between scientists from
the Americas, Europe, Asia, and Africa. &lt;br/&gt;