* 0813653
* RIG: The Molecular Effects of Pathogen-derived Auxin on the Plant Immune System
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2010
* Matthew Escobar, California State University San Marcos Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2010
* USD 175,000.00

Plants possess a complex and multi-layered immune system. Though the general
operation of this immune system is now reasonably well understood, the specific
molecular mechanisms that underlie plant defense against pathogens remain
largely mysterious. Recent studies have suggested that the plant hormone auxin,
which is also produced by a variety of plant pathogens, may act as a critical
negative regulator of plant immune response. The broad objective of this project
is to characterize how auxin alters a plant's ability to perceive and respond to
pathogen infection at the molecular level. In order to study the relationship
between auxin and the plant immune system, the studies will make use of two
isogenic strains of the plant pathogenic bacterium Agrobacterium tumefaciens:
A348 (wild-type) and A328 (auxin-deficient mutant). The relative activation and
timing of plant defense responses induced by A348 and A328 will be examined by
introducing the strains into the leaves of the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana
though pressure infiltration. During the week following infiltration,
measurements of reactive oxygen species production, bacterial growth, and cell
death-based plant defense responses in Arabidopsis leaves will be done. In this
way, the effect of pathogen-produced auxin on specific Arabidopsis immune
responses may be quantitatively assessed. In addition, these studies will
identify the differences in the plant's global transcriptional response to
infection with strains A348 and A328 using microarray technology. The microarray
data will then be used to identify the specific cellular regulatory networks
that are manipulated by auxin-producing plant pathogens. Overall, this project
will substantially increase an understanding of the effects of pathogen-produced
auxin on the plant immune system, and may ultimately inform the future
development of chemical agents and plant cultivars that minimize pathogen-
associated losses in crop productivity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;California State
University San Marcos undergraduates, supervised by the PI and a salaried
technician, will play a major role in carrying out the research. Because
approximately one-third of CSUSM undergraduates are members of minority groups
that are underrepresented in the sciences, this also promises to broaden the
participation of these students in plant biology research. This intensive
research experience at the undergraduate level will greatly benefit these
minority scientists as they move on to graduate school and industry, where they
can serve as role models for future minority scholars. In addition, the results
of the research will be disseminated widely in peer-reviewed scientific
journals, at scientific meetings, and on the internet (microarray data will be
deposited in NCBIs Gene Expression Omnibus). Finally, as discussed above, the
basic research described here has the potential to substantially inform the
applied field of crop protection, thus providing broad benefits to the U.S.
agricultural industry, and society as a whole.