* 0813835
* SGER:  DESIGNED VORTICES AND HYBRID VIRTUAL-PHYSICAL EXPERIMENTS FOR VORTEX DYNAMICS RESEARCH
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/2008,05/31/2009
* Charles Williamson, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Horst Henning Winter
* 05/31/2009
* USD 48,153.00

CBET-0813835 Williamson

This exploratory research project will bring the PI's work on fundamental vortex
dynamics, instabilities and the onset of turbulence to study propulsion and
energy extraction from unsteady controlled motion of bodies. The PI will also
study vortex-induced vibration, and dynamics of flying objects, as well as
freely rising and falling bodies. Two exploratory research investigations that
should deliver quite powerful and general tools are: firstly, an efficient
method to generate multiple vortices, possibly in the presence of solid bodies
or a wall; and secondly, building a "Virtual Unsteady Dynamics Facility."
Concerning the first approach, rather than observe vorticity distributions after
the fact, the PI will determine how to move a body, relative to a fluid, to
deliver a pre-determined vortex configuration - in short to actually design a
vortex configuration. A key to this idea is to devise a model of the vortex
formation from sharp-edged bodies. The approach involves translating a vertical
airfoil in a horizontal plane (like one uses a giant XY plotter), employing the
Cornell computer-controlled XY Towing Tank. An immediate application, where this
approach is urgently needed is that of vortex configurations applicable to
aircraft trailing vortex wakes, including counter-rotating or co-rotating vortex
interactions, and their interaction with the ground. The second approach
involves development of a Virtual Unsteady Dynamics Facility, which will allow a
body in the fluid to move as though it were elastically-restrained; the
structural stiffness, damping and mass are represented in software within a
computer, while the fluid forces and moments on the body are those actually
measured from the physical body. The motion of the body is computer-controlled
by the towing tank carriage system, following the equations of motion
represented in the software. The PI can experiment with freely rising and
falling bodies by representing gravity as a horizontal force! Direct comparison
can be made with some existing experiments studying free dynamics of spherical
and cylindrical bodies. Flutter of falling bodies such as plates can be studied
with a view to understanding tumbling and rocking modes in terms of the vortex
dynamics and stall. The PI has involved 177 students in his research
laboratories from 1990-2007, and his involvement with undergraduates, including
minority undergraduates, will continue with this project. A large proportion of
those undergraduates, whose experience has been in the PI's laboratories, have
gone on to Masters and PhD degrees.