* 0813861
* Effect of Redox and pH on the Reaction Kinetics of Anhydrite in a Coupled Chemical System: An Experimental Study with Implications for Modeling Vent Fluid Evolution at EPR 9-10 N
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2014
* William Seyfried, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 06/30/2014
* USD 299,261.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0813861&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: The objective of the proposed experimental study entails acquisition of
kinetic and thermodynamic data to enhance the development and application of
geochemical models needed to constrain the temporal and spatial evolution of the
expanding database for hydrothermal vent fluids at EPR 9-10°N and at other R2K
IS Sites. Existing vent fluid data suggest that anhydrite coexisting with
plagioclase, magnetite and calcic-bearing aluminosilicates may provide redox
buffering in response to the addition of seawater derived sulfate into portions
of subseafloor reaction zones at mid-ocean ridges. The redox buffer capacity
unique to this chemical system, however, is a function of reaction rates between
anhydrite and dissolved H2 and ferrous iron, the principle reducing agents
derived from hydrolysis of primary and secondary minerals in basalt. At present
little is known about the kinetics and thermodyamics of this system. The
research project will obtain the requisite kinetic/thermodynamic data, and will
apply these to geochemical models that will be used to constrain the
temporal/spatial evolution of hydrothermal vent fluids at the East Pacific Rise
9N Ridge2000 Integrated Study Site, with applicability to the other Ridge2000
ISS as well. The project will make use of a newly-developed hydrothermal flow
reactor with monitored pH and redox conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The project will provide essential data required for Ridge2000
integration and synthesis efforts, including the baseline data required for
subsequent development of reaction-transport models. The acquisition of kinetic
and thermodynamic data under hydrothermal conditions will help to develop
reaction-transport models designed to couple physical and chemical processes in
subseafloor reaction zones at mid-ocean ridges. This takes on added significance
considering the potential role of anhydrite on crustal permeability at mid-ocean
ridges. The proposed research will benefit from the participation of
undergraduate summer interns in connection with the NSF/REU program in the
Department of Geology and Geophysics at the UM entitled ?Fluids in the Earth?,
while also enhancing graduate student training and mentoring. Moreover, the
further development of the Ti-flow reactor in the course of the proposed study
enhances the research infrastructure available to scientists involved in
research and training in geology, biology and chemistry, as well as in a broad
range of engineering disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;