* 0813690
* Mercury Oxidation and Depletion in the Reactive Halogen Enriched Troposphere of the Dead Sea
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Menachem Luria, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2012
* USD 449,982.00

The aim of this study is to elucidate atmospheric conditions and chemical
pathways responsible for recently observed atmospheric mercury depletion events
(AMDE) at the Dead Sea in Israel. Hypotheses include: (1) depletion of gaseous
elemental mercury (GEM) at the Dead Sea is accompanied by increased levels of
reactive gaseous mercury (RGM) and particulate forms (PHg), which would confirm
that AMDE at the Dead Sea are analogous to those observed in the polar
troposphere; (2) AMDE are correlated with high levels of reactive halogen
compounds (RHC), specifically BrOx (Br + BrO); (3) even small concentrations of
RHC may initiate GEM oxidation, with implications for other midlatitude marine
boundary layer sites with lower RHC levels. These hypotheses will be tested by
simultaneous measurement of speciated mercury, halogen oxides, nitrogen oxides,
ozone, sulfate aerosols, fine particulates, and meteorological parameters. A
modeling study will help identify the mechanisms for reactive halogen chemistry
and mercury oxidation.

Knowledge of source and sink strengths of atmospheric mercury species is
critical for regulatory agencies to protect humans and ecosystems from this
potent toxin. The research will involve undergraduate and graduate students from
the University of Nevada, Reno. A partnership will be initiated with a local
(Nevada) school district to expose teachers and students to this research and
expand a current collaboration with their Gifted and Talented Program.