* 0813604
* IDC Conference 08 Workshops
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2008,02/28/2009
* Justine Cassell, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/28/2009
* USD 25,032.00

This is funding to support a pair of events in conjunction with the 2008
Interaction Design for Children conference (IDC08), which will take place June
11-13 in Evanston, Illinois: a Doctoral Consortium which will bring together
approximately 9 promising doctoral students from the United States and abroad
along with 3 distinguished research faculty; and a pre-conference Workshop on
Designing Technologies for Children with Special Needs that will culminate in a
keynote lecture that will explore the challenges, opportunities and complexities
behind producing international versions of a children's television program. The
annual IDC conference is the leading international forum for the presentation
and discussion of interaction design for children, from the perspective of
research as well as practice. IDC08 will strive to expand the reach of previous
conferences, both in terms of the number and kind of attendees, and in terms of
the number and kind of children that we target with our technologies. The goals
of the Doctoral Consortium are to increase the exposure and visibility of the
participants' work within the community, to help establish a sense of community
among this next generation of researchers, and to help foster their research
efforts by providing substantive feedback and guidance from a group of senior
researchers in the area in a supportive and interactive environment. Student
participants in the Doctoral Consortium will make formal presentations of their
work and will receive feedback from a faculty panel; the feedback is geared to
helping students understand and articulate how their work is positioned relative
to other research, whether their topics are adequately focused for thesis
research projects, whether their methods are correctly chosen and applied, and
whether their results are appropriately analyzed and presented. The Workshop on
Designing Technologies for Children with Special Needs will allow intellectual
exchange among top researchers and designers in this field. Discussions about
challenges for working with special populations, new methods for approaching
these challenges, and new directions for research and design will contribute to
and expand the research perspective of all participants. During the main
conference attendees of both events will present their work in poster sessions,
and abstracts will be included in the IDC Conference Proceedings as well in the
ACM Digital Library.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The pre-conference
workshops at IDC08 will bring together some of the best students, researchers
and practitioners in the field of interaction design for children, and will
thereby afford the younger participants a unique opportunity to gain wider
exposure in the community for their innovative ideas while also allowing them to
create a social network both among themselves and with senior colleagues in the
field. Since the IDC conferences host a diverse group along several dimensions
(such as nationality, scientific discipline, and research specialization),
participants' horizons will be broadened and new collaborations will emerge, to
the future benefit of the field.&lt;br/&gt;