* 0814549
* Modulation of Calcium Signaling in Neurons
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2011
* Stanley Thayer, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* James Deshler
* 06/30/2011
* USD 367,500.00

Nerve cells convert electrical signals into changes in calcium ion to trigger
biochemical responses. Only during stimulation or under pathological conditions
are calcium levels elevated. Under normal conditions the intracellular calcium
concentration is kept very low by a complex series of pathways that pump calcium
out of the cell or into organelles. The objective of this proposal is to study
three mechanisms by which calcium pumps embedded in the cell-surface membrane
are modulated. 1) Kinases are signaling proteins that regulate many cell
processes. The possibility that a kinase called Lyk modulates calcium pumps will
be tested. Lyk modulation of calcium pumps would identify a novel point of
cross-talk between the kinase and calcium signaling pathways in nerve cells. 2)
In response to toxic stimuli, calcium pumps move from cell-surface to
intracellular membranes. The mechanism of pump trafficking will be determined to
provide insight into how neurons adapt to stress. 3) Nerve cells express
multiple genetic variants of calcium pumps. The possibility that certain
variants specialize in regulating the calcium that triggers neurotransmitter
release, the basis for chemical communication between neurons, will be examined.
To achieve these goals, neurons will be grown in culture (in a dish) and studied
individually with optical and electrophysiological
instrumentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carrying out this project in a university
setting creates an environment for training scientists. Undergraduate and
predoctoral students, postdoctoral trainees and faculty on sabbatical leave have
all contributed to and will continue to participate in this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Calcium acts as an intracellular messenger that
triggers processes ranging from gene expression to the release of
neurotransmitters and hormones. Thus, fluctuations in calcium trigger adaptive
changes in neurons and play an essential role in cell-to-cell communication.
This work will increase our understanding of how neurons process information at
the molecular and cellular level.&lt;br/&gt;