* 0814260
* CNH: Collaborative Research: Integrated Dynamic Modeling of Ecosystem Services, Incentive-Based Policies, Land-Use Decisions, and Ecological Outcomes
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2008,03/31/2012
* Andrew Plantinga, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 03/31/2012
* USD 144,965.00

Over the past century, rapid growth of human population and the human economy
has transformed landscapes around the world. These transformations have reduced
and fragmented natural habitat, resulting in loss of biodiversity and many
ecosystem services. Maintaining biodiversity and ecosystem services while
meeting the needs of human society for food, fiber, fuel, and other essentials
requires integrated assessment of the biological and economic consequences of
land use and land management. This interdisciplinary research project will
develop and apply an integrated dynamic landscape-modeling approach to predict
and compare how alternative policy incentives and market forces affect land-use
decisions; how resulting land-use changes affect species conservation, carbon
storage, and the value of commodity production; and how this will affect future
land-use decisions. The investigators will approach these questions by
developing statistical models based on observed landowner behavior in order to
predict likely land-use changes as a function of current land-use conditions,
public policy, and market opportunities. Land-use changes have consequences for
species conservation, ecosystem services, and economic returns. Land-use
patterns shaped by these decisions will serve as input into models that predict
the status of species, the flow of ecosystem services, and the value of
commodity production from the landscape. Current land-use decisions and the
resulting set of consequences will set the stage for future conditions that
shape future policies and market opportunities, which, in turn, will affect
future land-use changes. This integrated approach will be used to analyze the
likely effect of alternative policies on land-use change dynamics, the
consequent trajectory for species conservation, ecosystem services, and economic
activities on the landscape. The integrated dynamic landscape modeling approach
will be applied to landscapes at several geographic scales, from the 48
contiguous states to regional analysis applied to the Willamette Basin in Oregon
and the Northern Lakes Region in Wisconsin. Two questions will be addressed by
using different scales of analysis within the same modeling approach: (1) How
much difference does inclusion of increased detail and spatial resolution make
to the analysis and results?, and (2) Can analyses be nested in the sense that
one can use the broad-scale analysis to highlight areas and species of concern,
at which point more detailed analysis can be undertaken using finer scale
analysis?

Conserving biodiversity and maintaining ecosystem services necessary for human
welfare in the long-run in the midst of a growing human economy with pressing
current needs requires careful planning based on an understanding of the full
set of consequences of human choices and actions. This project will integrate
economic and ecological research into a coherent framework to predict landscape
dynamics and the effects of these dynamics on biodiversity conservation,
ecosystem services, and economic production. The integrated landscape model
developed in this project will provide tools and insights that can be used to
improve decision making by a broad range of stakeholders. By facilitating
careful thinking about the pattern, extent, and intensity of human activities
across the landscape through time, this project may help landowners and policy
makers to achieve important species conservation and ecosystem service
objectives while also generating high economic returns over the long term. This
project is supported by the NSF Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems
(CNH) Program.

