* 0814244
* SGER: Cosmogenic 10-Be inventory of landslide debris in the steep Rio Chagres basin, Panama
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2008,01/31/2010
* Kyle Nichols, Skidmore College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 01/31/2010
* USD 10,600.00

The project goal is straight forward, to determine if landslides influence the
cosmogenic radionuclide (CRN) inventory of grain-sizes in a steep tropical
basin. By characterizing the nuclide input of landslide debris the research will
determine the importance of landslide sources and develop a mass and nuclide
model for basin-wide erosion rates. Specifically, the nuclide inventory of five
grain-sizes collected from 1) the landslide debris, 2) integrated depth profiles
from the landslide scar and 3) upstream channel sediment will be evaluated.
Channel bedrock samples will also be collected to test the nuclide input of
local sources for large grains. These data will result in a greater
understanding of the processes that contribute sediment to the Rio Chagres and
will assist in developing a mass and nuclide balance model to better
characterize the basin-wide erosion rates in similar
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Erosion rates are a major issue for many places.
Knowledge of these can help in planning, agricultural applications, and the
analysis of flood frequencies. It has been possible for several years to
estimate erosion rates from the ditribution of radionuclides that are contained
in sediments. However, the concentration of these may depend on source of
sediment and the grain sizes, leading to erroneous estimates. This project will
evaluate whether the erosion rates in an areas affected by landsliding processes
are affected by the size of the material in the sediments. This will lead to
better precision in calculating erosion rates in the future.