* 0814025
* CAREER: Microscopic Study of Photon Localization
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2008,05/31/2010
* Hui Cao, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 05/31/2010
* USD 119,596.00

In a highly disordered medium, light may be localized in small regions of the
size on the order of an optical wavelength. So far most experiments on photon
localization are performed on the macroscopic level. We propose microscopic
studies of photon localization using a near-field scanning optical microscope
and a scanning electron microscope. The interplay of light localization and
coherent amplification is a fascinating new field of research. We will
investigate the effect of optical gain on light diffusion in a random medium. In
addition to experimental studies, we will simulate photon localization
numerically with a new approach based on the finite-difference time-domain
method. The proposed interdisciplinary research will make a significant impact
on condensed matter physics, optics, and laser physics. The proposed educational
activities include: (1) establishment of a new multidisciplinary course,
Applications of Optics in Medicine and Environmental Science; (2) initiation of
an outreach program through the World-Wide-Web; (3) involvement of undergraduate
students and high school science teachers in leading-edge research work.
&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;Light scattering is a common phenomenon, occurring in
clouds and human tissue. The behavior of light in disordered media is of great
interest not only to physicists, but also to biologists. One extraordinary
phenomenon is photon localization: light can be "trapped" in a micrometer-sized
random medium. So far there has been no direct evidence of photon localization.
With the recent advance of nanotechnology, we propose to use nanometer-sized
tips to directly probe localized photons. In addition to experimental studies,
we will calculate photon localization with a new numerical simulation method. By
comparing the simulation result with the experimental data, we will gain a deep
insight of photon localization and its difference from electron localization.
The proposed interdisciplinary research will make a significant impact on
condensed matter physics, optics, and laser physics. The proposed educational
activities include: (1) creation of a new multidisciplinary course, Applications
of Optics in Medicine and Environmental Science; (2) initiation of an outreach
program through the World-Wide-Web; (3) involvement of undergraduate students
and high school science teachers in leading-edge research work.&lt;br/&gt;***
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;