* 0814030
* A Theoretical and Quantitative Macroeconomic Analysis of Labor Market Trends: 1970-2000
* SBE,SES
* 01/16/2008,01/31/2011
* Fatih Guvenen, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Niloy Bose
* 01/31/2011
* USD 165,595.00

The purpose of this project is to shed light on the economic forces behind some
significant labor market trends observed in the United States since the 1970's.
In addition, the project also aims to understand the consequences of these labor
market trends for the U.S. economy more broadly, by using rigorous theoretical
and quantitative economic modeling. The project is composed of three components,
which share this common goal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The first subproject focuses
on the broad trends related to the evolution of the wage distribution. For
example, in the past 30 years there have been substantial increases in overall
wage inequality as well as in the returns to education, which still continue
today. Will these trends continue in the coming decades? At the same time,
despite the significant rise in wage inequality, the rise in consumption
inequality has been rather muted. Should this give us comfort that these
developments are not likely to have important welfare consequences? To be able
to answer questions like these we need a sound understanding of the causes of
these phenomena; we need a model. Therefore the first subproject will
investigate whether the interaction of a human capital model---where the key
heterogeneity is in individuals' learning ability---with skill-biased technical
change (SBTC) can explain the observed features of the evolution of the wage
distribution. The proposed model is rich, yet analytically tractable, which
allows us to develop its implications theoretically. We also intend to provide a
comprehensive quantitative assessment of the model's ability to explain the
evolution of the wage distribution since the 1970's.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The
second subproject will elicit information about the nature of labor income risk
from individuals' economic choices (such as consumption choice), which contain
valuable information about the environment faced by individuals, including the
future (income) risks they perceive. Consumption-savings decision will be
modeled in a rich life-cycle framework, relaxing several important assumptions
made in earlier studies. These assumptions were designed to make the GMM
(Generalized Method of Moments) approach feasible. Instead, this project will
use the powerful new tools of Indirect Inference developed in the last decade,
which provides significant flexibility in estimating economic models with a rich
set of realistic features. This exercise poses several computational challenges,
and part of the contribution of this subproject will be to develop advanced
tools to make indirect inference feasible in complex macroeconomic models,
thereby having a broader impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The third subproject aims
to understand several developments that have profoundly changed women's role in
the labor market (what some economists have called the "quiet revolution").
Essentially, the labor force participation rate of married women increased from
33 percent in 1960 to almost 70 percent in 1990. Similar trends have been
observed in the educational attainment and occupational choices of women (which
have become more career-oriented). These trends have jointly given rise to the
emergence of "dual-career couples." This subproject therefore studies the
ramifications of the emergence of dual-career couples for the labor market
equilibrium. The project aims to understand how the labor market outcomes vary
across single- and dual-career couples, as well as how the rise in dual-career
couples affects the aggregate behavior of the labor market.&lt;br/&gt;