* 0814695
* Collaborative Research: Justification in Algebra:  Growing Understanding of Algebraic Reasoning (JAGUAR)
* EHR,DRL
* 01/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Jill Newton, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 09/30/2013
* USD 192,589.00

The main goal of the project is to understand how teachers 1) develop specific
mathematical knowledge (algebraic justification), 2) transform this knowledge to
classroom practice, and 3) advance in their pedagogy to promote students'
learning. The project will clarify the meaning of justification for school
algebra through collaborations among mathematicians, teachers, and mathematics
educators. The project focuses on the important and under-explored connection
between teachers' mathematical learning in a professional development
environment and the subsequent a) changes in their teaching practice and b)
continued deepening of their content knowledge in practice. Additionally, by
working with a select group of exemplary teachers, the project explores the
development of advanced inquiry teaching, namely teaching that supports
students' mathematics learning via justification activities. The project design
features a coordinated two-pronged approach in which teacher learning is
examined in the context of a mathematics content course and the teachers' own
classrooms. Data collection activities are designed to facilitate coordinated
analyses to investigate connections across these two contexts. The summer course
for teachers is modeled on a course that has been implemented successfully as
part of an NSF-funded professional development project. Similarly, activities
conducted with teachers during the academic year will provide opportunities for
the teachers to develop advanced teaching practices and opportunities for the
project team to investigate the development process. The project will utilize
and extend existing instruments for assessing students' and teachers'
understanding of justification. Algebra and algebraic reasoning are core to the
discipline of mathematics and have national importance for the development of
qualified STEM workforce.