* 0814049
* 27th International Conference on Mathematical Geophysics: student and early career scientist support, June 15-20, 2008 in Longyearbyen, Norway
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2009
* Claudia Pasquero, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 05/31/2009
* USD 39,000.00

This proposal requests funds to help support travel and meeting costs for
students and early career scientists at U.S. institutions to the 27th
International Conference on Mathematical Geophysics ?Dynamics in Earth Systems:
Flow, Fracture, and Waves? to be held in June 15-20, 2008 in Longyearbyen,
Norway, on the Spitsbergen Island of the Svalbard Archipelago. &lt;br/&gt;The
conference website is http://www.fys.uio.no/cmg2008/. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
conference brings together Earth scientists from across the
&lt;br/&gt;disciplines with physicists, applied mathematicians, and
computational scientists to discuss advances in mathematical and computational
techniques for understanding properties and processes in the Earth. This year?s
meeting emphasizes aspects of the solid and fluid earth in which the dynamics is
regulated by wave propagation and breaking, stress accumulation and fracture.
Those include flow and fracture of ice sheets, slips in faults and generation of
earthquakes, transport in geophysical turbulent flows and porous media, dynamics
of avalanches. This meeting provides a single multi-disciplinary forum for the
exchange of ideas and techniques across the disciplinary boundaries in the Earth
Sciences. Funds are requested to support travel and lodging costs for 15
students, post-docs, and early career scientists which is approximately one
third of the number attending &lt;br/&gt;past meetings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This meting is highly interdisciplinary and international
in nature and &lt;br/&gt;provides an important opportunity for U.S. students and
early career scientists from across the earth sciences and applied mathematics
to interact with senior scientists in a small informal setting. This year there
will also be an increased emphasis on mathematical aspects of the dynamics of
fracture, which can have sudden and destructive consequences, as in the breaking
of ice sheets (recently recognized of crucial importance for climate studies and
sea level rise predictions, given the unexpected observed acceleration of mass
loss from the ice sheets) and in the generation of earthquakes.