* 0814153
* Vegetative Roughness Controls on Aeolian Sediment Transport
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Jack Gillies, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 08/31/2013
* USD 300,063.00

The type and distribution of vegetation in arid environments play a critical
role in controlling the initiation of the wind-driven sediment transport system
as well as the magnitude of the flux of sand and dust. Despite this knowledge,
the role of natural vegetation is not well accounted for in present regional
wind erosion models. Previous research indicates that the change in sand
transport rate due to large solid non-erodible roughness elements is a function
of both the size and the distribution of the elements. For vegetation its
properties (e.g., porosity, flexibility, drag coefficients, distribution, etc.)
create uncertainty as to how similar their effects are as compared to solid
element roughness, which is typically assumed in current wind erosion models.
This project will investigate through field-based experimentation, how plant
community structure as characterized by its distribution pattern and associated
aerodynamic properties affects sand transport by wind. The data needed to answer
these questions will be collected at four sites within the USDA Jornada
Experimental Range (JER), NM, where the landscape has changed from one dominated
by grasslands to one that is becoming dominated by shrubs, with a resultant
increase in wind erosion and land degradation. The four sites represent
different stages of mesquite invasion at the JER. At each of the sites
instruments will measure regional and local wind speeds, surface shear stresses,
sand movement activity, and the vegetation distribution characteristics. This
research will aid in the identification of key characteristics of vegetation
that can be used to indicate either stability or the approach of a critical
threshold that subsequently leads to an increase in wind erosion and
environmental degradation. The results from this project will provide a means to
more accurately quantify the effect of sparse vegetation on sediment transport
thresholds and sand fluxes, which can be incorporated into regional wind erosion
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is designed to increase our
understanding of the links between wind-driven sediment transport processes and
vegetation in desert environments in general. Desert environments worldwide are
under pressure from climate change as well as expanding populations and their
need for resources. Vegetation plays a critical role in the stability of desert
environments, specifically as a buffer against wind erosion and the often-
associated dust emission process. However, as evident in parts of the Chihuahuan
desert in the U.S. southwest some desert plant communities, by virtue of their
survival mechanisms, can exacerbate wind erosion, leading to environmental
decline. Vegetation can therefore both positively and negatively influence wind
erosion processes and the results of this project will aid in determining the
nature and degree of these influences under a variety of environmental
conditions. Such knowledge can subsequently be used to aid in evaluating how
climate change and human-induced pressures could exacerbate degradation in these
sensitive areas.