* 0814457
* EAR-PF: Biogeochemistry of Nitrogen Associated with Discharge of Coal Bed Methane Production Water: Transport and Fate in Western Watersheds
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2010
* Rebecca Barnes, Barnes                  Rebecca        T
* Fellowship Award
* Lina Patino
* 09/30/2010
* USD 160,000.00

Dr. Rebecca Barnes is awarded an NSF Earth Science Postdoctoral Fellowship to
carry out a program of research and education at the United States Geological
Survey, Boulder. Dr. Barnes will examine the effects of coal bed methane (CBM)
extraction in the chemistry of streams in the Powder River Basin, Wyoming. The
research goals will be accomplished by examining the changes in nitrogen budgets
and behavior in the semi-arid watershed. The investigation will be based on
intensive sampling of stream waters, and field and laboratory experiments to
determine changes in the nitrification rates. Chemical analyses of water will
include ammonium concentrations and nitrogen and oxygen isotopes. These results
will contribute to better understanding of the chemical effects of coal bed
methane extraction on stream waters. The information can be used to inform
decisions as new CBM extraction areas begin production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition, Dr. Barnes will collaborate with faculty from the University of
Colorado - Boulder, Fort Lewis College and the Mountain Studies Institute in
developing field based classes for members of the San Juan Mountains community
to foster watershed literacy. This community was selected because there is
potential for CBM extraction in the future.&lt;br/&gt;