* 0814794
* CNH:   Collaborative Research:   Determinants of Grassland Dynamics in Tibetan Highlands:  Livestock, Wildlife, and the Culture and Political Economy of Pastoralism
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2014
* Andrew Smith, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2014
* USD 293,390.00

Grassland degradation is a global concern, affecting not only wild species and
pastoralists who rely on healthy grasslands for their survival, but also non-
local people who suffer from resultant hydrological disturbances, dust storms,
commodity scarcity, and social consequences of uprooted people. Livestock
grazing is the dominant form of land use in Central Asia, and pastures of the
Tibetan highlands are located upstream and upwind of roughly 40 percent of the
world's human population. Grasslands on the Tibetan plateau usually are
described as increasingly degraded. Causes for this grassland degradation are
variously attributed to over-stocking of livestock, poor livestock management,
historical-cultural factors, alteration of land-tenure arrangements, rapid
changes in socioeconomic systems, climate change, and excessive herbivory and
soil disturbance from wildlife. Prior research has yet to provide clear support
for any putative causative agents, however, and previous studies have not
examined interactions and complexity among these factors. As a result, policy
choices to reduce or reverse grassland degradation often are made without a
clear rationale and are based more on prejudice or convenience than evidence of
their effectiveness. This interdisciplinary project will examine multiple
correlates of grassland status and trends simultaneously, using replicated
measurements at permanent plots in a multi-strata design, measuring the strength
of evidence for various competing hypotheses. The investigators will link
ecological measurements directly to current and recent historical actions by
pastoralists, which in turn are affected by cultural norms, economic incentives,
and policies of central and provincial governments. In addition to biophysical
attributes of each site, livestock density and pasture usage patterns will be
quantified. Each site also will be described by the particular grazing strategy
employed by the pastoralist managing it, and that strategy, in turn, will be
related to the complex of economic and policy incentives and historical
determinants that pastoralists face. These data will be used to develop models
that link broad historical, policy, economic, and cultural factors to local
grassland conditions as mediated by the agency of individual pastoralists. The
models can also be used to evaluate the implications of different policy
interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will deepen basic understanding
of the complex interactions involving geophysical, biological, social, and
policy factors and feedback systems that affect grassland status. Because
multiple factors affect grasslands simultaneously and interactions are critical,
the interdisciplinary, the systems-approach adopted by this project is
fundamental. Enhanced understanding of this socioecological system will provide
important input for policies on grassland restoration, biodiversity, and
economic development in arid ecosystems worldwide. In addition to the education
and training of students, the project will train a number of Tibetan field
assistants, and the researchers will coordinate their work closely with local
and provincial grassland and forestry officials. Direct collaboration with
Chinese scientists and officials as well as facilitated workshops will enable
research results to be understood by policy makers. Direct interactions with
local pastoralists will allow immediate, practical applications of project
results. This project is supported by the NSF Dynamics of Coupled Natural and
Human Systems (CNH) Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;