* 0814442
* North Dakota: Research Infrastructure and Partnerships for Discovery
* O/D,EPS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* Philip Boudjouk, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Cooperative Agreement
* Timothy VanReken
* 08/31/2014
* USD 16,500,000.00

Goals: North Dakota RII proposal will bring together people, tools, and ideas to
lay the foundation for a durable, competitive and cutting edge research
infrastructure with the primary focus on competitive research in renewable
energy and flexible electronics and materials ? two areas of critical importance
to North Dakota (ND). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: New knowledge
generated by this work will lead to greater understanding of issues at the core
of problems in energy and microelectronics. The Flexible Electronic Materials
(FlexEM) program has three major thrusts: 1) Barriers for Flexible Electronics;
2) Conjugated Organic Polymers for Flexible Electronics; and 3) Electronic
Materials from Liquid Silanes. The proposed research aims at design,
preparation, characterization, modeling, (and ultimately, prediction of
behavior) of thin films and layered structures, which will enable flexible
electronic technologies such as e-paper, photovoltaics, and health monitoring
devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SUstainable eNergy Research Infrastructure and
Supporting Education (SUNRISE) program will elucidate fundamental aspects of
heterogeneous catalysis, especially at the nanoscale, that are relevant to
developing alternative transportation fuels and chemical feedstocks.
Heterogeneous catalysts will be studied to gain knowledge about the electronic
structure, surface morphology and defects, effects of doping and
functionalization, redox properties, and finite size effects. Catalysts that
show potential for the synthesis of preferred organic compounds that can be
exploited to produce fuels, chemicals, and polymer monomeric feedstocks will be
of particular interest. Emphasis will be placed on studies of transition metal
(e.g., Co, Pd, Pt) catalysts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The major
underrepresented groups in North Dakota are Native Americans and women.
Nurturing American Tribal Undergraduate Research and Education (NATURE) is a
multifaceted program that greatly increases the involvement of our five Tribal
Colleges in STEM education and research. The ND EPSCoR program also administers
Women In Science and Engineering (WISE) to provide supplemental funding to women
faculty for lab upgrades and additional research staff. ND EPSCoR also
appropriates funding for Women in Science, Mathematics, Engineering and
Technology (WISMET) a networking group that provides mentoring for women
undergraduate/graduate students and women faculty. The involvement on the
research university campus continues in the proposed program with commitments to
four new tenure track faculty slots for the Flexem and SUNRISE initiatives. At
least 50 new faculty will be hired in the broader STEM areas at University of
North Dakota and NDSU. &lt;br/&gt;