* 0814517
* 2008 FASEB Meeting for Retinal Neurobiology and Visual Processing; July 20-25, 2008 in Snowmass Colorado
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Peter Lukasiewicz, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Mark Kirk
* 06/30/2009
* USD 20,000.00

The retina is part of the central nervous system and has long been recognized as
one of the best experimental systems for neurobiological research. Many
important principles of synaptic communication, neuronal circuitry, signal
transduction, circadian biology and development were first established in the
retina. The FASEB conference on Retinal Neurobiology and Visual Processing
builds on this tradition and brings together the best speakers, scientists and
trainees to discuss cutting-edge retinal research. This meeting is held
biennially and is considered the premier meeting in the field. The 2008
conference will explore recent findings and new trends in retinal research,
spanning fields from the basic science of visual processing to novel approaches
to treat blindness. This broad focus and high quality meeting attracts first-
rate scientists and trainees, and provides an intimate scientific setting that
is unique in the retina field. Research findings are presented in two formats:
formal talks and poster sessions. When not in sessions, participants remain at
the meeting site, where they engage in informal discussions and exchange ideas.
The FASEB meeting plays an important role in attracting and retaining talented
trainees and researchers in the area of retinal biology. Ideas and discussions
at these FASEB conferences have stimulated novel, high-impact research and
generated new scientific collaborations. This meeting always receives rave
reviews from the attendees and is a key element in promoting and fostering the
highest quality retinal research.