* 0814512
* RUI:   CyGaMEs:   Cyber-Enabled Teaching and Learning through Game-based, Metaphor Enhanced Learning Objects
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2014
* Charles Wood, Wheeling Jesuit University
* Continuing Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,999,467.00

This is a project to explore Game-based, Metaphor Enhanced (GaME) design. GaME
is a method for applying cognitive science metaphor theory toward the design of
computer-mediated learning environments. The process uses structure mapping
theory to design videogame worlds aligned with science concepts. This is a
rigorous specification procedure for mapping relational structure from targeted
concept to game world. GaME design translates a targeted concept into a game
system, game play, and game goal. Because the relational structure of the game
world is designed as an analog of the targeted conceptual domain, players begin
to construct mental models of the targeted concept during interactive gameplay.
This makes learning concrete and embodied. Gameplay experiences are designed to
guide the learner to discover the relational structure of the targeted concept.
This gameplay is a readiness activity for preparing the learner for subsequent
instruction. The primary objective of the Cyber-Enabled Teaching and Learning
through Game-based, Metaphor Enhanced Learning Objects (CyGaMEs) project is to
empirically test this application of cognitive science theory. Aptly designed
videogame worlds will provide common experience that prepares educators and
their learners to achieve success. CyGaMEs employs cognitive science, informatic
sciences, and analysis methodologies to enhance control over what games do:
Engage learning through doing, discovery, and inquiry. While each player takes
an idiosyncratic route, applied structure mapping theory ensures that gameplay
exploration proceeds toward the learning goal. Selene: A Lunar Creation GaME is
the core of CyGaMEs research. This project will: (a) complete, refine and test
existing Selene prototype, (b) collect GaME data representing perceptions and
learning, (c) develop and refine new methods and metrics for assessing
motivation, engagement, and achievement within instructional videogames, and (d)
integrate GaME data collection and assessment within a cyber-enabled informatics
infrastructure.