* 0814559
* Frontier Research Empirical Study Proposal: Understanding Academic Performance in Organic Chemistry: An Investigation Examining Underrepresented Groups
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Richard Shavelson, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/2011
* USD 804,594.00

Thousands of students enroll in "Introduction to Organic Chemistry" (O-CHEM)
each year. Successful completion of O-CHEM is a prerequisite for many graduate
and professional STEM programs, yet the failure rate is notoriously high. O-CHEM
has unique knowledge representation protocols that often challenge even students
who initially master general chemistry. There are very few large-scale studies
examining why some students succeed while others have difficulty in O-CHEM. Such
issues are of particular importance when considering the impact on under-
represented minority students and women. A large body of evidence indicates that
these groups perform significantly worse in O-CHEM, contributing to the under-
representation of these groups in STEM careers. Previous studies by the PI
focusing on how students succeed in STEM courses used techniques such as
concept-mapping to examine "knowledge organization." Recent studies show that
both experts and high-achieving students demonstrate enhanced knowledge bases.
No study has examined how knowledge organization mediates academic performance
in O-CHEM. Furthermore, no study has examined the activities employed by
students to organize their knowledge appropriately, although more generally,
investigations into both expert performance and academic success have
demonstrated that concentrated, goal-directed activities are correlated with
superior performance. Previous studies by the PI have successfully identified
the importance of such activities using techniques such as think aloud protocol
analysis, structured interviews, and diaries. &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this study
is to combine the insights provided by multiple measurement techniques such as
concept-mapping, think-aloud protocol analysis, and diaries in order to examine
factors contributing to both academic success and difficulties in O-CHEM,
particularly among under-represented minority students and women. This is a
"frontier research empirical study." It is being undertaken collaboratively
between departments of education, psychology (cognitive science), and chemistry.
It is examining equal numbers of minority and non-minority students, and equal
numbers of males and females within each group. Groups are also comprised of
equal numbers of high-, average-, and low-achieving students. &lt;br/&gt;This
study has four specific objectives; to 1) Examine O-CHEM knowledge structures to
identify major conceptual difficulties; 2) Compare student-instructor O-CHEM
knowledge structure correspondence and identify specific discrepancies; 3)
Compare O-CHEM problem solving success and knowledge structures, and; 4) Compare
specific study activities and knowledge structures. It may lead to the design of
randomized trial studies involving individualized and group tutoring in O-CHEM
and, ultimately, the restructuring of O-CHEM syllabi and teaching methods in
order to close potential gaps between student knowledge and instructor ideals.