* 0814377
* Interaction of Ultracold Atoms and Molecules with Surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Dennis Clougherty, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2012
* USD 240,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and education in
theoretical physics in an area related to the interaction of ultracold atoms and
molecules with surfaces. The award is supported by DMR and a partnership with
NSF EPSCoR. The research addresses the theoretical challenge of non-
perturbatively describing the dynamics of a quantum system that is strongly
coupled to a continuum of surface and bulk excitations. A multichannel
formulation of inelastic quantum scattering will be extended and applied to
quantum sticking and desorption. Using Fredholm theory for systems of coupled
integral equations and diagrammatic perturbation theory, asymptotic solutions
will be sought in the low energy regime. Within the multichannel formalism
developed, novel multiphonon resonances recently seen in numerical calculations
of the Debye-Waller factor will be analyzed, and the effects of non-zero
substrate temperature will be explored. The behavior of the probability of
sticking as the particle energy tends to zero?the threshold law for quantum
sticking?will be calculated for a variety of model coupling forms and potentials
having application to physical systems that include: (1) neutral atoms impinging
on helium-II, (2) neutral atoms impinging on simple metals, (3) a Bose-Einstein
condensate (BEC) impinging on a dielectric substrate, (4) charged atoms
impinging on dielectric substrates, and (5) charged atoms impinging on simple
metals. Efforts will focus on the possibility of threshold laws deviating from
those ascribed to quantum reflection. Investigations will include threshold
effects stemming from many-body effects (1) of the final state such as the
infrared catastrophe, and (2) of nonlinear interactions in the case of the
BEC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has a strong education component
involving the training of graduate students and a continuation of the PI's long
history of recruiting undergraduates in cutting edge research projects with
publishable outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports fundamental theoretical research and education on the quantum
physics related to the interaction of ultracold atoms and molecules with
surfaces. The award is supported by DMR and a partnership with NSF EPSCoR. The
research is grounded in the usual quantum phenomena observed when very low
energy objects are propelled towards a surface and bounce off. This is exactly
the opposite of classical systems where attractions between surfaces and nearby
object causes them to stick, at least when the speed of the object is extremely
small. This phenomenon of a perfect quantum bounce has moved from the status of
an intellectual curiosity to one of central importance in the field of cold atom
research and the associated relevance of that to nanotechnology. Advances in
this area of cold atom research can be crucial for developing new miniaturized
atom chips in which atoms are trapped less than a micron or so from the
surface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will be conducted with the
participation of graduate and undergraduate students who will be trained in
modern methods of theory with applications to nanotechnology, preparing them for
careers in science and nanotechnology. The research will be performed in
collaboration with scientists from the US and abroad, strengthening and
enriching the US physical community.&lt;br/&gt;