* 0814505
* Collaborative Research:  Copepods in a Warming Climate: A Pan-Regional Model of Arctic and Northwest Atlantic Systems
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2013
* Chang-Sheng Chen, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 06/30/2013
* USD 226,754.00

The goal of GLOBEC is to understand the underlying biological-physical
interactions that determine how climate change affects abundance of marine
animals. The GLOBEC approach focuses on individuals and populations dynamics of
target species. This study will address major PRS themes by examining the
influence of climate on physical and biological processes for a synthetic
understanding of how basin- and global-scales changes in climate force physical
processes that control local and panregional-scale biological communities. The
investigators will use the approaches suggested in the RFP, including
panregional physical-biological modeling, by connecting and comparing NWA and
Arctic Ocean regions. As part of the GLOBEC NW Atlantic (NWA) program, they
developed a 3D biological-physical model to examine effects of climate forced
boundary conditions on plankton and dominant copepod species dynamics in the
Georges Bank-Gulf of Maine region. Separately, they have also developed a new 3D
model of the Arctic Ocean (AO) region and are using it to examine transport of
dominant copepod species. As yet, these two models have not been connected to
each other. In this pan-regional study, the investigators will combine these
models to study linkages between these two systems under scenarios of global
warming. They will examine a series of hypotheses that address how dominant
copepod species populations in these regions may interact under future warming
conditions. Specifically they will use the combined model together with existing
data on abundances and vital rates to study how a melting Arctic is likely to
affect the distribution and abundance of copepod species across the whole of the
Arctic-North Atlantic panregional domain. The proposed work involves four steps:
1) merge the NWA and AO physical models via a new global model grid, extending
their lower food web model (NPZD) across the pan-regional domain, to generate
present and future (2050) environmental conditions. 2) use these modeled
environmental conditions together with life histories of key species to
determine their population growth potential within and across regions, 3) use an
individual based model (IBM) parameterized for key species to examine effects of
transport and behavior on population growth and resulting pan-regional
distribution patterns, 4) develop a new evolutionary IBM for a generic copepod
to determine selection of optimal life history traits under existing and future
(warm) conditions across the pan-regional domain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
detailed, process-oriented, pan-regional modeling study will provide new
insights into the biological-physical mechanisms that determine how global
warming affects populations of key marine zooplankton species, which occupy a
central position in marine food webs. The resulting model will provide a
powerful new tool for understanding how pan-regional interactions control
ecology and biogeography of dominant marine
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results of this work will be broadly disseminated
to the general oceanographic community, K-12 institutions, and to the population
at large, through web-based servers using existing infrastructure at the
proposers? institutions. Web-based users can access model results and run the
model using chosen parameter settings to obtain predictions of currents,
hydrography, and plankton abundance patterns given selected climate forcing
scenarios. The investigators will sponsor undergraduate students in scientific
and public outreach aspects of the project. Collaboration with the NE COSEE, SEA
LAB, and Whyville programs for educational outreach with K12 students and the
public both nationally and internationally.