* 0814531
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Patent Law Borders at the Crossings of Indigenous Self-determination and Biotechnology Research in South Africa
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2009
* Laura Foster, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Martinek
* 07/31/2009
* USD 12,000.00

PI and Co-PI: Sandra Hardin and Laura Foster

UCLA

Title: Doctoral Dissertation Research: Patent Law Borders at the Crossings of
Indigenous Self-determination and Biotechnology Research in South Africa

SES - 0814531

Project Abstract

This research examines the socio-legal processes of production surrounding
Hoodia plant products, an appetite suppression agent. Hoodia is a plant grown in
southern Africa and used by the indigenous Khoi/San for generations to suppress
appetite. In 1996, South Africa's Council for Scientific and Industrial Research
(CSIR) obtained a patent on Hoodia?s P57 compound for commercialization as an
anti-obesity product. In 2003, CSIR signed a benefit sharing agreement giving 6
to 8% of their profit to the Khoi/San. The agreement with CSIR, however, only
applies to the production of Hoodia products in the form of the patented P57
compound through CSIR and its partners. Thus, a second benefit sharing agreement
was signed in February 2006 between the Khoi/San and the South African Hoodia
Growers (SAHG) to ensure that the Khoi/San would receive some benefits from
Hoodia products sold outside of the CSIR agreement such as for the herbal
supplement market. In light of this activity around the patenting of Hoodia, the
plant becomes a significant site of inquiry for examining the complexities of
patent law in relation to indigenous knowledge. The specific production
practices under investigation are the patenting of Hoodia and subsequent benefit
sharing agreements (i.e. law), the identification of the P57 compound by CSIR in
comparison with its identification by the Khoi/San (i.e. science), and the
advertising of Hoodia products to consumers (i.e. market). In order to answer
these questions, this project will use qualitative research methods. The
investigator will conduct interviews and participant observations with relevant
social actors in South Africa as well as document analysis of legal materials
and web content. By investigating the production of the Hoodia plant using a
variety of data sources, this project will contribute to socio-legal scholarship
by developing a more nuanced and textured understanding of how these production
practices work together and how they involve the production and re-figuring of
indigenous knowledge and categories of identity in ways that might marginalize
and/or empower indigenous peoples and indigenous women. The project will also
take into account critiques by indigenous women arguing against patent law, and
examine how the production of Hoodia across law, science, and market involves
complex negotiations of gender. One major goal of the project is to produce
generalizable knowledge that can have broader impacts by enabling stronger
protections for indigenous knowledge under the law and within scientific
research protocols. Another goal is to develop an understanding of how the
patenting of indigenous knowledge impacts indigenous women differently.