* 0814411
* Evolution of Neural Circuits for Locomotion
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Paul Katz, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* David Coppola
* 08/31/2013
* USD 523,206.00

Understanding the neural mechanisms that underlie the evolution of species-
specific behavior is a fundamental quest in biology. This project takes
advantage of unique characteristics of the nervous systems of gastropod molluscs
(sea slugs) that allow detailed comparisons to be made of the neuronal circuits
underlying behavior in closely-related species. In sea slugs, distinct nerve
cells or neurons can be recognized among individual animals within a species
based on unique anatomical and physiological characteristics. The same
characteristics can be used to recognize those neurons in the brains of other
sea slug species. In this way, the roles of these neurons in producing behavior
can be assessed. The project uses electrophysiological and neuroanatomical
techniques to study the properties of neurons and their connections. It also
uses new techniques for probing the genes that are expressed by individual
neurons. The project uses a new web-based tool called NeuronBank.org to allow
students and researchers at several institutions to share results of research
projects. This will provide a training opportunity for students to learn basic
neurobiological techniques and apply them to an important scientific question.
It is expected that uncovering the differences in simpler circuits in sea slugs
will provide an understanding of how complex behaviors arose during evolution.
Just as one would like to know how human intelligence arises from a brain
structure that is similar to that of monkeys, sea slugs offer the opportunity to
figure out how species can differ at the level of circuits composed of
identified neurons, something that is currently not feasible to investigate in
mammals.