* 0814544
* Phylogeny of Apidae (Hymenoptera) with an emphasis on the evolution and antiquity of eusociality
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Bryan Danforth, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Ranker
* 08/31/2012
* USD 401,236.00

The bee family Apidae comprises nearly 6000 described species (~35% of the bees
in the world), including a diverse array of social forms, including solitary and
communal orchid bees (Euglossini), the primitively eusocial bumble bees
(Bombini), the advanced eusocial honey bees (Apini), and the stingless bees
(Meliponini). Understanding the evolutionary history of social behavior in apid
bees requires a phylogeny at the tribal and generic levels. However, currently a
clear understanding of the phylogeny of this group is lacking because different
data sets provide highly conflicting results. Morphological data and the fossil
record appear to suggest a single origin of advanced eusociality (reproductive
division of labor, overlapping generations, and cooperative care of young),
while multiple molecular studies have supported dual origins of advanced
eusociality. This project will combine data from morphology, the fossil record,
and large molecular data sets generated with novel 454 Lifesciences sequencing
technology to resolve the conflicting results obtained by previous studies. The
research will allow a re-assessment of the morphological data, and are-
examination of apid fossils from Dominican, Baltic, and North American amber
deposits. The combination of fossil data and DNA sequence data will allow
application of relaxed-clock dating methods to estimate the antiquity of the
apid bees and the antiquity of eusociality. The project will lead to a revised
classification for the family and improved understanding of the evolutionary
history of bees.

Bees are vital biodiversity components of the natural world and are critically
important for pollination in human agrarian systems. These social insects are at
risk in the biodiversity challenges facing the world, and the project will train
more of the kinds of scientists needed to understand the extent of the risks as
well as potential solutions for such challenges. The project will include
traditionally underrepresented groups in the research, and partnerships with
several universities and museums will provide a strong outreach to the general
public. The project will facilitate education of systematists and provide basic
knowledge for understanding a unique group of insects that are of great
practical importance to human society.

