* 0814372
* Nevada Infrastructure for Climate Change Science, Education, and Outreach
* O/D,EPS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Nicholas Lancaster, Nevada System of Higher Education
* Cooperative Agreement
* Sian Mooney
* 08/31/2013
* USD 15,000,000.00

Abstract Proposal: EPS-08114372

Proposal Title: Nevada Infrastructure for Climate Change Science, Education, and
Outreach

Institution: Nevada System of Higher Education

This Nevada EPSCoR Rll project seeks to create a statewide interdisciplinary
program that stimulates research, education, and outreach centered on the
effects of regional climate change on ecosystem resources. The six focus areas
in this project are: climate modeling; ecological change; water resources;
cyberinfrastructure; education; and policy, including related decision-making
and public outreach. The goal is to build capacity to model regional climate
change, evaluate methods to downscale model output, understand and quantify key
ecological and hydrological processes, translate climate change science into
formats usable by decision-makers, integrate models and data, and improve how
students learn about climate change.

Intellectual Merit: Ongoing climate changes in Nevada are resulting in complex
interactions among climate, biophysical, and human systems. To date, most
efforts to address these issues have been directed at the global scale. There is
limited understanding of regional processes and their impacts. This project will
take an integrated approach to learning how climate change will affect water
resources, linked ecosystem services, and human systems. The primary questions
to be addressed are (1) How will climate change affect water resources and
linked ecosystem services and human systems? and (2) How will climate change
affect disturbance regimes and linked systems? Related questions include
identification of forcing factors underlying recent climate changes; feedback
mechanisms between climate and vegetation; impact of locally generated aerosols
on climate; and effects of change in precipitation type on hydrology. This
project in the unique natural laboratory of the Great Basin has the potential to
transform climate change studies at regional and sub-regional scales.

Broader Impacts: Strategies to increase diversity are woven throughout the six
components that will drive the research. A key strategy is to make results from
the research easily available via an accessible, on-line data portal. Outreach
to diverse stakeholders will be accomplished by identifying important needs in
climate change research as well as informing and involving the public in climate
change science. Nevada has a strong history of involvement in K-12 outreach as
well as undergraduate and graduate research. This outreach will continue with
summer research programs, academic year scholarships, mentorship programs for
graduate students, and training for teachers in climate change science.
Recruitment of new faculty and graduate students will target underrepresented
groups. A statewide virtual information center for climate change will be
created to focus on outreach, and visualization strategies will be employed to
communicate findings to the public and policy makers.