* 0814051
* Functional Analysis of TEV Internal Ribosome Entry Site
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Dixie Goss, CUNY Hunter College
* Continuing Grant
* Roy Welch
* 07/31/2012
* USD 562,450.00

A major deviation from the classical model of translation occurs for those mRNAs
that lack a cap structure. These mRNAs possess a structured, non-coding region
of 5' RNA known as an IRES (internal ribosome entry site). IRES are also
beginning to be identified in cellular RNA. Generally, they are found under
conditions where overall translation is compromised. The 5' untranslated region
(UTR) of viral mRNA is sufficient to confer its cap-independent translation,
however the mechanism of IRES translation (including viral translation) is not
well understood. This project will elucidate the mechanisms of IRES function by
using the 5' UTR of tobacco etch virus (TEV) as a model system. The TEV 5' UTR
secondary structure has been mapped by chemical probing and mutagenesis. Three
inter-related phases of the initiation process will be examined. These are 1)
eIF binding, 2) helicase activity and 3) ribosome binding activity. Each of
these activities will be measured for a select library of TEV constructs with
differing translational activity. The eIF binding will be monitored by direct
fluorescence assays. Base pairing changes associated with helicase activity will
be elucidated by using fluorescent labels incorporated into specific locations
in the RNA and nmr measurements. Ribosome binding will be measured by direct
fluorescence methods and sucrose gradient analysis. The experiments described
here will elucidate the molecular interactions that allow viral IRES to compete
effectively with the much higher concentrations of cellular RNA for translation.
&lt;br/&gt; Plant viral diseases affect a significant number of food crops
world-wide and can have severe impact both on economic conditions and food
supply. There is potential to use information from this research not only to
control viruses but also to develop systems to produce desired proteins which
are nutritionally beneficial, antibodies or have economic uses. TEV is one of
the simplest IRES elements, so it serves as a model system to increase our
understanding of more complex viral and cellular IRES function. The experiments
will provide excellent training for students from high school through graduate
school in both biochemical and quantitative measurements. Many of the students
involved in research in the past have been from underrepresented minority groups
and this is likely to continue in the future. These students will contribute to
a diverse and well trained workforce in science and technology.