* 0814905
* Comprehensive Error Analysis in NMR Relaxation for Accurate Assessment of Protein Dynamics
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2013
* Rieko Ishima, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/2013
* USD 413,944.00

During the past two decades, advances in NMR and its related technologies have
tremendously increased the sensitivity of NMR relaxation experiments. NMR-
derived parameters now have sufficient sensitivity to allow comparison with
parameters obtained by other methods, such as molecular dynamics simulations and
thermodynamics experiments. However, for meaningful results to emerge and for
reasonable comparison of NMR-derived dynamics with those obtained by other
methods, accurate evaluation of uncertainties in the NMR-derived parameters is
critical. The objective of this project is to provide a comprehensive assessment
of the relaxation errors for a variety of experiments. Based on this assessment,
uncertainty estimations will be incorporated into software packages to allow
accurate extraction of protein dynamics. Such analyses will significantly impact
the field and are crucial at the present time when NMR dynamics studies are
increasingly used to interpret unique features in enzymatic mechanisms and other
biological processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research will be
widely distributed via journal publications and websites, promoting their broad
application in the NMR community and facilitating the development of new and
existing analysis tools in the field. Removing impediments caused by improper
error estimation, this work will allow the merging and integration of NMR
results with those derived by other biophysical methods. Such seamless
integration is important for future progress in Biophysics and Structural
Biology. This project will also provide interdisciplinary training for students.
An advanced NMR course comprising theory and experiments will be integrated into
the Molecular Biophysics and Structural Biology Graduate Curriculum and
increased opportunities for summer undergraduate research will be created. Also,
science exposure in the local communities will be increased and Structural
Biology will be brought to K-12 schools.&lt;br/&gt;