* 0814006
* Workshop: A Workshop on Friction: A Grand Challenge at the Interface of Solid and Fluid Mechanics; Chamonix, France, March 13-14, 2008
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2008,07/31/2008
* Beverley McKeon, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 07/31/2008
* USD 49,998.00

The multi-scale challenges of friction, which arise across disciplines at solid-
solid and solid-fluid interfaces, have limited the engineering community's
ability to describe the process in a deterministic manner. This grant enables
the convening of a small workshop to initiate a "cross-fertilization" of
methodology between fluid and solid mechanics communities studying this problem
at different interfaces and to tackle the grand challenge of the formulation of
unified analysis techniques. The small group of attendees will be selected to
include broad and diverse participation across the disciplines of fluid
mechanics (microfluidics, slip, turbulent boundary layers), solid mechanics
(friction, multiscale analysis and material physics) and dynamical
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improved understanding and modeling of the
multiple origins of friction form a vital component of technologies aimed at
reducing the environmental impact of human development and transportation. The
implications for solid-solid interfaces include reduced wear, noise, vibration,
etc. and increased transmission efficiency in many applications. At interfaces
between fluid flow and solid materials this enhanced understanding holds
potential for advances ranging from turbulent skin friction reduction for
increased vehicle efficiency, improved models and control of pollutant
dispersion by atmospheric winds in urban "rough" environments to advanced
understanding of environmental physics and climate phenomena such as ice-field
development and glacier melting. The need for significant progress challenges
the engineering community both to find interdisciplinary approaches that
integrate elements of fundamental solid and fluid mechanics and to develop
active control techniques to shape the coupling between friction at the
interface and the overall system response in optimal ways.&lt;br/&gt;