* 0814373
* Collaborative Research: Creating a Bean Beetle Curriculum Development Network
* EHR,DUE
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2014
* Lawrence Blumer, Morehouse College
* Standard Grant
* Katherine J. Denniston
* 02/28/2014
* USD 147,038.00

Biological Sciences (61). "Creating a Bean Beetle Curriculum Development
Network" is a collaborative project between Emory University and Morehouse
College. The goal of the project is to expand the use of inquiry-based
laboratory exercises with the bean beetle model system, Callosobruchus
maculatus. There are four primary objectives. The first objective is to use
faculty workshops, along with the handbook and website created as part of an
earlier project, to develop faculty expertise in the use of bean beetles in
inquiry-based laboratory courses. The faculty recruited for these workshops will
be from biology disciplines, such as animal physiology, neurobiology, molecular
biology, genetics, and developmental biology that were not addressed in the
previous project. The second objective is to provide faculty in the workshops
the opportunity to adapt the inquiry-based laboratory exercises developed in the
previous project to fit their curricula and institutions. Fulfilling this
objective is allowing the implementation of these educational innovations in a
greater diversity of educational institutions. The third objective is for
faculty in the workshops to develop and implement new inquiry-based laboratory
studies (i.e., new learning materials) using bean beetles in the areas of animal
physiology, neurobiology, molecular biology, genetics, and developmental
biology. Finally, the fourth objective is for network participants to develop or
adapt assessment tools to evaluate their new laboratory exercises and to
implement those assessments.

The intellectual merit of the project lies in the development, testing and
implementation of inquiry-based laboratory experiments, which have been shown to
increase student understanding of scientific content, experimental design, and
the nature of science. By creating a curriculum development network, the project
is broadening significantly the disciplines within biology that will be able to
use bean beetles as a model system for inquiry-based laboratory courses. New
laboratory materials are being produced for courses in animal physiology,
neurobiology, molecular biology, genetics, and developmental biology. Finally,
the project is assessing the effectiveness of inquiry-based learning in
laboratory courses across a diversity of institutions and disciplines in
biology.

The broader impacts of the project emerge from the recruitment of faculty for
workshops from a diverse array of institutions. As a result, the curriculum
development network established at the proposed workshops is promoting better
teaching and learning in diverse settings. In addition, the workshops are
establishing partnerships that will continue to improve laboratory education in
biology. Furthermore, to increase involvement of under-represented minorities in
inquiry-based research, some workshop slots are being set aside for faculty from
community colleges and minority-serving institutions. Finally, the materials
developed by participants in the curriculum development network are being
disseminated through a devoted website, workshops and presentations at annual
meetings of the undergraduate STEM education community, and publication in
journals related to undergraduate STEM education.