* 0814328
* Developing Engineering Faculty as Leaders of Academic Change
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Elizabeth Cady, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Don Millard
* 08/31/2012
* USD 486,874.00

Engineering - Other (59)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is organizing a two-
day national workshop of approximately 25 engineering education leaders to
identify the knowledge and skills required to lead academic change processes and
to design a delivery system to effectively impart the identified knowledge and
skills to engineering faculty. The workshop includes interactive sessions to
review major international developments that set the context for academic
engineering leadership as well as relevant lessons learned from the pre-cursor
activities by the workshop organizers, to identify the challenges before
academic engineering educators and the skills needed to surmount the challenges,
to distill a list of desired leadership skills and parameters by which to guide
the development of programs of study by which to impart the desired skills, and
to explore options for the design, delivery and sustainability of a new program
for developing faculty capacity for academic change leadership. In post workshop
activities, attendees are organizing activities on their campuses to engage 250
additional faculty members in further discussion of workshop topics. In
addition, the organizers and a small group of engineering education faculty
members are translating the workshop outputs into a framework for a formal post-
graduate certificate program in academic change leadership that embodies the
desired knowledge, skills, and delivery mechanisms identified in the workshop to
be offered via Purdue's Butler Center for Leadership Excellence. In addition,
they are identifying engineering faculty (and ideally departments or colleges)
willing to participate in pilot implementations of the envisioned Engineering
Academic Change Management post-graduate certificate program. The evaluation
effort is assessing the effectiveness of the workshop and the on-campus follow-
up activities, the variety and novelty of the developed ideas, and changes in
the participants' attitudes. Results of the project are being disseminated by
postings on a website, by presentation at the engineering education conferences,
and by publishing and distributing the workshop proceedings. Broader impacts
include the dissemination of the material especially through the post-workshop
activities, which are engaging a much larger audience.