* 0814483
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Life and Death at Brothertown, An Archaeology of Endurance
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2008,02/28/2010
* Craig Cipolla, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2010
* USD 14,972.00

The main objective of the Brothertown Project (a collaboration between Craig
Cipolla and the Brothertown Indian Nation) is to explore the processes by which
the Brothertown Indians negotiated their identities between the 18th and 20th
centuries. During this period, the Brothertown Indian community embraced
Christianity, adopted the English language, and consumed an abundance of mass-
produced non-Native material culture. The project proposes, first, to examine
the changing burial practices implemented by the Brothertown Indians as an index
of the community's shifting identity. Second, to investigate the residential and
land-use patterns that contributed to this changing identity. To accomplish
these objectives, the Brothertown Project will map all known Brothertown
cemeteries in New York and Wisconsin, catalogue all gravestones found within,
and use ground penetrating radar to detect unmarked graves. In addition to the
cemetery analysis, historic maps of the Brothertown settlements will be analyzed
in terms of spatial distributions of individual and family plots. The comparison
of these patterns with the spatial distributions of graves in cemeteries will
offer insights into the ways that lived spaces and cemetery spaces related to
emerging social distinctions within the community.

The proposed activity has specific intellectual merit for historical archaeology
and cemetery studies. This project makes use of several new methods and
theoretical approaches. First, instead of focusing only on gravestone
iconography, it takes the entire cemetery into account as a unit of analysis.
This includes stone sizes, shapes, and materials along with overall spatial
layouts. These additional lines of evidence expand on classic approaches to
graveyards in historical archaeology and elsewhere. Second, this study compares
cemetery and residential patterns in order to gain new links between Brothertown
in life and Brothertown in death. It is anticipated that such a comparison will
offer new perspectives by juxtaposing these two distinct types of spaces,
linking the everyday life of the Brothertown community to the cemeteries that
commemorated their ancestors and their pasts.

Those that formed the Brothertown community in the 18th century were mostly
literate in the English language. The rich documentary record associated with
Brothertown is rare in terms of Native American histories which are typically
based on oral and ethnohistoric records. In terms of the anthropology and
archaeology of indigenous peoples in colonial and postcolonial contexts, the
"insider" perspective that the Brothertown context allows will likely shed light
on the complexities of colonial and postcolonial social negotiations and it will
certainly allow for more nuanced interpretation of the cemetery and residential
patterns under analysis. In the broadest sense, this project will be of interest
to anthropological and other social scientific studies of material culture and
mass consumption as it explores the social transitions one particular community
went through as it transformed its commemoration practices to incorporate mass-
produced gravestones. The proposed project is also important for the Brothertown
Indian Nation and many non-indigenous residents of historic Brothertown,
Wisconsin as it will act to preserve historic information contained on
gravestones and increase public awareness of local histories.