* 0814658
* Symposium entitled, Materials Structures - The Nabarro Legacy, at MRS Meeting, San Francisco, CA, March 24-28, 2008
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2008,03/31/2009
* Robert Pachavis, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Alan Ardell
* 03/31/2009
* USD 12,000.00

TECHNICAL: The Materials Structure - Nabarro Legacy (Symposium Z) will be held
at the 2008 spring meeting of the Materials Research Society in San Francisco,
CA from March 24-28, 2008. This symposium focuses on the impact of Professor
Frank Nabarro's work over the last 66 years on modern-day materials science and
engineering. The symposium will be a comprehensive meeting bringing together
standing exponents in the field and the 'materials science youth' focusing on
how the heritage and legacy of Professor F. R. N. Nabarro affects the
advancement of technology in manifold ways. The organizers have chosen invited
speakers whose research activities reflect the multidisciplinary and
international nature of the field. The intent of the symposium is to provide
researchers from academics, government and industrial laboratories an
interdisciplinary forum for interaction, discussion and exchange of ideas on
recent fundamental advances in understanding materials microstructures and the
resulting impact on the development and application of advanced materials. NON-
TECHNICAL: PIs believe that being able to partially support travel and to cover
the costs of attending the meeting will allow a wider, more representative
population to attend and participate in the symposium and eventually, to
strengthen representation in the area of materials science and engineering. PIs
will in particular, attempt to encourage research groups across the country to
support undergraduate participation in the poster sessions, as a means of
exposing students to a high level of research at an early stage of their
educational experience, and through these means, enhance accessibility to
research. The Materials Research Society (MRS) is an interdisciplinary
professional organization dedicated to the promotion of 1) research on materials
properties and performance, and 2) interaction among researchers in the
universities, government laboratories, and industrial laboratories.