* 0814716
* RUI: Investigating Salt Induced Effects on RecA Unfolding and Nucleotide Binding
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* Gina MacDonald, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/2014
* USD 275,484.00

The objective of this project is to identify protein structures that are
involved in nucleotide binding and ion protein interactions that result in the
high salt induced changes in RecA activity and stability. The Escherichia coli
RecA protein is a DNA-dependent ATPase that requires formation of a
nucleoprotein filament to perform the DNA strand-exchange reaction in DNA repair
and homologous genetic recombination. Salt induced effects that modulate enzyme
structure and function involve specific changes in protein structures that
result in modified activity and protein-protein interactions. In order to
investigate the origin of salt induced effects on RecA the PI will use
difference infrared spectroscopy, circular dichroism and fluorescence to study
how salt influences the aggregation and unfolding of RecA while simultaneously
studying how salt modulates nucleotide binding and ATP hydrolysis. Difference
infrared spectroscopy is a powerful yet underutilized technique that has the
ability to elucidate changes induced by nucleotide-binding under a variety of
solution conditions at the single amino acid level. Combining difference
infrared and circular dichroism studies will enable undergraduate students to
obtain complementary information about salt induced effects on stability and
nucleotide binding. Despite decades of study on many seemingly well-
characterized proteins, identifying the specific amino acids and protein
structures that are involved in substrate binding, allosteric regulation and
ion-mediated processes has continued to be elusive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All of
the work in this project will be performed by undergraduates at James Madison
University. In addition, the PI has an established history of working with deaf
and hard-of-hearing students who will be recruited for research efforts. This
project will be important in helping all the involved students gain valuable
research experience and will aid in recruiting and retaining future scientists.
Furthermore, the results of these studies will lead to a better understanding of
not only RecA, but also the wide variety of proteins whose activity, stability
and structure are modulated by the presence of salt.