* 0814558
* Bringing Out the Dead: Distribution and microbial decomposition of copepod carcasses in the marine environment
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Kam Tang, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 06/30/2012
* USD 266,754.00

A basic need in zooplankton research is accurate assessment of zooplankton
population abundance in nature. Traditionally researchers collect, preserve and
enumerate zooplankton disregarding the live/dead status of the zooplankton.
However, recent studies have shown that zooplankton can suffer significant level
of non-consumptive (non-predatory) mortality and their carcasses can be abundant
at times in the marine environments. Without distinguishing between live and
dead zooplankton in natural samples scientists would misunderstand many
fundamental pelagic processes. Because zooplankton carcasses are also rich
substrate sources for bacteria and other microbes, their presence in the ocean
also potentially affects microbial processes and composition in the water
column. A vital stain method recently refined and tested by the PI allows them
to easily separate live and dead zooplankton, especially copepods, in natural
samples. The method is simple, inexpensive, and compatible with common routine
sampling protocols. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Field studies in the Chesapeake Bay
found a substantial portion of the copepod populations dead in the summers of
2005 and 2006. Laboratory experiments further showed that copepod carcasses were
'microbial hotspots' that favor the activity and growth of specific bacterial
phylotoypes, and contribute new bacteria to the surrounding water. These
observations pointed to the need for further study of the live/dead composition
of natural copepod populations, and their contribution to ambient microbial
activities and composition. This project will expand the application of the
vital stain method to different copepod developmental stages and different
zooplankton groups. Year-long routine samplings will be conducted in different
parts of the Chesapeake Bay. Multivariate analysis will be used to explore
predictive relationships between live/dead copepod composition and various
hydrographic parameters. Laboratory experiments will quantify the loss rates of
carcasses due to sinking and microbial decomposition. Modern molecular
techniques will be used to investigate the shift in bacterial community
composition during the decomposition process. Field and lab data will then be
combined in a modeling effort to estimate species- and stage-specific non-
consumptive mortality. The PI will coordinate with researchers from around the
world to study live/dead zooplankton abundance and distribution in vastly
different marine ecosystems, taking an important step toward understanding non-
consumptive zooplankton mortality on the global scale.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results of this project will fundamentally change our
understanding of zooplankton ecology and secondary production in the marine
environment, and help improve marine monitoring programs and existing copepod
population dynamic models. The PI will lead a global concerted effort with
several international research groups in the application of the staining method,
and produce unprecedented scientific information on the live/dead copepod
composition in different parts of the world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Student
education is an integral part of the project. A Ph.D. student will work closely
with many international research groups in the project. Undergraduate interns
will be recruited through the existing DREAMS and REU programs at VIMS. Besides
the obvious scientific benefits, this international collaboration also allows
researchers from very different cultural backgrounds to interact and learn from
each other, stimulate future collaborations among them, and help advance
oceanographic research in the participating countries. The PI will actively
engage faculty and students in the partner institutions through seminars,
workshops, special courses and conferences, aiming to broaden the educational
impacts of the project.