* 0814302
* The Cognitive Neuroscience of Bilingual Advantages in Executive Control
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Brian Gold, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Lynne Bernstein
* 09/30/2011
* USD 442,000.00

Humans have an amazing facility in switching attention between two or more
ongoing tasks. This kind of cognitive flexibility allows for successful
navigation of the demands of everyday life, but it declines with aging. Recent
results have shown that such age-related declines are not as severe in lifelong
bilinguals; speaking more than one language on a regular basis since childhood
seems to provide some protection from this general effect. Current cognitive
models suggest that the basis of this boost relates to the fact that bilinguals
are constantly switching between multiple languages, which serves to strengthen
task switching and related executive control processes. With support from the
National Science Foundation, Dr. Brian Gold and his colleagues at the University
of Kentucky will conduct experiments designed to gain a more comprehensive
understanding of the cognitive and neurobiological bases of bilingual advantages
in executive control processes. The methods used will include standard
behavioral experiments and neuroimaging studies conducted with monolingual and
bilingual participants. In behavioral studies, participants will engage in task
switching and working memory paradigms and reaction time and accuracy data will
be recorded. Results will explore whether bilingualism strengthens just those
processes that directly replicate the bilingual experience, or if it serves to
bolster other executive control processes, such as memory updating. The
neuroimaging studies will use functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and
diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) methods to understand the neurobiological bases
of bilingual performance advantages. The fMRI experiment will identify
variations in bilingual brain activation patterns that correlate with their
advantages on executive control tasks. The DTI measures will identify variations
in white matter microstructure in bilinguals, ones that correlate with the
advantages on executive control tasks. The experiments will provide a more
precise understanding of the cognitive and neurobiological variables that seem
to be protected by lifelong bilingualism. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from the
present project will be relevant to the question of how accessible lifestyle
variables can influence neuroplasticity and/or compensatory brain reserve in
aging. It will also provide research training and mentoring to a postdoctoral
fellow and two undergraduate research assistants. Trainees will acquire
knowledge in neuroanatomy, and the analysis of neuroimaging data. This project
will provide information about the relationship between second language learning
and neurobiology, an issue of fundamental relevance in our increasingly
multilingual society.