* 0814724
* Culture, Cognition, and Evaluation of STEM Higher Education Reform: A Mixed-Methods Longitudinal Study
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Susan Millar, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* James S. Dietz
* 09/30/2012
* USD 812,610.00

This study is intended to develop better understanding of why changes in reform-
based practices in higher education are slow to develop. The project aims to
increase understanding of the relationship between mental models of faculty
about effective pedagogy in STEM fields and the extent of consensus about such
pedagogy. The research will also examine individual and institutional factors
that may influence mental models and consensus and the individual and group
level factors that are related to teaching practices and changes in cognitive
structure and consensus over time. The study will use cognitive frameworks to
explain institutional inertia and will develop methodological approaches to
examine several different units of analysis using both cognitive and cultural
frameworks. The investigators will create an evaluation design that will be
tested in higher education institutions. It will describe the mental models held
by individual faculty about effective pedagogy, describe the groups that have
consensus on these structures, and describe how individuals and institutions
vary in teaching approaches. The study will measure changes in faculty views of
pedagogical practices over time by following faculty over time. Data will be
gathered from faculty in math, life science and physical sciences over a three
year period. The primary source of data will be a survey instrument given in the
first and third year. There will also be in-dept interviews with subsets of
faculty. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;