* 0814241
* Modeling the Dynamics of Surface-slope Reversals and their Role in the Formation and Stability of Subglacial Lakes
* GEO,OPP
* 11/15/2007,12/31/2010
* Todd Dupont, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Palais
* 12/31/2010
* USD 149,748.00

This award supports a three-year modeling effort to understand the dynamics
surrounding ice-air surface slope reversals on ice streams and ice shelves, with
implications for the creation and stability of subglacial lakes. Local reversal
of the ice-air surface slope may lead, through a reversal of the hydraulic
gradient, to the trapping of basal and surface water, producing subglacial and
supraglacial lakes, respectively. In the case of subglacial lakes, once such a
sizable reservoir of pressurized water is created the potential exists for
drainage, in the form of large outburst floods or as smaller, but sustained,
periods of increased subglacial water flow. The research seeks to extend some
initial work that has been done to include time-dependence and a wider array of
parameters and geometries. The methods will involve the use of a suite of
models, all of which will include longitudinal deviatoric and basal-shear
stresses, with some also taking account of lateral drag and internal vertical
shear. The intellectual merit of the proposed activity includes an improved
understanding of the processes and parameters involved in the formation of
surface-slope reversals in ice-stream/ice-shelf systems, as well as insight into
the stability of subglacial lakes formed as a consequence of slope reversals.
The broader impacts resulting from this activity include the provision of tools
to study the dynamics of ice-stream/ice-shelf systems, an improved understanding
of the physics behind outburst floods, and insights into the coupling of ice
streams with their subglacial water systems. The research will support the
studies of a beginning postdoctoral researcher. Results of the research will be
incorporated into courses and public outreach serving anywhere from hundreds to
thousands of people per year.