* 0814287
* Conference: The Developmental Biology of the Sea Urchin XVIII: Functional Genomics, Development and Education
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2008,03/31/2009
* Veronica Hinman, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Carol Ann Burdsal
* 03/31/2009
* USD 4,000.00

Veronica Hinman &lt;br/&gt;Proposal number
(IOS-0814287)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supplements travel costs for
approximately 20 students to attend the 18th conference on the "Developmental
Biology of the Sea Urchin". Sea urchins are one of the best model organisms for
understanding how genes regulate development, in large part due to the technical
ease with which complex molecular biological procedures can be undertaken using
their embryos. Sea urchins are also one of the mainstays of undergraduate
teaching labs as they are easy to obtain, culture, view and handle. This meeting
will be the first since the publication in September 2006 of the genome sequence
of the purple sea urchin and hence will particularly focus on the use and
development of genomics-based tools and resources to enhance research, and also
to discuss ways in which undergraduate curricula can include genomics approaches
with traditional teaching uses of the sea urchin. Utilizing curricula that
combines experimental and computational experiences and a familiarity of
genomics resources is of foremost importance in training undergraduate and
graduate students for careers in modern biology. This meeting brings together
the world's leading sea urchin biologists, scientists with experience in
building and using genomics tools and faculty with experience in creating and
implementing undergraduate research based curricula. This provides fertile
ground for new and exciting ways to invigorate the sea urchin field, genomics
research, and undergraduate education. Approximately 150 attendees are
anticipated, which, in the past, has provided an intimate setting for informal
discussion and initiation of new ideas and collaborations. This meeting provides
opportunity for students to present their work (often for the first time),
fosters new collaborations between scientists and educators, and aids in
development of new undergraduate curricula. The program is well-balanced with
respect to gender.