* 0814027
* Collaborative Research: CT-ISG: Secure Knowledge Management: Models and Mechanisms
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2007,08/31/2009
* Ravinderpal Sandhu, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Xiaoyang Wang
* 08/31/2009
* USD 128,138.00

The advancement in computer technology produced large volumes of data, which
motivated the investigation of database technology (especially database
management systems) that has been proven successful in maintaining and utilizing
the ever-increasing volumes of collected, generated or derived data. This
collaborative project (IIS-0524612, Shouhuai Xu, University of Texas at San
Antonio and IIS-0524462, Ravinderpal S. Sandhu, George Mason University)
envisions the emergence of a new era in which it becomes important to share the
knowledge derived from the large volumes of data in the process of problem
solving, e.g., business decision-making. In order to facilitate such a task,
this project explores technical methods that can help fulfill a system
middleware called knowledge management systems -- analogous to the database
management systems. In particular, this project focuses on addressing the
security aspect of this envisioned middleware, which includes secure knowledge-
extraction and secure knowledge-dissemination. Both security problems are
addressed with sound security models and mechanisms. The security mechanisms
include the following: (1) designing a variety of schemes, including
cryptographic and non-cryptographic, to facilitate secure and practical
knowledge-extraction; (2) developing methods for mitigation of the damage due to
knowledge-breaching that is inevitable in the course of knowledge-dissemination;
and (3) full exploration of the notion of (dynamic) policy-directed knowledge-
dissemination and its cryptographic-based implementation.

This inter-institutional collaborative project will provide a team-oriented
learning and research environment for graduate students, and research results
will also be integrated into educational courses. The aim for this project is
that the results developed in this project, i.e., the models and mechanisms for
knowledge management and safe knowledge dissemination will be integrated into
the implementation of knowledge management systems in the future. The results of
this project will be disseminated via the project web site
http://www.cs.utsa.edu/~shxu/research/skm-nsf-2005/.