* 0814381
* IMR: Acquisition and Development of an Ultrafast Thermal Conductance Apparatus for Materials Research and Student Training
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Dana Dlott, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2010
* USD 196,000.00

NSF is requested to fund the acquisition and development of an ultrafast
thermal conductance apparatus, consisting of a high repetition rate femtosecond
laser and a Raman spectrometer, that will be used to study the flow of heat
through molecules at interfaces with picosecond time resolution and angstrom
space resolution. The state of the art of measurements of this type involves
placing a molecule or a layer of molecules on a metal surface or between two
metal contacts to measure the heat flow. Such methods do not reveal the detailed
mechanisms responsible for the heat flow. In our approach, molecules assembled
on metal surface, or a metal surface with a very thin oxide coating, are
subjected to a 1 ps temperature jump by a femtosecond laser pulse. As heat flows
into the molecules from the metal surface, its arrival at different locations,
as well as the instantaneous populations of the individual vibrations that carry
the heat, will be probed with anti-Stokes Raman (ASR) spectroscopy. ASR probing
is made possible despite the small Raman cross-section by the use of surface-
enhanced Raman (SERS) substrates. The low laser damage threshold with ultrashort
pulses for interfacial molecules on SERS substrates, and the need to produce a
large T-jump, necessitates a femtosecond laser that has not been readily
available until recently. The flash-heating ASR concept can be used to study a
vast range of material architectures whose structures can be systematically
varied on an atom-by-atom basis. This will create the knowledge base required to
design molecules from first principles that exhibit enhanced or inhibited heat
flow characteristics needed to effectively engineer molecular electronic devices
and molecular nanomachinery.

The operation of all mechanical and electrical devices involves the movement of
heat, and the principles and engineering of heat conduction are understood very
well. Scientists involved in nanotechnology seek to produce extremely tiny
devices and electric circuits, some as small as a single molecule. However our
understanding of heat flow does not presently extend to the tiny length and
short time scales involved in the operation of such tiny devices. By
understanding and controlling heat at the level of single molecules we can
better engineer nanomachinery and we can develop new devices such as thermal
diodes that let heat flow in one direction only. Funds provided by the National
Science Foundation will be used to purchase and develop instrumentation to
measure the flow of heat through molecules. A metal surface on which a layer of
molecules has been placed will be suddenly heated by a laser pulse lasting only
one ten-trillionth (10-13) of a second. As heat flows into the molecules from
the hot metal, the molecules will be set into rapid motion. A second laser pulse
will be used to probe this motion in detail using an effect called "anti-Stokes
Raman scattering" where certain frequencies within the optical pulse are
selectively amplified by the molecular motion. These signals are extremely weak
and could not have been detected until recently. A combination of
nanotechnology, which allows us to texture the metal surface so it enhances
certain frequencies of light like a tuning fork, and advanced laser engineering
makes these measurements possible. This measurement of the characteristic
motions of the molecules will tell us at any instant where the heat is located
and how fast it is moving. For the first time we will be able to watch the flow
of heat through molecular devices and molecular wires in real time. Systematic
studies on molecules of different sizes and shapes will create the knowledge
base needed to design efficient and versatile molecular machinery.