* 0814225
* Effects of Goal Pursuit on Women's Performance and Persistence in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math (STEM)
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Lora Park Bunting, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Sally Dickerson
* 08/31/2013
* USD 400,000.00

Abstract

Women continue to be underrepresented in various fields within STEM. For
example, in higher education, women represent just 29% of faculty in doctoral
science and engineering programs at 4-year colleges and universities, and 18% of
full professors in these fields. Although various theories have been proposed to
explain women's underperformance and underrepresentation in STEM, an area that
has not yet been investigated is how women's broader goal pursuits may affect
their performance and decision to persist in these fields. During college, two
goals may be particularly salient for men and women and include the goal to be
competent, which facilitates educational and career aspirations, and the goal to
be attractive, which facilitates social relationships and mate-related goals.
Whereas men may not experience much conflict when pursuing both goals, women are
hypothesized to experience significant conflict, such that the pursuit of
attractiveness may interfere with their pursuit of competence. In line with
this, the present research proposes that women who believe that competence is
attractive and desirable in men, but not in women, may show decrements in
competence when primed with the goal to be attractive. The project involves a
series of studies to examine effects of gender, gendered beliefs, and goal
pursuit among college students enrolled in math, science, and engineering
courses. Using multiple methods (e.g., lab studies, reaction time studies, daily
diary and longitudinal studies), this research will study: a) how and why the
pursuit of attractiveness undermines women's competence; b) whether the pursuit
of attractiveness undermines women's cognitive performance in general; c)
effects of succeeding vs. failing at goal pursuit; and d) the efficacy of social
psychological interventions designed to alter gendered beliefs about competence
and attractiveness. Three mediators (e.g., automatic inhibition of competence,
increased relational focus, salience of femininity) will be tested as mechanisms
linking women's pursuit of attractiveness with diminished performance and
interest in STEM. The proposed research will extend basic social psychological
theory, and findings from this research will be directly relevant to college
students in math, science, and engineering courses. In addition, findings from
this research may guide the development of interventions designed to recruit and
retain women in STEM by better understanding the nature of their goal pursuits
and gendered beliefs.