* 0814985
* Collaborative Research: The Cultural Context of Learning: Native-American Science Education
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Menominee Administration, Menominee Indian Tribe of Wisconsin
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 08/31/2011
* USD 194,557.00

This project is a collaborative effort between Northwestern University, TERC,
the Menominee Tribal School (MTS) and the American Indian Center of Chicago
(AIC). The long-term goal of the proposed project is to improve science learning
and school achievement for Native-American children. They begin school with an
advanced understanding of biology and superior performance on standardized tests
compared to their non-Native peers, but in later years this benefit does not
result in high levels of school achievement and biology becomes their worst
subject. Understanding why and how this happens is a central purpose of this
research. Previous work examined the hypothesis that there is discord between
Native-American cultural ways of knowing biology and the cultural ways of
knowing in school science and that this discord is at the heart of student
disengagement and underachievement. A central feature of the discord was found
to be the lack of explicit connections across contexts in which students learn
science. The lack of connections is manifest across a range of levels, including
content knowledge, practices, values, and relevance to family, community, and
society at large. The project is composed of two complementary strands of work
aimed at supporting students? navigation between and through the various
cultural contexts in which they learn science. One strand consists of design
experiments in both in-school and out-of-school settings that will allow the
researchers to continue to develop, extend, and refine design principles and
related curricular innovations. The second strand consists of a series of small-
scale cognitive studies that are intended to support components of the design
work. Further, this project will contribute to the growing body of work
exploring the deep intellectual resources students from non-dominant backgrounds
bring to teaching and learning environments and the ways in which these
resources can enhance school science learning. Previous work demonstrates that
culturally- and community-based science programs can affect identification with
science, motivation to learn science and conceptions of the very nature of
science. The proposers of this project are anxious to develop and test the
framework further and to implement their design principles in classrooms and
after-school programs.