* 0814048
* A Workshop to Focus on Regional Strategies for Improving the Public Understanding of Science, Tampa Bay Florida, spring 2008
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2008,02/28/2009
* Roy Caldwell, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 02/28/2009
* USD 16,525.00

The University of California Museum of Paleontology (UCMP) is requesting funds
to support: A Workshop to Focus on Regional Strategies for Improving the Public
Understanding of Science. Funds will be used to support a two-day workshop that
will lay the groundwork for achieving a scalable and sustainable network
structure for the Coalition on the Public Understanding of Science (COPUS). The
meeting will focus on building stronger bridges among stakeholders and
identifying strategies for sustaining efforts through the formation of regional
and thematic hubs. The primary goals of the proposed workshop are (1) to examine
different hub models, (2) to identify and articulate motivations, opportunities,
advantages, and challenges of developing and maintaining a regional or thematic
hub, (3) to share successes and best practices, (4) to focus on critical needs
for a successful hub, including those that can best be met by COPUS, and (5) to
discuss needs and strategies for long-term networking. The products of the
workshop will include: (1) a Hub Toolkit that provides detailed guidelines for
others interested in developing a regional or thematic hub, a suggested list of
core activities around which to engage the community in science, strategies for
enlisting community support for hub activities, and strategies for
sustainability, (2) a procedural plan for the expansion of the hub systems
within the COPUS network, and (3) a set of prioritized activities and support
services to be provided by COPUS.