* 0814242
* Establishing the Kinetics of Aqueous Reactions at Fe(III) Molecules and Minerals
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* William Casey, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2012
* USD 383,092.00

Investigators propose to establish a linear-free-energy relation (LFER) to
predict rates of ligand substitution on Fe(III)-oxide minerals from the <FeIII-
OH2> bond lengths, which can either be calculated or measured. In the last
funding period we showed experimentally that such a LFER probably exists between
<FeIII-OH2> bond lengths and rates of solvent exchanges. They also used similar
data on nanometer-size Al(III) ions to establish a LFER for aluminous surface
structures. They coupled 'rare event' simulation methods to experimental data on
rates of water-exchanges from Al(III) metals in large nanometersize clusters.
This work showed, for the first time, that the rates at the surfaces are
extraordinarily and surprisingly rapid.

Investigators now want to extend the work to Fe(III) (hydr)oxide materials. They
use aqueous complexes with particularly useful <FeIII-OH2> bond lengths and
aqueous stabilities to establish an experimental scale of rates and bond
lengths. In the last funding period, they mastered a 17O-NMR line-broadening
method for paramagnetic metals like Fe(III). This method is new to geochemistry,
but otherwise well understood and dependable. Once the experimental scale is
established, they repeat their 'rare-event' simulations to estimate rates for
Fe(III)-(hydr)oxide surface structures that are experimentally inaccessible.

For bridging oxygens, and to complement the 17O-NMR measurements, they employ a
new ElectroSpray-Ionization Mass-Spectrometry (ESI-MS) method that allows to
follow the rates of oxygen-isotope exchanges in the dissolved molecules. With
ESI-MS, we follow reactions at oxo bridges and the carboxylate oxygens in a
bonded organic ligand. With this method, geochemists can study an enormous range
of compounds that were previously impossible, such as the Mn(IV,III)-oxo
clusters. In this sense, and in others, this research is both pioneering and
transformative to geochemistry.

This research is also Transformative because water-exchange rates are the most
fundamental timescale for describing aqueous reactions---slow loss of these
bound waters precedes most ligand substitutions ('adsorptions') and many
electron exchanges. In soils, these reactions are usually part of a complex
network, but these elementary reactions control the essential step. This
research is Transformative because reactions are also at the appropriate scale
to improve methods of simulation, which will be heavily employed by geochemists
for cases where experiments are impossible. They are trying to make aqueous
geochemistry quantitative at the molecule scale.

The Intellectual Merit is fundamental research in aqueous reactivity where they
answer questions such as: 'What are the most promising types of computationally
inexpensive methods that can yield hidden reaction pathways in systems that are
sufficiently large to be geochemically relevant?' The research also ties to the
increased awareness about nanometer-size clusters in natural water chemistry, in
transporting toxicants or as toxicants themselves, and as the fundamental
building block for amorphous materials.

The Broader Impacts extend well beyond Earth science because this research is
used by many disciplines, including colloid chemistry, nanoscience, materials
science and medicine (metalloproteins such as ferritin and enzymes such as the
purple-acid phosphatases resemble these clusters). Also, enrollment at UCD draws
disproportionately from the high population of new immigrants to the United
States and lures them into Chemistry and Geochemistry. These funds bring
nontraditional but highly talented students into the Earth Sciences, which
comprise the population of UCD.