* 0814195
* US-Republic of Congo (Brazzaville) Dissertation Enhancement:   What Limits Recruitment of Tropical Trees? An Experimental Test of Seed and Establishment Limitation
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2010
* Douglas Levey, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* DeAndra Beck
* 04/30/2010
* USD 14,990.00

Ms. Connie J. Clark will conduct dissertation research in the Republic of the
Congo under the supervision of Professor Douglas J. Levey of the University of
Florida, and Professor Jean Marie Moutsabote of the Universit√© Marien Ngouabi of
Brazzaville, Republic of the Congo. Her research will consist of determining
tropical tree diversity through recruitment limitation, using both the seed
limitation hypothesis and the establishment limitation
hypothesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Tropical forests account
for nearly 50% of all known species. Yet, very little is understood about the
processes that maintain or promote such diversity. Theoretical models suggest
that processes limiting recruitment of new individuals into populations are key
to maintaining species diversity. By keeping population numbers of more
competitive species in check and slowing competitive exclusion, recruitment
limitation should allow greater numbers of species to co-exist.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The seed limitation hypothesis posits that the ability of
a plant to recruit at a site is determined by the availability of seeds. It
follows that at the community level the abundance and distribution of a species
is determined by a "lottery" process -- recruits are drawn at random from the
seeds that happen to arrive at a site. The establishment limitation hypothesis
posits that recruitment is limited by the availability of suitable microsites
for establishment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To experimentally test the relative
importance of seed and establishment limitation, this project has established
30, 1-ha plots in logged and unlogged forests in the Republic of Congo, mapped
and identified all trees and saplings, measured seed rain, and conducted seed
addition experiments for six randomly-selected tree species in 90 subplots in
all plots. Data are being gathered on seed predation, seedling emergence,
seedling growth and survival, and several abiotic and biotic factors that likely
influence the magnitude of seed and establishment limitation. The project is
entering its third year and this award will support return trips to Congo to
monitor the experiment and work with University collaborators to finalize
species identification of seedlings, saplings and tree voucher specimens.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Improved forest stewardship is being
achieved through the project's collaboration with the Wildlife Conservation
Society (WCS) and a major logging company, Congolaise Industrielle des Bois
(CIB). WCS and CIB are working together to improve forestry and wildlife
management in large logging concessions surrounding Nouabale Ndoki National
Park, hoping to achieve Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) certification of 1.8
million hectares of contiguous forest by 2009. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Another
goal of the project is to improve the technical capacity of Congolese scientists
and resource managers. In collaboration with the Royal Botanical Gardens (RBG),
the project also provides an intensive field botany course for Congolese
students (13 students trained to date). Voucher specimens collected during this
study are being donated to the RBG to produce a field guide to the trees of
Congo, which will provide an excellent resource to Congolese
botanists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because this project is being conducted in a
high risk area for Ebola outbreaks, the co-PI has been trained as a "first
responder" and participates in the WCS "field vet" program to monitor and
control wildlife disease outbreaks in areas where multiple carcasses of primates
are found. To assure humans in the concessions are armed with the information
necessary to protect themselves and their families, participants in this project
are part of an Ebola awareness campaign directed toward villagers most at risk
of exposure to the virus.