* 0814008
* Gender Equity in Materials Science and Engineering at Universities and National Laboratories; College Park, MD; May 18-20, 2008
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2009
* Angus Rockett, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 04/30/2009
* USD 51,200.00

This award provides support for a workshop entitled ?Gender Equity in Materials
Science and Engineering at Universities and National Laboratories? to be held at
the University of Maryland Conference Center from May 18-20, 2008. The workshop
will address gender equity issues and identify major barriers that make science
and engineering careers unattractive to women. Included among the topics to be
discussed are: current status of gender equity in universities, MSE in
particular, improving Workplace environment, balancing work and family life,
increasing the pipeline of women in MSE, and current approaches to gender
equity. The workshop will consist of keynote speeches, topical talks, panel
discussions, and break-out sessions, which will include participants from
universities, national laboratories, professional societies and funding
agencies. The anticipated outcome is the development of a series of
recommendations and plans for policy changes to address the problem of gender
equity, biases and have transformational impact on gender equity in the MSE
community. A final report of the workshop will be published and it will contain
the findings and recommendations from the workshop discussions for recruiting,
hiring, and retaining women in MSE workforce at all levels. The expected outcome
of the workshop is specific efforts in the coming years to increase the number
of women opting for MSE-related careers in academe and national laboratories.
&lt;br/&gt;This award is jointly funded by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences
in the Department of Energy and by the Division of Materials Research and the
Engineering Directorate in National Science Foundation. The workshop is co-
sponsored by DoE , NSF and the University Materials Council.&lt;br/&gt;