* 0814646
* SGER: Linking enzymes to light emitting semiconductors for high throughput screening
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Daniel Bond, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 08/31/2009
* USD 75,000.00

CBET-0814646&lt;br/&gt;Bond&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Highly efficient enzyme-
functionalized electrodes are essential for enzymatic fuel cells,
electrobiocatalysis and other renewable energy applications. There is currently
no available electrochemical technology enabling high throughput selection and
improvement of electrode bound enzymes, due to limits in highly parallel sensing
of very low rates of electron flow. The central goal of this project is to
demonstrate a solution to this issue: a micro-array of enzyme-functionalized
light emitting semiconductor based electrodes. By fabricating LED micro-arrays,
high throughput screening of electricity producing enzymes and bacteria via
light detection will become possible. Future versions of this approach will aim
to allow on-chip PCR amplification and in vitro translation of protein
libraries, eliminating a key bottleneck (cloning and purification) in enzyme
discovery. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Combining enzymes and
semiconductors for electron transfer-dependent light generation and detection is
a novel approach. This interdisciplinary project combines the knowledge of
protein chemistry and biology with electronics and electrical engineering.
Broader impact: Enzyme-LED micro-arrays would have an impact on the pace of
biocatalyst development for green biotechnology and bio-fuel cells utilizing
renewable carbon sources with improved efficiency. This novel approach could
resolve a crucial limitation in development of enzyme functionalized electrodes,
and will represent cross-disciplinary training for a team of chemistry,
biochemistry, and engineering students.