* 0814361
* EPSCoR Research Infrastructure Improvement Plan "Building Oklahoma's Leadership Role in Cellulosic Bioenergy"
* O/D,EPS
* 09/01/2008,12/31/2013
* Lance Lobban, Oklahoma State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Sian Mooney
* 12/31/2013
* USD 15,000,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
EPS-0814361&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: EPSCoR Research Infrastructure
Improvement Plan ?Building Oklahoma?s Leadership Role in Cellulosic
Bioenergy?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Oklahoma State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Goals: With this Research Infrastructure
Improvement (RII) grant, Oklahoma EPSCoR will develop a research program on
cellulosic biofuels and will bring it to a nationally competitive level. The
science theme is a multi-institutional program that adds value to the Oklahoma
Bioenergy Center (OBC), a $40 million program to pursue the application of
biofuels R&amp;D in cellulosic ethanol production. The RII will also support a
robust education outreach program to nurture Oklahoma?s human resource
infrastructure. The scientific, diversity, communications and human resource
outreach activities proposed here, along with a cyberinfrastructure plan, are
closely aligned with Oklahoma?s Strategic Plan for Science and
Technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The science theme consists
of three objectives addressing critical issues in developing the cellulosic
bioenergy industry. One objective concentrates on establishing a better
understanding of the molecular mechanisms of biomass development to improve
yield potential while enhancing the tolerance to abiotic and biotic stresses.
The other two objectives are focused on the molecular mechanisms for efficient
microbial conversion and new catalytic/thermochemical processes for converting
cellulosic biomass to liquid fuels. Proposed RII funding will provide the
support to build a critical mass of scientists enabling Oklahoma to compete for
large-scale NSF funding in programs of sustainable energy and biotechnology.
Through NSF and state support, and the investments in new faculty and staff by
the research institutions, Oklahoma plans to reach national prominence in the
research area of cellulosic biofuels. This will facilitate efforts to develop
major research centers and enhance private sector R&amp;D in the
state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The PIs propose comprehensive
educational and outreach programs, links to economic development, and to
initiatives designed to enhance public awareness of the importance of science.
K-12 students and teachers will be exposed to cutting-edge science and
cyberinfrastructure related to the bioenergy theme through summer technology
academies, mobile science vehicles, and teacher training workshops.
Undergraduate student research experiences in industry and academia will be
supported and talented students will be recruited into biofuels/bioenergy based
graduate programs. A state-wide cyberinfrastructure consortium will also be
established. The education outreach initiatives embrace the inclusion of women
and underrepresented groups and strengthen competitiveness and diversity through
collaboration with Oklahoma?s HBCU and tribal college, by facilitating the
transition from high school to college, providing culture-attuned counseling
support, and promoting enhancement programs to retain students pursuing STEM
disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;