* 0814749
* Collaborative Research:  Estimating Ecosystem Model Uncertainties in Pan-Regional Syntheses and Climate Change Impacts on Coastal Domains of the North Pacific Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Andrew Moore, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2012
* USD 179,995.00

A sequence of Bayesian Hierarchical Models (BHM) will be developed to synthesize
coastal ecosystem dynamics and responses to climate change across focus regions
bounding the North Pacific Ocean. BHM is a unified probabilistic modeling
approach that updates uncertain distributional knowledge about process models
and parameters in the presence of multi-platform observations. Summary measures
of the resulting "posterior" distributions provide realistic quantitative
estimates of central tendencies and uncertainties. The investigators will
develop our process model distributions after the North Pacific Ecosystem Model
for Understanding Regional Oceanography (NEMURO). So, a significant outcome of
the research will be quantitative understanding and comparisons of the relative
uncertainties of NEMURO state variables and parameters, region-by-region across
the North Pacific. A three-step BHM development plan will address pan-regional
syntheses, climate change impacts, and ecosystem management tool concepts, over
a three-year schedule. The initial BHM development will be a relocatable, time-
dependent, one-dimensional (vertical) model intended to summarize ecosystem
dynamics for different regimes (shelf, slope, upwelling loci, boundary current
extensions, etc.) within the coastal regions of interest. Data and insights from
multi-disciplinary observational programs and deterministic model
implementations in coastal regions of the North Pacific will be fully exploited.
In addition to emphasizing field observations, the BHM methodology will
incorporate deterministic model output (e.g. the Regional Ocean Modeling System
or ROMS) as data, providing a rigorous and complete synthesis of the state of
understanding for coastal ocean ecosystems of the North Pacific. The
investigators will focus on data and models in the Eastern Pacific from parts of
the US GLOBEC program (i.e. California Current System, CCS; and Coastal Gulf of
Alaska, CGOA) and in the Western Pacific (WPAC) from the North Pacific Marine
Science Organization (PICES). The 1D BHM will also be implemented in climate-
scale calculations to document and compare climate change impacts within and
across North Pacific coastal ocean ecosystems, and to quantify uncertainties in
these comparisons. The ultimate BHM implementation will be in three dimensions,
accounting for mesoscale ocean dynamical impacts on the coastal ecosystem
regions, and demonstrating potential ecosystem management advantages of the BHM
approach.

The intellectual merit of this research derives from a novel extension of
probabilistic modeling methods (i.e. BHM) to synthesize disparate observations
and deterministic model simulations from coastal regions on eastern and western
boundaries of a major ocean basin. Application of BHM in Biological Oceanography
represents a transformative research step and introduces a new paradigm. The
research proposed here combines the strengths of deterministic and probabilistic
models to obtain uncertainty estimates for state variables and parameters of a
modern lower-trophic level ocean ecosystem model. A broader impact of the
research will be the training of postdoctoral and graduate students (in
statistics and oceanography) in this new synergy of ocean modeling approaches.
As ecosystem managers and scientists learn to utilize state and parameter
information in probability distributions, uncertain parts of the ecosystem model
can be targeted for more intensive observations and/or more sophisticated
parameterizations.