* 0814013
* Seismic Imaging of Southern Californian Crust Using Deformable-Layer Tomography and Prestack Depth Migration
* GEO,EAR
* 12/31/2007,12/31/2009
* Hua-Wei Zhou, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin R. Phillips
* 12/31/2009
* USD 70,286.00

To advance our understanding of the crustal structure and geodynamics of
southern California, a new crustal seismic imaging project is carried out to
significantly improve the mapping of the regional 3D crustal velocity structure
and major reflection events across the San Andres fault system. The data include
the earthquake readings compiled by the Southern California Earthquake Center
(SCEC) and seismic reflection records from the Los Angeles Regional Seismic
Experiment (LARSE). An innovation of the project is the use of a new deformable-
layer tomography to directly map the geometry of P-wave and S-wave velocity
discontinuities in the crust and uppermost mantle, and constrained by known
crustal thickness variations from receiver functions and other analyses. In
addition, an advanced wave equation prestack depth migration is applied to
provide new reflection images for the LARSE profiles. The preliminary results
from this project indicate that the new tomography method produces sharper
vertical resolution and more realistic representations of lens-shaped geologic
features like the edges of basins and lithologic pinchouts, which is a
significant improvement over traditional tomography that inverts for velocity
values on fixed-in-space mesh grids. The LARSE reflection images obtained so far
indicate that prestack depth migration can better handle near surface lateral
velocity variations and improve the resolution and reflector continuity over
previous images of the LARSE datasets. Interestingly, the results from this
project suggest that the presence of high noise level, strong lateral velocity
heterogeneity and crooked survey geometry argue for, rather than against, the
use of prestack depth imaging over the simple CMP stack techniques. This two-
year project is expected to provide significantly improved 3D P-wave and S-wave
crustal velocity models for southern California and prestack depth migrated
images beneath two onshore LARSE surveys across the San Andres fault system. The
broader impacts of the project include field demonstration of innovative seismic
imaging techniques for future crustal and mantle studies, such as those
envisioned for EarthScope/USArray, as well as promotion of crossbreeding in
ideas and training between solid Earth geophysics and exploration geophysics
that will lead to a fundamental modification of undergraduate and graduate
education in seismic imaging.