* 0814918
* Microbial photoheterotrophy in lakes: biogeographical patterns, environmental controls and ecological significance
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2008,05/31/2013
* Matthew Cottrell, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2013
* USD 259,600.00

Sunlight provides much of the energy that drives the ecology of lake ecosystems.
Current ecological models recognize microbes that harvest light energy and
generate organic materials and other microbes capable of obtaining carbon and
energy only from previously generated organic materials. However, new data
suggest that photoheterotrophic microbes capable of using both light and
dissolved organic materials (DOM) are more prevalent in aquatic systems than was
previously believed. The goal of this work is to obtain quantitative data on the
abundances of photoheterotrophic microbes in freshwaters that will reveal their
ecological significance and biogeochemical roles. The project will focus on
three types of microbes. The impact of cyanobacteria on freshwater ecosystems is
well recognized, but their photoheterotrophic role has been largely overlooked.
A second type of photoheterotroph, the aerobic anoxygenic phototrophic (AAP)
bacteria, has been examined in laboratory experiments using cultured strains,
but nothing is known about the ecology of AAP bacteria in freshwaters. A third
type of photoheterotroph possessing proteorhodopsin (PR) has not even been
examined in lakes, even though evidence indicates that about half of marine
prokaryotes contain PR. The project will apply a unique set of analytical tools,
including flow cytometry, fluorescence microscopy and environmental genomics for
examining photoheterotrophs in the lakes of southern Québec, the Laurentian
region north of Montreal and boreal lakes in the taiga regions of northern
Québec. These lakes vary in several environmental properties (e.g. trophic
status, DOC concentrations, color and turbidity) that are hypothesized to affect
photoheterotroph abundance. The proposed work will test hypotheses about
community dynamics and environmental controls of photoheterotrophic microbes,
which potentially have unique impacts on biogeochemical processes in
freshwaters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is significant because it will
contribute to an emerging picture of the geographical distribution of microbes
that now appears to follow ecological principles like those previously thought
to apply only to higher organisms. The work will contribute to understanding the
biogeographical patterns of photoheterotrophs, what environmental conditions
control their abundance and diversity, and the underlying ecological
significance of these microbes in freshwaters. This project will support the
education of graduate and undergraduate students and the general public. The
project will directly support the work of a graduate student and would
positively impact the NSF REU program at the College of Marine and Earth Studies
at the University of Delaware (Lewes, DE). Students from Lincoln University, the
nation's oldest Historical Black College, will also participate as part of
another NSF-supported program. Interactions with visitors from Canada will
enrich the overall experience of the summer interns and graduate students. Dr.
Cottrell's results are featured during weekly tours of Lewes facilities (about
1000 visitors per year) and during Coast Day, an annual open house that attracts
about 10,000 visitors. The project's web site will help to educate colleagues
about photoheterotrophic microbes and the general public about the importance of
microbes in freshwater ecosystems.