* 0814452
* Forces and Forms III Workshop
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2008,02/28/2014
* Maresi Nerad, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 02/28/2014
* USD 314,900.00

Now is a moment of openness to innovation in STEM PhD education around the world
which holds enormous potential for inventing a better, future-oriented PhD. To
realize this potential, we need to understand the relationship of national and
local policy actors to globalizing and internationalizing forces and the
outcomes of current reforms in doctoral education. To help meet this need, the
Center for Innovation and Research in Graduate Education (CIRGE) at the
University of Washington, Seattle, with support from NSF, created a unique
international network of doctoral education researchers and policy makers, the
Forces and Forms of Change in Doctoral Education Worldwide (F&amp;F) network.
Based on two previous NSF-supported research collaborations, F&amp;F network
members have identified three critical topics in the globalization of science
doctoral education which they are committed to investigating: (1)
internationalization and inequality in intellectual capital, (2) diversity in
doctoral education, and (3) preserving the role in doctoral education of
intellectual risk-taking (i.e., the capacity to conduct research outside the
mainstream or with uncertain outcomes). This proposal requests support for a
synthesis research project which will build on the expertise and prior research
collaborations of the F&amp;F network to generate policies for addressing these
three critical issues. The goal is to move beyond the national context for
understanding these issues and to generate policy tools for shaping science PhD
programs to address these issues within the context of the emerging, global
system of STEM doctoral education.&lt;br/&gt;Support is requested for research,
centralization of information on PhD education internationally through a web-
based information hub, planning and coordinating a meeting of participating
researchers (including travel support for U.S. scholars), involvement of younger
scholars (i.e., a small training component) and dissemination of research
findings and research-based policy recommendations through print and online
media, targeting doctoral education policy audiences, including researchers,
graduate deans, funding agencies, and the general higher education public (e.g.,
insidehighered.com and Chronicle of Higher Education).&lt;br/&gt;The
Intellectual Merits&lt;br/&gt;The F&amp;F network's research agenda will advance
knowledge in the area of globalization in doctoral education. This project
focuses particularly on the international policy context for expansion and
innovation in STEM PhD programs. Resulting research papers will contribute to
understanding of individuals and organizations who influence, advocate, and
implement policy reform in PhD programs around the world and the relationship of
national and local actors to globalizing and internationalizing forces in
doctoral education. Building on this knowledge, the project will generate policy
recommendations addressing the role of doctoral education in the unequal
distribution of intellectual capital, diversity in PhD education, and the role
of intellectual risk-taking in doctoral education.&lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impacts
of Proposed Activity&lt;br/&gt;This project is designed to promote broader
impacts by creating vehicles for centralization and dissemination of research on
doctoral education worldwide, fostering international connections among doctoral
education researchers and policy makers, and stimulating further research on
critical issues in PhD education. CIRGE will make the policy-relevant knowledge
that exists in the F&amp;F network available to U.S. audiences through
publications, presentations and the CIRGE-managed web-based information hub. The
project links diversity and excellence in STEM PhD education in a novel way by
developing global (or at least international) perspectives on both issues as two
sides of the same coin. The project includes graduate students and early-career
scholars. It will generate policy tools for improving doctoral education.