* 0814449
* New Mexico EPSCoR RII3: Climate Change Impacts on New Mexico's Mountain Sources of Water
* O/D,EPS
* 09/01/2008,12/31/2013
* William Michener, University of New Mexico
* Cooperative Agreement
* Audrey Levine
* 12/31/2013
* USD 15,000,000.00

Goals: This Research Infrastructure Improvement award seeks to improve
observational modeling and analysis of high elevation hydroclimatology by
strengthening the instrumentation and modeling infrastructure. A second goal is
to address a critical state problem with global significance ? understanding and
forecasting the effects of climate change on water supply and water quality in
arid regions. Climate changes are affecting natural environments around the
world. In New Mexico, climate changes are altering processes associated with
water supply, which sustains New Mexico?s economy and determines, to a large
extent, the quality of life. This multidisciplinary effort will transform
climate change science and policymaking in New Mexico by providing the tools
required for quantitative, science-driven discussion of difficult water policy
options facing the state, and will create a citizenry that is informed about
climate change and its impact on natural resources.

Project Major Foci: The research will address the influence of large scale
atmospheric circulations on regional and local atmospheric processes and explore
how hydrometeorological fluctuations propagate into changes in surface flows
downstream. Given the uncertainties associated with global coupled model
projections across southwestern North America, the research will examine the
covariability of precipitation and land anomalies in these projections as they
relate to the Southwest. Land-atmosphere feedbacks associated with snowpack at
high elevation may be of first-order importance in modulating the transition
from winter to summer precipitation in the current climate. Thus, characterizing
and properly simulating the full seasonal hydrological cycle in regions with
winter snowpack is critical for process-based analysis and for projections of
stream flows in New Mexico, motivating the proposal?s focus on the upstream
portion of the Rio Grande in northern New Mexico.

Intellectual Merit The impacts of climate change on New Mexico are profound and
are altering processes associated with the water supply for the region. Proposed
research infrastructure improvements will enable scientists to observe processes
at the watershed scale and to understand the effects of climate change on water
supply, water sources, and water quality in arid regions. New Mexico EPSCoR
proposes to strategically invest in building a robust hydrologic infrastructure
to develop a better understanding of the relationship of high elevation events
to downstream water supplies. This capability is needed for meaningful
forecasting and decision support. New cyberinfrastructure will support multi-
scale modeling and rapid delivery of climate change data and information to
scientists, educators, decision-makers, and the public.

Broader Impacts New Mexico EPSCoR research foci are of global scientific and
societal importance. The investment in research, cyberinfrastructure and human
infrastructure will establish New Mexico as a laboratory for climate change and
a model for science-based public policy that can serve science and society.
Education, outreach and diversity programs will create a citizenry that is
informed about climate change and its impact on natural resources.