* 0814612
* Model-Based Ultrafast High Resolution Nano-Interrogation
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2007,04/30/2009
* Murti Salapaka, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 04/30/2009
* USD 191,651.00

&lt;br/&gt;Nanotechnology has the potential to revolutionize the human condition
through fundamental contributions&lt;br/&gt;to science and technology. The
chances of realizing the full potential of nanotechnology have been
buttressed&lt;br/&gt;by recent demonstrations of rational control and
manipulation of matter at the atomic level. Yet, in spite of&lt;br/&gt;the
remarkable feats achieved in its nascent years, nanotechnology has formidable
challenges to overcome in&lt;br/&gt;the areas of manufacturing methods, system
design, and basic understanding. These challenges have to be&lt;br/&gt;overcome
before the promise of this new paradigm becomes a reality.&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this proposal is to establish a paradigm for real-time use of models in Atomic
Force Microscopy&lt;br/&gt;(AFM). The concept of using models in real-time has
significant potential that has not received the deserved&lt;br/&gt;attention by
atomic force microscopists as the related tools are primarily employed by
engineers. Such a&lt;br/&gt;perspective facilitates interpretation of data since
it provides a precise means of delineating the effects of&lt;br/&gt;the inherent
dynamics of the system from the properties of the sample being probed. Thus it
provides an&lt;br/&gt;effective means of interpreting sample properties. In
addition to the proposal goal of laying the foundations&lt;br/&gt;of a new
paradigm, specific aims of the proposal will result in a new ultrafast
investigation tool for AFM,&lt;br/&gt;termed the Transient Force Detector (TFD).
The prototype will yield hundred thousand features per
second&lt;br/&gt;detection rates without compromising sample size and
resolution. A particular advantage of the TFD is that&lt;br/&gt;the resolution
of the detection process, dependent on the quality factor of the cantilever
probe, is decoupled&lt;br/&gt;from the speed of the detection process. Issues of
the loss of the probe signal and high resolution imaging&lt;br/&gt;based on the
likelihood that the probe is detecting the sample will be addressed. Use of
models in realtime&lt;br/&gt;is very well suited to explore model based imaging
where a more detailed information is desired when&lt;br/&gt;compared to
detection. A finer characterization of the sample will result only if
cantilever-sample interaction&lt;br/&gt;models amenable for real-time use are
available. Based on averaging theory, a methodology is proposed
to&lt;br/&gt;extract sample characteristics that include topography, local
stiffness and local damping at the nanoscale.&lt;br/&gt;This includes a parallel
operation where the sample characteristics will be gleaned by real-time models
built&lt;br/&gt;on the results of the averaging analysis of the tip-sample
dynamics. Observer theory based active modification&lt;br/&gt;of the cantilever
probe is presented. This systems viewpoint opens up new vistas for tailoring
bandwidth,&lt;br/&gt;resolution and forces on the tip and sample. This enhanced
flexibility is absent from the present set of tools&lt;br/&gt;on modifying the
cantilever dynamics. The innovative methods to be developed in the proposed
investigation&lt;br/&gt;will be complemented by the existing and future
experimental facilities. Preliminary proof of concept results&lt;br/&gt;indicate
the vast potential of the model based imaging paradigm
presented.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Micro-cantilevers are being used in
diverse areas with increasing impact and has in-&lt;br/&gt;fluenced science in a
fundamental manner. The methods proposed are enabling technologies and will
open&lt;br/&gt;doors for investigating basic science issues by providing ultra-
high bandwidth and resolution. The innovative&lt;br/&gt;contributions of the
proposals will directly impact most aspects of scanning probe microscopy, as the
proposed&lt;br/&gt;methods apply to most of the existing setups. For example, it
will directly impact the extremely high&lt;br/&gt;density data storage (3
Tb/in2) and read out technologies as well as the array technologies employed by
the&lt;br/&gt;bio industry. The experimental aspects of the proposed research
will be accomplished in collaboration with&lt;br/&gt;Asylum Research, and
Bioforce Nanosciences Inc. both leading biology related scanning probe
microscope&lt;br/&gt;(SPM) company. This collaboration is expected to foster
transfer of the theory and technology developed&lt;br/&gt;in this program
between the academic institution of the PI and the SPM industry. The PI has
successfully&lt;br/&gt;disseminated the system and control theory viewpoints to
the physics community that is heavily involved in&lt;br/&gt;scanning probe
microscopy. Under this proposal goals the PI will continue to push the
synergistic transfer of&lt;br/&gt;knowhow between the two communities by
exchanging student visits and presenting specialized workshops.&lt;br/&gt;A web
based remote operation of SPMs is being explored by the PI in collaboration with
Asylum Research&lt;br/&gt;that can be used for remote operation that will aid
this effort.&lt;br/&gt;