* 0814584
* Collaborative Research: GLOBEC Pan-regional Synthesis: End-to-end Energy Budgets in US-GLOBEC Regions
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Eileen Hofmann, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2013
* USD 273,468.00

The research addresses the overarching question: are marine food webs leading to
fisheries controlled from the top-down, the bottom up, or a combination of the
two? To address this question we will (1) compare end-to-end energy budgets of
the 4 US-GLOBEC study regions in the context of top-down v. bottom-up forcing,
(2) assess the skills of the regional models in capturing basic material fluxes,
(3) extract diagnostics from the regional models that will be used to evaluate
the effects of climate change and fishing pressure across GLOBEC regions and (4)
develop quantitative methods to compare the diagnostics. The major successes of
GLOBEC have been in elucidating the processes underlying the dynamics of
individual species in ecosystems characterized by diverse physical settings. At
the same time there is an increasing demand for an ecosystem approach to
management of marine resources subject to fishing pressures and climatic
changes. Improving the understanding of trophic links in oceanic food webs is
integral to the ability to understand and predict ecosystem responses to climate
change and anthropogenic forcings. The use of state-of-the-art modeling
approaches coupled to data assembly and analyses provides opportunities to train
graduate students (3 included in project) in a variety of disciplines (food web
modeling, data analyses, data assimilation, marine ecology) that are needed to
address the important scientific and societal problems facing marine systems.
The project includes 2 postdoctoral scientists, many women (9 of 22
investigators) including several in lead roles, several talented young
scientists new to GLOBEC, other scientists new to GLOBEC, and an outstanding
team of international collaborators (see Letter of Support from BAS). The
cooperative effort among scientists from academia, government, and private
industry is beneficial to all groups. The management plan centered on intensive,
frequent communication via in-person, digital and electronic meetings is a
unique and potentially transformative aspect of the project.