* 0814399
* Immunity and Ontogenic Decline of Regenerative Capacity in Xenopus
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Anthony Mescher, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 08/31/2012
* USD 359,999.00

Larval frogs (tadpoles) regenerate lost limbs completely at early stages of
development but lose this ability as they approach metamorphosis. This decline
in regenerative capacity in larvae occurs during development of several
components of the adaptive immune system in these animals. Experiments designed
in this study will test the hypothesis that changes in the developing frog's
immune system, including the appearance of cells characteristic of an
inflammatory response, modify the local limb environment to interfere with or
preclude cellular events required for regeneration when the limb is lost.
Previous analyses of tadpole limb regeneration by this laboratory have shown the
expression of many inflammation-related genes and the appearance of various
immunomodulatory proteins in the limb during the first days of regeneration.
Other investigators working with skin regeneration in several mouse models have
shown the regeneration seen at fetal stages of development persists in adults
that are immunodeficient and have fetal-like immune systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will examine and quantify inflammation at the
cellular and molecular levels during the early period of limb regeneration at
larval stages when regeneration occurs successfully and at later stages when
regeneration is poor. Procedures that affect inflammation positively and
negatively will also be tested for their effects on regenerative capacity, using
both molecular and morphological assays. The results are expected to reveal a
strong correlation between loss of regenerative potential during development and
strong or prolonged local inflammatory reactions to the regenerative stimulus.
Such results will impact the emerging field of regenerative biology by
highlighting the importance of peripheral immunity and immunomodulation in the
local development of stem cells and tissue regeneration. The immune-regulating
properties of various stem cells in mammalian models and their importance in
tissue regeneration are increasingly recognized. Similar findings in a well-
characterized amphibian model of regeneration will lead to greater understanding
of the regenerative ability of these animals and the decline of this capacity in
mammals. The broader impacts of the work, which are important not only for
scientific advances but also for the education of graduate students in
regenerative biology, include integrating considerations of the organism's
immunity with cellular and molecular aspects of limb development, an integration
required for a full appreciation of the factors controlling regeneration of
organs in animals where the adaptive immune system is already functioning.