* 0814615
* Systems Approach to Dynamic Atomic Force Microscopy
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2007,08/31/2010
* Murti Salapaka, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2010
* USD 162,158.00

The goal of this project is to establish a framework for model based
simultaneous topography and parameter estimation in the amplitude modulation
atomic force microscopy (AFM). Parametric models of tip-sample interaction that
are amenable to real-time identification will be developed. Harmonic balance and
power balance tools will be incorporated towards the estimation of the model
parameters. The amplitude and phase dynamics based on the model will be
developed, which will be used to validate the model with experimental data and
subsequently used for control design purposes. These methods will be used to
study yeast cells. A framework for non-parametric reconstruction of tip-sample
interaction potential will be researched. Limitations on how well amplitude
modulated AFM can decipher different sample interactions will be studied. The PI
will continue to push the synergistic transfer of know-how between the physics
and engineering communities by exchanging student visits and presenting
specialized workshops. A web based remote operation of the AFM will be developed
and integrated into a course on nano-interrogation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Micro-
cantilevers are being used in diverse areas with increasing impact and have
influenced science in a fundamental manner. Indeed, they provided a significant
impetus to nanotechnology. The amplitude modulation atomic force microscopy
method to be researched in this project is by far is the most used AFM mode as
it can image samples with atomic resolution and is non-invasive and is thus
particularly useful for biotechnology related investigation. The methods to be
used in this project are enabling and therefore will open doors for
investigating basic science. The PI has strong collaboration with leading
biology related scanning probe microscope companies. This collaboration is
expected to foster transfer of the theory and technology developed in this
program between the academic institution of the PI and the SPM industry. The
web-based remote operation of AFMs to be developed under this proposal will help
excite interest in science and will form an instructional tool.