* 0814338
* The Changing Face of Andean Urbanism: Sociopolitical Change at El Purgatorio, Casma Valley, Peru
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2008,12/31/2012
* Melissa Vogel, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2012
* USD 157,583.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Melissa Vogel, Peruvian
archaeologist Percy Vilcherrez and their collaborators, will devote the next
three field seasons to the study of ancient urban environments on the north
coast of Peru. The project will investigate the sociopolitical changes that
accompany the development of cities and the effects of these changes on the
urban populace, through an examination of the built environment at a prehistoric
Andean city that offers unique insights into the dynamics of urbanization on the
north coast of Peru during a critical period of the region?s prehistory.
Research will focus on the site of El Purgatorio, a large urban center and the
proposed capital city of the Casma polity. The site appears to have had a long
occupation, from at least the Middle Horizon (AD600-1000) through most of the
Late Intermediate Period (AD1000-1350).

Project El Purgatorio has a dual emphasis on archaeology and physical
anthropology. The architectural aspect of the study focuses on the functions and
meanings of the extensive walled compounds and their internal elements.
Excavations will also be conducted in a selected sample of non-compound
structures that have been identified as possible commoner residences and
workshop areas. The results of the architectural component are expected to
contribute new insights into the processes that shaped Andean cities and their
changing forms over time, as well as identify those elements specific to the
Casma polity. The bioarchaeological component of the study focuses on human
skeletal remains, and will seek evidence for the effects of urbanism on the
local populace. Biodistance analysis will be utilized to determine the
population's geographic origins and kinship relations, while additional analyses
will examine their health, nutrition, and disease patterns.

The questions addressed by this project have substantial implications at
multiple levels, from the effects of urbanism on local populations to the
enhancement of archaeological models for the development of cities, and the
furthering of regional archaeological knowledge in the Andean region of South
America. Examining the changing face of urban environments on the north coast of
Peru will not only inform our understanding of New World urbanism, but may also
provide models for other studies of ancient cities around the world. The
implications of this research for the development of anthropological theory and
the study of complex societies include further definition of the concepts of
urbanism, urbanization, and what constitutes a city. The study of El Purgatorio
may provide significant insight into the reasons for and processes of
urbanization.

This project utilizes a Public Interest approach to recover the heritage of
Peru's indigenous people. It will provide employment and learning opportunities
for local people, offer presentations and site tours to schoolchildren and
community members, and contribute to the development of archaeological tourism
in the Casma Valley for the benefit of local communities, primarily through the
Sechín Museum. In addition, both undergraduates and graduate students will
receive hands-on training, while the employment of Peruvian archaeologists will
further goals for international cooperation.