* 0814506
* Assessment of Damage to Industrial Facilities and the Resultant Environmental Contamination in New Orleans and the Gulf Coast
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2007,03/31/2008
* laura Steinberg, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 03/31/2008
* USD 29,990.00

Hurricane Katrina hit the center of the American petrochemical industry,
shutting down eight refineries, hundreds of oil-drilling platforms, and numerous
other industrial facilities. This study is concerned with two ripple effects
from the hurricane: structural damage to industrial facilities, and releases of
hazardous materials from compromised facilities. The approach used for the work
to be accomplished in this project includes: visits to industrial facilities to
observe damage and release sites first hand; use of non-destructive testing
equipment to look for further signs of damage; interviews with industrial
facility managers, response personnel, and/or environmental regulators regarding
chemical releases and response to them; and data analysis including mapping,
development of quantitative explanatory relationships, and case studies of
hazmat releases and response. In addition, the data will be used to help design
an environmental justice study and to ground-truth satellite imagery of the
damaged structural facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The issues explored in this
study are particularly important on the Gulf Coast, where hurricanes are
frequent, industrial facilities are numerous, and a large portion of the
population is relatively poor with few resources to fall back upon when
catastrophe threatens. However, the importance of addressing these issues is not
limited solely to the Gulf Coast - other hazard-prone areas with large
industrial bases and vulnerable populations, such as southern California, are
similarly threatened and can profit from the lessons learned from the industrial
experiences along the Gulf Coast following Hurricane Katrina. By providing
analyses of damage and hazmat releases at industrial facilities as a result of
Hurricane Katrina, the project results will provide valuable knowledge about how
to protect industrial facilities from structural damage and hazardous material
releases during major hurricanes. The adoption of efficacious protection and
response measures will result in less damage to these facilities, and a
reduction in the likelihood and/or severity of hazmat releases. It will also
help to prioritize resources in terms of mitigation and response measures. The
analysis of satellite imagery will help to improve the utility of these data in
future disasters, and the environmental justice component of the project will
help to address issues regarding the socio-economic distribution of disaster
impacts in the United States.