* 0814990
* Collaborative Research:  Linking Hydrogeomorphology And Denitrification in the Tidal Freshwater Region of Coastal Streams
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2008,03/31/2012
* John Bohlke, UNITED STATES DEPT OF GEOLOGICAL SURVEY
* Interagency Agreement
* Ingrid Padilla
* 03/31/2012
* USD 151,343.00

Abstract

Tobias et al.

?Collaborative Research: Linking hydrogeomorphology and denitrification in the
tidal freshwater region of coastal stream?

In recent decades, changes in land use and increasing population density have
accelerated the delivery rates of nutrients (particularly nitrogen) from
terrestrial sources to aquatic biomes. Humans now contribute more reactive
nitrogen (N) to the hydro- and biospheres than all other natural N sources
combined. Aquatic habitats have in turn responded with nuisance algal blooms,
changes in species composition, impacts on fin and shellfish resources, and
deleterious economic consequences. As streams and rivers trend closer towards
nitrogen saturation, increasing amounts of nitrogen pollution are exported to
the coastal margins where it promotes expanded severity and duration of hypoxic
events. An understanding of the fate and transport of N through the entire
aquatic continuum (e.g. streams, rivers and estuaries) is necessary for
identifying zones that are particularly susceptible to N inputs, and those that
act as hot spots for N removal. Knowledge of the hydrologic and chemical
mechanisms controlling N reactivity provides the foundation for guiding nutrient
management strategies and for enhancing the natural capacity of these
environments to attenuate N loads. Measurement of denitrification, the only
mechanism that represents absolute attenuation of nitrogen, has been examined
across a wide range of aquatic ecotypes. However, one particular segment of the
aquatic continuum, tidal freshwater rivers and streams, has generally escaped
inquiry. Connecting upland streams and rivers to estuaries, we suggest that
tidal freshwater streams possess unique hydrology, geomorphology, and chemical
reactivity that optimize for N removal relative to any other component of the
aquatic continuum. Further, we propose that enhanced N removal can be generated
in non tidal systems simply by inducing a quasi-tidal hydrologic regime (i.e. by
generating a rhythmic rise and fall in water level). Investigators propose to
combine extensive hydro-chemical monitoring efforts in Coastal Plain streams in
the Southeastern U.S. with a unique series of chemical tracer studies, and
stream modeling. All work is to be conducted in situ under natural and
hydrologically-manipulated conditions. Tidal streams are dominant aquatic
features of the Southeastern US, and the proposed work will help to determine
the extent to which they are a hotspot for N removal on broad geographic scales.
The research represents a federal-academic partnership that will provide a
better understanding of how nutrient loading in watersheds translates into
ecosystem response along continental margins. Work of this nature is essential
for improving predictions of habitat response to human perturbation and/or
restoration effects, assessing resiliency of aquatic habitats, refining
regulatory targets for nutrient loading. The mechanistic picture of how
hydrology and chemistry interact to regulate N processing provides the critical
foundation for developing simple low-cost technologies that enchance natural N
attenuation and thereby improve water quality. Broader impacts of the work
include extensive educational components, public outreach, and the potential for
technology transfer. Research activities are integrated directly into academic
curricula, investigators will mentor high school and undergraduate students,
train graduate students, and provide opportunities for traditionally
underrepresented groups. Technological advancements in water quality restoration
resulting from this work will be disseminated to resource managers at the
county, state, and federal levels. In total this effort facilitates enhanced
stewardship of aquatic resources.



