* 0814251
* Delaware EPSCoR Research Improvement (RII-2) Proposal: Building Research and Education Infrastructure to Enhance Environmental Science and Its Application in Delaware
* O/D,EPS
* 09/01/2008,11/30/2013
* Donald Sparks, University of Delaware
* Cooperative Agreement
* Sean Kennan
* 11/30/2013
* USD 15,000,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: EPS-0814251&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
Title: Delaware EPSCoR Research Infrastructure Improvement (RII-2) Proposal:
Building Research and Education Infrastructure to Enhance Environmental Science
and Its Application in Delaware&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of
Delaware&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative RII project involves the
University of Delaware (UD), Delaware State University (DSU), Delaware Technical
and Community College (DTCC), and Wesley College (WC). The goals are to (1)
develop the state?s research and education infrastructure with a focus on
environmental science; (2) develop a large, diverse workforce of scientists and
technologists, and strengthen scientific literacy statewide; (3) capture the
educational, social, and economic benefits of the research by developing an
EPSCoR Integrative Process; and (4) manage the grant in an efficient and
effective manner to achieve sustainability. The project?s focus on achieving a
sustainable biogeochemical environment while ensuring a prosperous economy is
aligned with the Delaware State Science &amp; Technology (S&amp;T) Council?s
strategic roadmap.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The
project will substantially advance knowledge of the biogeochemical processes
that occur at heterogeneous interfaces in the Critical Zone (CZ), which is
Earth?s life-sustaining, near-surface environment. This is of vital importance
to Delaware because of the state?s delicate coastal ecosystem and its history of
intensive industrial and agricultural usage. Critical Zone research will be
conducted in three theme areas: (1) Metal-Microbe-Carbon Interactions, (2)
Particle Transport and Release, and (3) Environmental Observation and Sensing.
The overarching research question is ?How do important biogeochemical processes,
occurring at Critical Zone interfaces and over a range of spatial and temporal
scales, govern the long-term sustainability and ecosystem health of land and
water resources??&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;Research
results will be broadly applicable to management of coastal environmental
systems and water resources regionally, nationally, and globally. Integration of
research and education will enhance workforce training and diversity of students
at all levels, and engage the public in dialog on the science and ethics of
environmental issues. Graduate, undergraduate, and K-12 education will be
enhanced through multidisciplinary graduate programs, research internships,
professional development of teachers, science summer camps, Science Saturdays,
and early research experiences. Development of the EPSCoR Integrative Process
will promote interactions with stakeholders in ecosystem health through analysis
and communication of the impact of the research in ethical, social, political,
business, regulatory, and legal arenas.&lt;br/&gt;