* 0814702
* Collaborative Research: Climate Variability and Change in the U.S. GLOBEC Regions as Simulated by the IPCC Climate Models: Ecosystem Implications
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Enrique Curchitser, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2012
* USD 83,389.00

A large body of literature has shown that ecosystem dynamics is strongly
influenced by large scale climate variations. A primary way by which climate can
affect marine biological processes is through wind-driven changes of the ocean
circulation, which are influenced by both natural and anthropogenically-induced
variability. Simulations performed with 23 state-of-the-art climate models in
support of the Intergovermental Panel for Climate Change (IPCC) Assessment
Report 4 (AR4) are the principle means for examining climate change. The IPCC-
AR4 simulations include runs with fixed external (solar, volcanoes, greenhouse
gases) forcing (control simulations), as well as simulations where external
forcing is prescribed according to the observed 20th century record (20th
century simulations) or according to different climate change scenarios. These
climate integrations are global and provide complete information on a large
number of variables, including those relevant for marine ecosystems, at each
model grid point. The output from the IPCC-AR4 simulations will be used to
examine climate variability and change in the three GLOBEC regions (northeast
Pacific, northwest Atlantic, and Southern Ocean) focusing on the following
questions:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Does the present generation of climate models
show connections between large-scale low-frequency wind forcing variations and
ocean circulation changes in the three GLOBEC study areas similar to those that
are believed to exist in nature? Can the IPCC-AR4 multi-model ensembles be used
to extend the observational record and test hypotheses on the climate-
circulation links with a larger statistical confidence?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2.
Based on the most reliable climate models, to what extent will the influence of
climate upon regional processes change over the 21st and 22nd
centuries?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Can statistical downscaling methods be
developed and used for relating variations at the regional (ecosystem) scale to
large-scale climate forcing? Can specific parameters be identified that are more
amenable to statistical downscaling?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first question
will be addressed by analyzing the control and 20th century simulations, while
projections of the influence of climate on regional processes in the next
century will be examined using the scenario simulations. Available data, as well
as output from a regional model at different resolutions will be used to assess
the feasibility of statistical downscaling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will
improve understanding of the links between large-scale climate forcing and
physical processes important for ecosystem dynamics in different regions. The
global nature of climate models enables a consistent means of establishing
connections within and between different geographical regions. Thus, results
from this study support the pan-regional synthesis phase of the GLOBEC
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The present study has the potential to enhance the
ability to predict ecosystem changes due to natural and/or anthropogenically
induced climate variations. Results from this project can support regional
ecosystem studies by providing a perspective of the large-scale forcing and its
evolution in a changing climate, as well as boundary condition and forcing
fields for regional models. Specifically, a key aspect of this project will be
to provide output from the IPPC model simulations and guidance in how to use the
output to other researchers funded through this phase of the GLOBEC program.
Results from this study will also be presented to middle and high school
students through the outreach programs at NOAA and at the investigators'
Universities.