* 0814340
* Whose Phenotype is it Anyway?  The Complex Role of Mycorrhizal Fungi in the Expression of Plant Defense
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* Mark Hunter, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 08/31/2014
* USD 650,000.00

Plants worldwide must defend themselves from being damaged by their enemies,
including insects, deer and pathogens. Plant defenses range from physical
defenses, like thorns, spines, and tough leaves, to chemical defenses such as
cyanide and steroids. As plants try to defend themselves, most of them make use
of nutrients that are provided to them by fungi (called mycorrhizae) that live
in their roots. In what is basically a barter system, plants provide the fungi
with sugar while the fungi provide plants with minerals such as phosphorus. The
strength of plant defenses may vary with the amount of fungus in their roots and
the identity of their fungal partners, but this has never been studied in
detail.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using common milkweed as a study plant, this
research explores how the strength of plant defense varies with the fungal
colonization of roots. It examines how variation in plant and fungal identity
contributes to defense, and how natural variation in soil nutrients influences
the barter system. Experiments also explore the effects of root fungi on insect
herbivores. The results of this work will contribute to an understanding of how
diverse plant species, from agricultural crops through forest trees, use root
fungi in their defense strategies. It may be possible to manipulate root fungi
to protect the plants that are important to humans or to render defenseless
those that are invasive pests. The research will also help to train the next
generation of biologists both in universities and in local area schools.