* 0814575
* IMR: Acquisition of Pulsed Laser Deposition System for Multicomponent and Multilayer Oxides and Student Training
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Harry Tuller, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2009
* USD 168,400.00

Technical Abstract Multicomponent and multilayer oxide films are well known to
exhibit an exceptionally wide and rich range of electrical, optical and magnetic
properties. As a consequence, these materials have a very wide range of
technologically important applications in sensors, actuators, waveguides,
dielectrics, energy storage devices, data storage, superconductors, and
semiconducting devices. Pulsed laser deposition is an excellent technique for
the growth of thin film oxides. This proposal relates to the acquisition of a
pulsed laser deposition (PLD) chamber, which will be assembled together with an
existing laser (Compex 205) and an existing reflection high energy electron
diffraction (RHEED) system to construct a complete state-of-art PLD system for
about half the cost of a new system. The PLD chamber has the ability to
automatically steer the laser beam between targets to make atomically-controlled
multilayers, and to create a continuous composition spread to enable
combinatorial materials synthesis. The PLD system will be used in three major
projects: nanostructured ionic materials, gas sensors, and magnetooptical
materials, as well as a number of smaller projects. The broader impacts of this
proposal are related to the use of the equipment by a diverse group of
researchers: undergraduates, graduate students, and postdocs, as well as
visiting undergraduates and school teachers.

Lay abstract Complex oxide materials, which are oxides of more than one element,
are of great interest in many applications. Complex oxides can have very
interesting and useful properties, such as tunable electrical conductivity,
magnetization, optical and mechanical properties. For example, lead zirconium
titanate is used as a piezoelectric actuator, in which an electric field causes
the material to expand or contract, while lithium cobalt oxide is useful as the
electrode material of a lithium battery. In microelectronic applications, it is
desirable to deposit complex oxide materials as thin films, so that they can be
incorporated into devices such as memories, optical components, or gas sensors.
One excellent method for making films of these materials is pulsed laser
deposition (PLD). In PLD, a high power laser is used to ablate a ?target? made
of the desired composition, and the material that is ejected from the target
deposits on a nearby substrate. This proposal concerns the acquisition of a
vacuum chamber in which to carry out pulsed laser deposition, which will be made
into a state-of-the-art deposition system by combining it with a high power
excimer laser already in the PI?s laboratories. This equipment will facilitate
research into devices such as gas sensors, and components for optical
communications. The equipment will be used by a diverse group of researchers:
undergraduates, graduate students, and postdocs, as well as visiting
undergraduates and school teachers.