* 0814529
* Conference-EC-US Task Force Joint US-EU Workshop on Metabolomics and Environmental Biotechnology
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2009
* Lily Young, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2009
* USD 15,000.00

The European Commission (EC)-United States (US) Task Force on Biotechnology
Research has a longstanding joint Working Group on Biotechnology for the
Environment whose mission is to foster collaborations between researchers in the
European Union (EU) and US in the field of environmental biotechnology. A
special focus of the Working Group is to increase scientific interchange between
early career scientists in the US and EU. Such interactions provide
a&lt;br/&gt;foundation for long-term collaborations and aid in solving
environmental problems that challenge both groups and respect no international
boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;In keeping with the mission of the Working Group, a joint
United States European Commission Workshop on Metabolomics and Environmental
Biotechnology is planned for Mallorca, Spain on June 16-17, 2008. This award
provides support for a limited number of US participants. The goals of this
Workshop include: 1) The exploration of current applications of metabolome
science to environmental biotechnology- what is the present state of the art? 2)
The examination of future roles that metabolomics can play in environmental
biotechnologywhat are the potential applications for the future and what needs
must be met to realize this potential? 3) To provide a forum for scientific
exchange of knowledge and ideas by researchers investigating these issues
thereby presenting new opportunities for collaboration. 4) To encourage the next
generation of leaders in the field to collaborate across the Atlantic. 5) To
broaden participation of underrepresented groups in science in all of the above.