* 0814317
* Forms of Exchange and Integrative Outcomes:  Effects of History and Embeddedness
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Linda Molm, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2011
* USD 170,896.00

PI: Linda D. Molm, University of Arizona&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Forms of
Exchange and Integrative Outcomes: Effects of History and
Embeddedness&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SES-0814317&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As organizational scholars have shown in richly-
detailed ethnographic studies, both the history of exchange relations and the
?embeddedness? of economic exchanges in broader social relationships affect how
exchange partners feel about one another, trust one another, and interact with
one another. This project brings the rigor of laboratory experimentation and a
well developed theory to bear on these complex exchange relations. In two
experiments, college student subjects interact with one another via computer in
small (3- and 4-actor) structured networks that offer the opportunity to engage
in repeated exchanges with alternative partners for points that are converted
into money. The first experiment tests how different relationship histories
(different sequences of reciprocal and negotiated forms of exchange) affect
integrative bonds of trust, regard, and solidarity between exchange partners;
the second tests how different relationship contexts (the embedding of one form
of exchange within an ongoing relation consisting primarily of the other form)
affect these bonds. The project builds on previous work in a decade-long program
investigating how different forms of exchange (reciprocal, negotiated, and
generalized) affect the development of integrative bonds. That work was the
first to establish dramatic differences between forms of exchange existing in
isolation from one another; this phase of the program is the first to study
complex sequential and concurrent combinations of the two direct exchange forms.
The work will extend the reciprocity theory of exchange, increase the relevance
of the theory and research for exchanges in natural settings, and strengthen
theoretical linkages between the exchange tradition and organizational scholars.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the research are considerable: it
would (1) promote the direct participation and education of undergraduate and
graduate students in research; (2) facilitate interdisciplinary connections
across different levels of analysis (micro, meso, and macro), research
methodologies (laboratory experiments and ethnographic research in natural
settings), and disciplines (sociology, psychology, economics, management,
organizations, business); and (3) address an increasingly important societal
question: how to construct social organizations and institutions that enhance
trust, community, and solidarity, in order to promote more effective and
efficient economic exchanges and more satisfying social relationships.