* 0814586
* RUI: Population Dynamics and Niche Differentiation among Ammonia Oxidizing Prokaryotes in Salt Marsh Sediments
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Anne Bernhard, Connecticut College
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2012
* USD 142,449.00

The supply of nitrogen often limits the primary productivity of marine and
terrestrial ecosystems. Consequently, understanding the processes that control
the flux and transformation of nitrogen is of broad importance to ecology.
Nitrification, the conversion of ammonia to nitrate, is a critical step in the
nitrogen cycle that was thought to be carried out only by microorganisms
belonging to the Domain Bacteria. However, a different group of microorganisms,
Domain Archaea, were recently discovered to also be capable of this process,
known as ammonia oxidation. Despite the ecological importance of ammonia
oxidation, very little is known about the ecology of the organisms responsible.
Additionally, since archaea were only recently discovered to be involved, their
contribution to nitrification and their interactions with other nitrifiers
remains unknown. This project will investigate interactions between ammonia
oxidizing bacteria and ammonia oxidizing archaea in salt marsh sediments, using
a combination of molecular, biochemical, and cultivation techniques. Preliminary
studies indicate that the bacteria and archaea are differentially distributed
among sites dominated by different marsh grasses. This project will test the
hypothesis that this distribution reflects competition, niche differentiation
and specialization by these two groups of microorganisms. Results from this
study will help to elucidate fundamental ecological principles that drive the
organization and activity of ammonia-oxidizing microorganisms and their impact
on ecosystem functioning. These results will have broad significance to
management and restoration of salt marshes, which play an important role in
controlling nitrogen influxes to adjacent estuaries and coastal seas by trapping
particulates and excess nitrogen. Another broader impact of this project
involves its special focus on training undergraduates in research techniques and
on recruiting more students from socio-economically disadvantaged backgrounds
into the science curriculum at Connecticut College, a predominately
undergraduate institution.