* 0814237
* Collaborative Research: Earthscope Integrated Investigation of Cascadia Subduction Zone Tremor, Structure and Process
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2008,12/31/2011
* Geoffrey Abers, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 12/31/2011
* USD 196,181.00

0544847&lt;br/&gt;Abers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, an integrated
field experiment is undertaken in the Cascadia subduction zone to elucidate the
relationship between water transport, aseismic slip, episodic tremor, and arc
magmatism. The ultimate goal is to explore H2O processes in subduction zones
using the tools of seismology, geodesy and petrology, and to integrate these
results with complementary constraints from geodynamics and geochemistry.
Seismic imaging is employed to illuminate (i) the descending oceanic plate where
it metamorphoses, and (ii) the mantle wedge where fluids may be producing
hydrous phases such as serpentine or, beneath the volcanic arc, primary magmas.
The experiment is designed to traverse the one part of the Cascadia system where
earthquakes extend to nearly 100 km depth, thus permitting an investigation of
the relationship between the release of fluids and the generation of Wadati-
Benioff-zone earthquakes. The transport of fluids may be also a primary driver
for episodic tremor and slip (ETS), a phenomenon observed in Cascadia perhaps
better than anywhere else on the planet, including source regions within this
experiment. Measurements of tremor from known source regions are integrated with
slip distributions derived from GPS data and existing long-baseline tiltmeters.
Together with the seismic imaging, these observations yield an unparalleled data
set for determining the relationship between tremor, slip and the regions where
imaging indicates metamorphism of the down-going plate or hydration of the
overlying mantle wedge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The basic experiment has four
components: a broadband imaging array of flexible-array instruments integrated
with Bigfoot, three small-aperture seismic arrays near sources of non-volcanic
tremor, analysis of the PBO and PANGA GPS data sets to define the details of
episodic slip events, and integrative modeling. The broadband array features a
dense transect across the part of the Cascadia subduction system that includes
intermediate-depth earthquakes and the Nisqually earthquake hypocenter, in a
staggered configuration to allow along-strike effects to be tested. This is
complemented by 2 cross lines, one crossing the slab where the crust appears to
be dehydrating, and one in the Cascades foothills to sample the roots of the
arc. The tremor and GPS arrays are collocated with the broadband imaging as much
as possible, to allow simultaneous location of tremor and slip and imaging of
their source region. These data are subject to the gamut of analyses appropriate
to such data, including array analysis for wave-front orientation of tremor
waves, migration of teleseismic scattered waves, tomographic images of Vp, Vs
and Q, shear-wave splitting, earthquake relocation, investigation of high-
frequency phases interacting with the slab, and specialized GPS processing
designed for the detection and quantification of transient events. The results
are interpreted in conjunction with detailed petrological-thermal models of the
Cascadia subduction system. These results are used to place new constraints on
the dehydration pathways within the down-going plate, the relationship between
structure and seismicity at intermediate depths, the relationship between
transient strain events and structure, the temperature, melt and volatile
content of the mantle wedge, and the growth of continental crust.&lt;br/&gt;