* 0814332
* Cognitive and Metacognitive Foundations of STEM Learning by Deaf Students
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Marc Marschark, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 08/31/2011
* USD 966,434.00

The proposed research is designed to enhance science-related education for at-
risk students and others with diverse learning needs. Recent research has
demonstrated that deaf and hard-of-hearing (DHH) students come into the STEM
classroom with less information than hearing peers and also learn less. Results
consistently have shown that neither students' reading levels nor communication
skills are sufficient to explain this situation. The proposed project will focus
on the effects on learning of DHH students' comprehension monitoring skills and
their relatively lesser content knowledge and infrequent use of integrative
learning strategies. Experiments involve participants' reading or seeing
presentations and then answering questions, summarizing content, and/or
identifying other features of the presented information prior to learning
assessments. With one exception, content is presented in signed, spoken, or
written form. Students will make judgments about the expected accuracy of their
responses; these and other methods will be used to assess their awareness of
ongoing comprehension in addition to learning per se. It is expected that
metacognitive accuracy will vary as a function of factors such as method of
presentation, mode of communication, the nature of the material, and possibly
several demographic variables. Of particular interest are measures of learning,
ongoing comprehension monitoring, and the ways in which these influence each
other. The research is expected to refute claims that deaf students' learning
challenges are specific to printed materials or poor communication skills.