* 0814168
* Conference: Gordon Research Conference on Plant Molecular Biology to be held at Holderness School, New Hampshire, on July 13 - 18, 2008
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2009
* Nancy Gray, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 05/31/2009
* USD 10,000.00

The project's goal is a scientifically stimulating Gordon Research Conference on
Plant Molecular Biology at the Holderness School in New Hampshire from July 13
to 18, 2008. The conference will bring together a range of plant scientists who
are investigating basic plant cellular processes in a variety of plant species.
The conference will focus on areas of plant research that are key to advancing
both agriculture and a basic understanding of plant developmental and
biochemical processes. For example, there will be sessions on metabolism,
bioenergy, new methods to study genomes/proteomes and metabolomes, plant-microbe
interactions, plant hormones, and epigenetics. This conference will bring
together leaders as well as young scientists in a range of disciplines to
exchange ideas, and to permit the participants to learn of the latest
developments and ideas in diverse areas of plant biology. The broader impacts of
this project are to foster progress in plant biology. The goal of fostering
progress can be furthered by bringing together plant scientists to collectively
discuss and explore areas outside of their narrow field of expertise. Hopefully
the conference will result in the discovery of connections among diverse fields,
which in turn will lead to collaborations and further scientific progress. This
conference features several speakers at an early stage of their career, as well
as opportunities for many more young scientists to interact with established
scientists working in academic, government, and industrial laboratories. To
encourage participation by junior scientists, additional speakers will be chosen
from submitted abstracts, and all participants will have opportunities to
present their research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;