* 0814387
* Idaho Research Infrastructure Improvement: Water Resources in a Changing Climate
* O/D,EPS
* 09/01/2008,12/31/2013
* Jean'ne Shreeve, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Cooperative Agreement
* Audrey Levine
* 12/31/2013
* USD 15,000,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
EPS-0814387&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Idaho Research Infrastructure
Improvement: Water Resources in a Changing Climate
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of
Idaho&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Goals: This five-year Research Infrastructure
Improvement award will significantly expand the statewide research
infrastructure for understanding the effects of climate change on water
resources in the region and the impact of these effects on ecological, human,
and economic systems. This RII project aims to fill a critical niche in
hydrology by understanding the nexus between surface flow and groundwater;
supporting field studies on a highly managed river system and a relatively
unmanaged system; and developing a more complete understanding of how climate
change will impact the Western U.S. across multiple watersheds. To do this,
capacity will be developed in three areas: 1) hydroclimatology to improve
modeling of water resources affected by climate change; 2) integration of
hydrology and economic modeling of water resources in the Snake River basin
(highly managed river system); and 3) integration of hydrology and ecological
change in the Salmon River basin (unmanaged river system). Battelle?s
comprehensive analysis of Idaho?s core competencies identified ecological health
as an area with high potential for tying its academic research strengths to
commercial applications. The research theme of this award directly supports the
Ecological Health Technology Platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Major Foci:
The core research focus is the impact of climate change on human and ecologic
systems at small to intermediate-sized watersheds. During the first three years
of the award, the project will concentrate on hydrologic modeling of the Snake
and Salmon basins. Output from the models will be used in the later years of the
project to determine the effects of climate change on resources in Idaho.
Probabilistic techniques, such as Bayesian network modeling, will be used to
derive probability distributions for water supply options and reliability under
various scenarios. Results from all studies will be used to populate a web-based
decision support system that integrates internet-mapping technologies with
Bayesian networks to quantify the impact of climate change on water supply and
demand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The Intellectual Merit
lies in the creation of a cohesive team of researchers in climate change and
water resources, who will perform modeling of surface and groundwater
connections in managed river systems; will enhance the understanding of how
climate change impacts may be buffered through effective utilization of
groundwater; and will provide key data to clarify economic ramifications of
climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The understanding of the effects of climate change on water
resources could enhance planning regarding water resources in Idaho as well as
the western region of the U. S. &lt;br/&gt;A range of experimental learning
programs for secondary students and teachers, designed to enhance STEM education
in the state, particularly the Native American and Hispanic populations, will
bring the excitement of science to the classrooms. Outreach and diversity
investments will provide sustainable experimental learning programs for 1,750
secondary students and teachers.&lt;br/&gt;