* 0814280
* Continuation LTREB at Hubbard Brook:  Hydrologic-nutrient cycle interaction in small undisturbed and human-manipulated ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Gene Likens, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 08/31/2013
* USD 430,000.00

The comprehensive chemistry of precipitation, stream and lake water within the
Hubbard Brook Valley of the White Mountains of New Hampshire is the longest
continuous record (45 years) of this type in the world. The proposed research
would extend this unique record to 50 years and beyond. The main objective of
this research is to apply these long-term data to important questions related to
biogeochemical change in northern hardwood forest and associated aquatic
ecosystems. For example, these long-term data will be used to quantify and
evaluate the response to and recovery from disturbance such as acid rain, forest
harvesting, ice or wind-storm damage, salinization of surface waters from road
deicers, and experimental watershed-ecosystem manipulations. Acid rain was
discovered in North America at Hubbard Brook and is a serious, ongoing
environmental problem. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Such carefully documented, high-
quality long-term data are crucial to decision-makers searching for solutions to
major and persistent environmental problems. It is known from these long-term
studies that legacies of disturbance, such as from forest cutting, last longer
than 40 years. A larger goal of this long-term research is to help transform the
way people view and value the importance of watersheds and the quality of
surface waters and air passing over these watersheds in their daily lives.
Researchers will share the long-term data from this project with the public,
educators and policy makers and assist with their interpretation and
evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;