* 0814537
* Reverse Geocoding, Geographic Masking, and Geospatial Privacy
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2011
* Paul Zandbergen, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Thomas J. Baerwald
* 02/28/2011
* USD 121,980.00

The widespread availability of powerful geocoding tools in commercial Geographic
Information Systems (GIS) software and the interest in spatial analysis at the
individual level have made address geocoding a widely employed technique in many
different fields. However, when locations of individuals and/or households are
made public as published maps, the addresses associated with these locations can
be determined using a technique known as "reverse geocoding." Therefore,
individual-level data can often not be released due to geospatial privacy
concerns and/or legal requirements. Techniques to preserve geospatial privacy
exist and are collectively referred to as "geographic masking." The goal of this
research is to develop robust methods for the protection of geospatial privacy
of individual and/or household level data. The research will: 1) investigate the
capabilities of reverse gecoding in identifying individuals and/or households
based on point locations and associated attribute data; 2) determine which
geographic masking techniques are most effective in meeting standards for
geospatial privacy protection; and 3) determine the impact of geographic masking
techniques on spatial analysis derived from point locations. The overall
research design relies upon an empirical evaluation of reverse geocoding and
geographic masking using a large sample of residential addresses in twelve
different US Counties. Several types of geocoding will be employed, including
address point and street geocoding using GIS software as well as commercial
geocoding firms. Various existing and newly developed geographic masking
techniques will be applied and evaluated for their robustness. This will provide
an assessment of the type and magnitude of masking necessary to effectively
preserve geospatial privacy. The effect of geographic masking will be determined
using several large simulated datasets of typical individual-level data. This
will provide insight into which geographic masking techniques provide sufficient
levels of geospatial privacy protection, while at the same time maximizing the
robustness of spatial-statistical analysis of the masked data.

The increased interest in individual level data in a number of fields and the
widespread availability of high quality spatial data and software tools present
a major challenge to the protection of geospatial privacy. Current practices in
the use of geographic privacy protection techniques do not consider the
abilities of software tools, and are not based on theoretical or empirical
estimates of the likelihood that geospatial privacy is breached. This research
will expand existing privacy concepts to geographic data in order to provide a
consistent quantification of the degree to which geospatial privacy is
protected. The research will provide specific guidelines for the use of specific
geographic masking techniques in the light of the current and future
capabilities of reverse geocoding. This will provide much needed confidence in
deciding whether and how to release individual-level locational data.