* 0815141
* Developmental Basis of Convergent Evolution of Drosophila Pigmentation Patterns
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2013
* Artyom Kopp, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Anthea Letsou
* 07/31/2013
* USD 511,103.00

It is common for similar anatomical structures and physiological processes to
evolve independently in different species of animals and plants. This phenomenon
(known as convergent evolution) reflects the fact that similar ecological
pressures impose similar functional requirements; in other words, each task
calls for a specific tool. What is not clear is whether convergently evolved
traits share the same genetic and molecular basis. It is possible that different
molecular pathways can be co-opted in different evolutionary lineages to produce
superficially similar structures and adaptations. This hypothesis will be tested
by identifying the genes responsible for evolutionary changes in color patterns
in several species of fruit flies (Drosophila). Drosophila has been chosen as a
model for this research due to the ease and low cost of genetic and molecular
experimentation in this insect. If different genes are found to produce similar
color patterns in different species, it will indicate that natural selection can
utilize different sources of variation to achieve the same functional outcome.
An opposite finding will suggest that the action of natural selection is
constrained by the inherent structure of genetic pathways that control animal
development. Given the increasing importance of understanding adaptive processes
in human pathogens, agricultural pests, and other biological species that affect
human society and economy, resolving this interplay between chance and necessity
in evolution will help in the development of biological and chemical control
strategies. An additional goal of this project is to train young scientists
prepared to take the lead in analyzing molecular variation on genome-wide
scales, and relating it to anatomical and physiological traits and environmental
factors. Such training is essential for further advances in human medicine,
agriculture, forestry, and biotechnology. This project will provide an
opportunity for students to acquire first-hand research experience and expand
their career options by complementing theoretical education with a practical
application of the latest concepts and techniques.