* 0815104
* Gene, Enzyme and Physiological Characterization of Maize Shrunken-2 and Brittle-2 Alleles
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* L. Curtis Hannah, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Sarah Wyatt
* 07/31/2012
* USD 400,000.00

Cereals, including corn or maize, are the major source of calories for the world
human and animal population and, of late, are used as an alternative to
petroleum-based fuels. Rising gasoline and food prices are everyday reminders of
the importance of cereals. Accordingly, cereal seed yield and mechanisms to
increase it are of paramount importance. This project will use genetic,
molecular and biochemical approaches to further characterize a genetic variant
that appears to enhance corn yield two to three fold. The variant is in a starch
biosynthetic enzyme, adenosine diphosphate glucose pyrophosphorylase
(AGPase).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; AGPase is a composed of two different subunits.
A goal of the project is to genetically combine the recently-isolated variant
harbored by the small subunit with a previously-isolated large subunit variant
to further enhance corn yield. Physiological experiments will be performed to
determine whether the extent of yield increase caused by the small subunit
variant is subject to growth conditions of the plant. This is the case with the
large subunit. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; At a more basic level, the relative roles
of the two subunits in catalysis are not clear. Molecular approaches will be
used to convert the specificity of the enzyme from ATP to UTP. If successful,
the exact roles of each subunit can be elucidated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The
broader impacts of these studies are multifaceted. First, the variants arising
from this work have had and will continue to have significant impact on cereal
yield. Second, Outreach efforts will continue in educating the public about the
science behind transgenic plants and their benefit to society. High school
students and the lay public are targeted specifically. The project also includes
efforts to contribute to the University of Florida's Center for Precollegiate
Education and Training Program, which promotes linkage between K-12 schools and
members of the UF faculty. Lectures will be presented to K-12 teachers that
participate in the program.