* 0815577
* Enhancing the effectiveness of large scale virtual environments for educational and training purposes
* EHR,DRL
* 10/15/2008,09/30/2012
* James Lackner, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 09/30/2012
* USD 998,585.00

The goal of the proposed work is to enhance the feasibility of using virtual
environments (VE) for the teaching of science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) at all grade levels in order to maximize the effectiveness of
curricula. In principle, the applications of VEs for training in physics,
chemistry, astronomy, engineering, biology and mathematics are unlimited.
However, in practice, their usefulness has been limited by undesirable side
effects of motion sickness, dizziness, and postural instability. Consequently,
users spontaneously limit their head and body movements in frequency and
amplitude and move more tentatively. Many have to terminate participation. In
order for VEs to be a viable tool for educators it is necessary first to
identify the primary factors that contribute to motion sickness, postural
instability and impaired eye-head coordination in VEs. A coordinated series of
experiments is proposed using as a model an educational VE designed to teach
molecular and chemical structure. The relationship of field-of-view, tracking
delays in scene updating, and visual resolution to these side effects will be
determined. Techniques involving various types of haptic cuing of body and
environment orientation will be used to suppress side effects and increase the
user?s mobility and ability to learn the VE. Head movement contingent blanking
of the visual field will be tested as a way of attenuating motion sickness,
postural instability, and preventing derangements of gaze control. The goal of
the proposed research is to enable students to move naturally and freely while
exploring the VE without restricting their activities and without their becoming
nauseous, dizzy, or unstable. Achieving this would be transformative by
increasing the usefulness of immersive VEs for training in STEM disciplines.