* 0815190
* Under the Microscope:  Examining the research base on biological lab experiences, grades 1-13
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2011
* Gillian Puttick, TERC Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 07/31/2011
* USD 247,557.00

This project involves research synthesis of the literature on laboratory
experiences in the life sciences from first grade through the first year of
college from 1987-2006. During this time period many advances in educational
standards, cognitive sciences, and learning research have changed the conception
of lab experiences in biological sciences. The project will produce both a
literature review and a publication that: 1) identifies areas that are already
well studied; 2) indicates areas requiring further study; 3) establishes a
theoretical framework for research and development of progressions in laboratory
experiences in the life sciences across grades. The NRC study, America?s Lab
Report, limited its research to high school, expressly leaving aside the
question of earlier grade levels, and the progression from elementary school to
college. Furthermore, the NRC study did not explore any particular disciplinary
content. Thus, some of the unique characteristics of the biological sciences
have not been used in a consideration of the goals, value, and growth of
understanding in biology during students' biology education. This study will
fill that gap. The study?s main goal is to examine key literature on labs and
activities in life sciences, examining English-language publications in North
America, Australia, and Europe. The study will address six major research
questions that relate to progressions in student learning, content and design,
activity structure, support of diverse learners, ?innovation bias? and
international comparisons. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will contribute to
the development of empirically based research and development in life science
curriculum and teacher education by taking a critical look at the lab
experiences. The research synthesis will aim to serve current needs in life-
science education across the grades. The deliverables are intended to inform
researchers and practitioners concerned with life science education, and to
facilitate dialogue between these constituencies. It will also serve the field
of science education research, by identifying gaps in the research of the past
two decades ? gaps in age-level studied, in subject matter covered, and in kinds
of lab experiences under-investigated. The findings of the study are likely to
have an impact of curriculum design and teacher professional development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;