* 0815875
* CNH: Drowning of Developed Coastal Barriers: Investigating the Threshold Rates of Sea-Level Rise of the Geologic-Human System
* GEO,GEO
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Di Jin, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Ruth
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,399,912.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Coastal barriers, narrow sandy islands or spits found along
many of the world's coasts, face an uncertain future over the next century.
Rates of sea-level rise already exceed those experienced over the last several
thousand years and are predicted to be substantially greater by the end of the
century, offering the potential that barriers could drown. Natural barriers
respond to sea-level rise through a process of landward migration - during
storms, overwash and breaching transfer sediment to the back of a barrier. Human
activities intended to preserve coastal infrastructure, such as building
seawalls, constructing groynes, nourishing beaches, stabilizing inlets, or
armoring updrift headlands, have accumulated to the point where a new landform,
unprecedented in earth?s history, has emerged: the "developed barrier".
Typically, engineering activities on developed barriers prevent or counteract
overwash. Two key questions guide this research: 1) Are there threshold rates of
sea-level rise beyond which coastal barriers will drown completely? and 2) Will
human responses to sea-level rise mitigate or exacerbate the potential for
losses of developed barriers across entire systems? A multidisciplinary team of
geologists, numerical modelers, and economists will engage in an integrated
field and modeling study to examine the behavior and predict the fate of barrier
systems. Focused geologic investigations will investigate how barriers responded
to higher rates of sea-level rise in the past (rates that match those predicted
for later this century). Numerical models will study the evolution of developed
barrier systems at decadal to centennial time scales by coupling natural
sediment transport processes and human alterations of the coast. Different human
protection strategies will be explored, comparing coordinated versus
uncoordinated responses and considering whether well-informed versus poorly
informed responses result in different barrier futures. The most important
question will be whether human activities intended to preserve infrastructure
and beach recreation may make wholesale collapse, or "drowning" of barrier
systems more likely.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The drowning of barrier beaches due to
sea-level rise is an issue of global importance. The same wave processes that
created these barriers will cause them to change dramatically as sea levels
rise. Barriers will do more than flood passively (like a bath tub); storms,
waves, and tides can reshape entire coastlines. Barriers contain a beach, a
resource that is particularly valued, and house significant amounts of
infrastructure, including homes, resort complexes, hotels, and roadways.
Accordingly, humans respond to coastal changes by bulldozing beaches, pumping
sand, and armoring the coast. What are the long-term effects of these activities
on the naturally occurring processes on the coast? This research aims to provide
guidelines on how the global system of barriers will respond to changes in sea
level and to changes in mitigation strategies, with a goal of identifying
optimal societal responses to reduce the resulting potential economic losses.
This research will involve communication with stakeholders and coastal managers
to obtain their inputs to help formulate and assess decision-making strategies
for model simulations and to disseminate the study findings. This program will
also provide interdisciplinary training for students, who are the next
generation of coastal researchers, on the diverse aspects of coastal processes.