* 0815705
* Collaborative Research: Multilocus Comparative Phylogeography of Pine-Oak Woodland Birds in North America
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Scott Edwards, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 09/30/2011
* USD 156,678.00

For nearly a century, biologists have debated whether past climate change
promoted speciation in temperate zone organisms. Models of climate-driven
geographic speciation were developed for many groups of temperate organisms, and
a particularly detailed and explicit speciation model was developed for North
American birds. Over the last decade, this paradigm for North American birds has
become the topic of debate, and so a comprehensive understanding of how
temperate zone birds were impacted by past environmental change events remains
elusive. This project will directly test the paradigm and will significantly
extend understanding of the history of the fauna of pine and oak woodlands. The
work will use state-of-the-art molecular techniques and analyses to examine the
temporal and spatial patterns of diversification of North American birds in
relation to past environmental change and will produce a multi-locus comparative
phylogeography of pine and oak woodland birds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
provides significant mentoring and research opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students, including many students from underrepresented groups, and
gives these students a unique opportunity to work in a multi-institutional and
multidisciplinary research effort between a small rural university and two large
urban research universities. The project also will support a workshop for high
school teachers from the rural and reservation communities of western South
Dakota and provide them the knowledge and resources to teach about climate
change and its impact on biotic diversity in their classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;