* 0815336
* Collaborative Research: Life histories of species in the genus Calanus in the North Atlantic and North Pacific Oceans and responses to climate forcing
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Andrew Pershing, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2012
* USD 278,168.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Species in the genus Calanus are predominant in
the mesozooplankton of the North Atlantic and North Pacific Oceans. Their key
role in marine food web interactions has been recognized in GLOBEC programs,
both in the U.S. and internationally. Considerable knowledge of life history
characteristics, including growth, reproduction, mortality, diapause behavior
and demography has been acquired from both laboratory experiments and
measurements at sea. This project reviews and synthesizes this knowledge and
uses it to develop an Individual Based Life Cycle model for sibling species in
two sympatric species pairs, C.marshallae and C. pacificus in the North Pacific
Ocean and C. finmarchicus and C.helgolandicus in the North Atlantic, that have
been the particular focus of GLOBEC programs and other recent research projects
in the U.S., Canada and Europe. The IBLC model is then applied to make
predictions about the life history response of each species to forcing under
reasonable climate change scenarios for ambient food and temperature. The
project involves training of a graduate student and two postdoctoral researchers
in evaluation and prediction of effects of climate change on marine plankton
populations. It fosters international collaboration with Canadian and European
researchers, including participation in a workshop in Europe. Outreach to the
broader fishing and management community is through seminars, information
exchange sessions with fishermen managers, including the Maine Fisherman?s
Forum, collaboration in affiliated projects with colleagues involved in herring
and tuna research in the Gulf of Maine and in climate and fisheries interactions
within NOAA.