* 0815413
* OPUS: Lyme disease ecology in eastern North America: questioning dogma, embracing complexity
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2011
* Richard Ostfeld, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 06/30/2011
* USD 136,771.00

When a new infectious disease emerges, biomedical scientists mobilize to
identify the key species (pathogen, wildlife reservoir, vector) or climatic
factors responsible, and to produce a sketch of environmental sources of risk.
These sketches are insufficient at best and inaccurate at worst, potentially
leading to inadequate mitigation of disease risk. For example, attempts to
reduce Lyme disease (LD) incidence by targeting white-tailed deer and white-
footed mice have failed because several other important hosts for ticks can
compensate for reductions in deer and mouse populations. The major objective of
the proposed research is to identify the causes of limited success, using LD as
a case study. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will provide a
synthesis of knowledge about LD to: (1) describe the predominant initial
approach to emerging diseases; (2) illustrate the shortcomings of such an
approach in predicting risk of human exposure or prescribing effective control
of that risk; and (3) explore the broader ecological context of disease risk. LD
is arguably the best-studied vector-borne zoonotic disease in the world and
serves as a model for many other diseases. The synthesis will be used to
describe a more holistic approach to the ecology of emerging infectious diseases
that is expected to provide a more thorough, sound, and rapid understanding of
risk leading to more effective mitigation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;