* 0815373
* Disturbance Theory:  The effects of different types of environmental perturbation on species invasion and coexistence
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Katriona Shea, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2012
* USD 375,324.00

Disturbances occur in all ecosystems, but there is no general theoretical
framework that encompasses the various aspects of disturbance and their
individual and interacting effects on biological communities. The frequency,
intensity, duration, extent, and timing of disturbance can each influence the
ability of species to coexist and the ability of new species to invade existing
communities. Interactions among these aspects of disturbance further complicate
their impacts, creating a need for a robust theoretical framework that can be
applied to many ecosystems and to individuals, populations, and communities. An
ecological niche-based theory of disturbance will be developed using analytical
and simulation models, linking species traits to disturbance regimes and
population dynamics. If successful, the project will create a common framework
for a diverse literature on disturbance, significantly advancing our
understanding of disturbance as a driver of biological diversity. The utility of
the resulting models will be tested by applying them to three case studies:
invasion and management of non-native thistles, fire and grazing disturbance
interactions in Australia, and coexistence of species in deep-sea hydrothermal
vent systems. &lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this project are present because
human activities are changing disturbance regimes in virtually all ecosystems,
with unknown consequences for species coexistence and diversity, and because
disturbance has played a key role in the spread of many invasive species. A
comprehensive theory of disturbance will inform scientists and natural resource
managers when and where changes in disturbance are likely to pose threats to
diversity or change the susceptibility of an ecosystem to invasive
species.&lt;br/&gt;