* 0815966
* CNH: Globalization and the Connection of Remote Communities: Environmental Implications
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* Aaron McCright, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,057,123.00

The forces of globalization increasingly are penetrating the remote communities
of the world and are likely to affect profoundly the local use of natural
resources. Remote communities, those that lie at the periphery of existing
global market, migration, and technology networks, are increasingly connecting
to these networks through infrastructure projects such as roads, rail, ports,
and communication technologies. Because remote communities often are found in
close proximity to abundant and relatively intact natural resources, an
understanding how the forces of globalization interact with tightly coupled
human and natural systems in remote communities is central to achieving
environmental sustainability. Causal pathways linking global connection to
environmental effects are complex and often are mediated by myriad factors,
including household economics; human, social, and physical capital assets of
households and communities; local governance and knowledge; formal and informal
institutions; culture; and gender dynamics. Previous studies have provided
limited and often contradictory accounts of these pathways and effects due to
their narrow scope, limited time frames, and research design. This
interdisciplinary research project will address these concerns and provide
answers to the overall question: What are the impacts on human and natural
systems of the connection of remote communities to global networks of markets,
migration, and technology? The project's objectives are to determine the effects
of market, migration, and technology integration in remote communities on local
agricultural, forest, and marine resources while identifying and accounting for
possible mediating factors. The research sites are twelve small communities
along the heretofore isolated Caribbean "Mosquito" Coast of Nicaragua. The
communities vary in their degree of connectedness to urban centers and therefore
to global networks via new infrastructure. The investigators will employ a
variety of data collection strategie, including (1) household surveys; (2) key
informant interviews with community leaders and local government officials; (3)
assessments of agricultural, forestry, and marine ecosystems; (4) satellite
imagery of land use change; and (5) market surveys for the agricultural,
forestry, and marine sectors. Their analytical methods will include land-cover
change analysis, empirical modeling and statistical analyses, and agent-based
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will test and extend theories of the
influence of external forces of globalization on human and natural systems in
remote communities. As the reach of these forces continues to extend,
understanding their impact and developing strategies for mitigating their
harmful effects is of the utmost environmental, economic, and social importance.
Project results will help policy makers and leaders of understudied remote
communities better anticipate and plan for changes coming from global
connection, and they will help guide resource use and management. By
incorporating the exogenous factors of markets, migration, and technology along
with various household characteristics, the project's analytical approach for
examining environmental impacts will provide a language for scholars from a wide
range of disciplines to interact on a broad basis for collaboration on similar
problems associated the impacts of globalization on remote communities. The
project also will have educational impact by engaging students of all levels, at
home and abroad, in the discussion and analysis of the project's research
themes. This project is supported by the NSF Dynamics of Coupled Natural and
Human Systems (CNH) Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;