* 0815453
* Collaborative Research and RUI: Auxin fluxes in the Arabidopsis Root Apex--a Combined Experimental and Computational Approach
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2008,10/31/2013
* Eric Kramer, Simon's Rock of Bard College
* Continuing Grant
* Kent Chapman
* 10/31/2013
* USD 337,293.00

Abstract: Hidden by soil and often ignored, the root is vital to the growing
plant, exploring the soil to get water and nutrients and providing anchorage.
Root form and function is regulated by the plant hormone auxin, which is
produced and transported by specialized protein families in the plant. The
activity of these proteins is understood in broad outline, but quantitative
aspects remain unclear. The research goals of the project aim to advance
knowledge of auxin transport by combining experimental and computational
approaches. The experimental approaches of this multidisciplinary project
include high-resolution measurements of the movement of auxin itself, as well as
of the propagation of auxin-mediated responses, such as cell growth. The
experiments will use the species Arabidopsis thaliana, the "fruit fly" of plant
biology. The nearly transparent roots are a significant advantage for microscope
work, and the available storehouse of auxin-related mutants is second to none.
The computational aspect of the project will refine AuxSim, a model under
development by Kramer that is already recognized as a powerful computational
tool for auxin transport. The refined model and experimental results will fill
in several blanks in the flow-chart for auxin transport within the root. This
will synergize with contemporary efforts to understand the molecular biology of
auxin action, and may also help applied efforts to enhance agricultural
productivity by improving root efficiency. AuxSim will be made freely available.
The award will partner undergraduates at Simon's Rock and UMass Amherst, and
will provide training that is both biologically rigorous and computationally
rich, a combination increasingly considered essential for tomorrow's workforce.