* 0815046
* Developing Online Value Inventories to Predict and Improve Student Success in STEM Education
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Donald Deeds, Drury University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/2012
* USD 441,626.00

Assessment/Research (91) This Phase 2 CCLI project is continuing to develop and
test assessment tools focused on measuring the value that students place on
learning science and mathematics. A primary goal is to provide instructors with
improved methods for shaping their courses and curricula so as to improve
student success in STEM education, building on earlier work that produced the
Science Value Inventory (SVI) and Math Value Inventory (MVI). These instruments
were developed to test the idea that real STEM literacy requires students to
find value in their STEM courses. Data from testing the paper versions of both
instruments indicate that they are both valid and reliable. They are now in use
in a variety of institutions around the country. Analysis of survey results has
detected significant gender differences, and variations among instructors and
curricula. Analysis has also found similarities in how students at Historically
Black Colleges and Universities and Midwestern state universities value science.
This project is more widely disseminating these tools for general education, and
working on developing similar tools for STEM majors. The project phases and
goals are to (1) Develop and implement an accessible, efficient web-based system
for administering the MVI and SVI instruments. Project tasks being conducted
include validating the online versions, and creating an automated process for
recording student registration, student responses, demographic information, and
submission of instructor and course information. (2) Develop new online value
inventories to use with STEM majors. Project tasks being conducted include
initial testing and modification of the instruments to ensure that they are
valid and reliable using online protocols. This task requires the development of
more sensitive instruments, because undergraduate STEM majors tend initially to
place greater value on science or math (or both). The Web-based system
constructed in the first phase of this work is being used to administer these
inventories, analyze and distribute the results, and build a database that
provides insight into how value affects STEM majors' prospects for success. (3)
Conduct analyses to determine the power of these instruments in predicting
student success in STEM education. The collected data are being used to build a
national database of student values, allowing comparison against national norms,
as well as subgroups based on institutional type, student background, ethnicity,
gender and other variables.