* 0815047
* Collaborative Research: Climate Forcing of Calanus finmarchicus Populations of the North Atlantic
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Peter Wiebe, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2013
* USD 420,780.00

The overall goal of this project is to understand the processes that regulate
the large-scale distribution and abundance of Calanus finmarchicus, a keystone
species of the North Atlantic ecosystem. The investigators hypothesize that
three main population centers in the North Atlantic are quasi-distinct and
selfsustaining. This hypothesis will be tested with combined physical-biological
modeling and genetic analysis of C. finmarchicus populations. The modeling
approach is to assimilate observations of C. finmarchicus from the Continuous
Plankton Recorder (CPR) into the North Atlantic Regional Ocean Modeling System
using the adjoint method. The first phase of the project will be to investigate
the mean seasonal cycle based on monthly mean CPR data together with the
climatological mean circulation. The inverse model solution will be diagnosed to
quantify the interconnectivity between the three population centers. Molecular
population genetic analysis will yield independent estimates of the rates of
exchange between the gyres, which will be compared with model predictions. This
assessment of the climatological mean seasonal cycle will set the stage for a
study of interannual variability, with particular emphasis on changes in the
mean state of the system in association with the North Atlantic
Oscillation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this effort includes
its interdisciplinary approach (physics and biology) and integrated analysis
(adjoint modeling and molecular population genetics), which can provide new
insights into complex oceanographic phenomena, such as ocean basin-scale
processes, that are difficult or impossible to observe directly. Broader impacts
of the proposed research will include international collaboration, as well as
training of both undergraduate and graduate students. The project will use the
outreach capacity of the "Census of the Marine Zooplankton," a Census of Marine
Life (CoML) field project led by A. Bucklin, to ensure broad dissemination of
results to researchers, students, and educators. This project will produce a
video, contribute to CoML synthesis publications, and produce researcher
interviews for the CoML web site.