* 0815053
* US-Argentina Planning Visit to the Diamante Caldera Maipo Volcanic Complex; Mendoza, Argentina
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Maureen Feineman, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 07/31/2011
* USD 19,614.00

This U.S- Argentina award will support one junior scientist and one graduate
student, under the direction of Dr. Maureen Feineman of Penn State University,
on two planning visits to Argentina. The first visit will take place in February
2008 and the second in February 2009. The primary goal of these visits is to
initiate a long-term collaboration between researchers at Penn State University
and Servicio Geol√≥gico y Minero Argentino (SEGEMAR) in Argentina. In this
collaboration, Penn State will provide detailed geochemical analysis to locally-
based ongoing field work at Maipo Volcanic Complex which is situated in an
active part of the Southern Volcanic Zone in the Andes. The team will meet with
Dr. Patricia Sruoga, a geologist with SEGEMAR who has extensive field experience
in this region and is the first author of the of the most complete geochemical
assessment of Maipo to date. During these two visits, the researchers will
familiarize themselves with the geography and geology of the area, collect
samples for preliminary geochemical work, and develop a strategy for future
collaborations between the two institutions. The investigators plan to develop a
collaborative proposal in Petrology and Geochemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
visit will involve a very-talented early-career PI and one graduate student. It
has the potential to generate a series of future studies regarding the processes
of magma recharge, storage, and evolution beneath Maipo Volcanic Complex and
will further our understanding of what triggers the occasional violent eruption
in a volcano that has a relatively quiescent volcanic history.&lt;br/&gt;