* 0815421
* Study of the Impact of Specialized Public High Schools of Science, Mathematics, and Technology
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2013
* Rena Subotnik, American Psychological Assoc
* Continuing Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,005,869.00

Intelligent Merit: The intent of this proposal is to conduct a national,
retrospective study of specialized science, mathematics, and technology (SMT)
schools that provide a more rigorous course of study for academically talented,
science-focused students. The main goal of the proposed work is to determine
what contributions can be made to public policy decisions about SMT education
relative to specialized schools. The study will examine the educational and
career consequences of these schools to gain better insights about their
contributions to the SMT workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through a three-phased
approach, this study will focus on graduates from specialized high schools and
their counterparts from regular high schools as a comparison group. During the
first phase of the study, graduates from one specialized high school and from a
comparison group will be studied, while during phase two, three specialized
schools and comparison groups will be studied. In phase three, the study will be
expanded using the same study respondents from the first two phases. Throughout
the first two phases, methods and instruments will be crafted, piloted, and
revised. Overall, the study will involve 5000 graduates from specialized SMT
schools and 1000 graduates with similar backgrounds from regular high
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research questions for this study
include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Are graduates from specialized SMT high schools
more likely to enroll in SMT-related studies and career fields when compared
with graduates from regular non-magnet non-examination high schools with
comparable academic and demographic backgrounds?&lt;br/&gt;2. What school models
employed by specialized SMT high schools are most associated with entrance into
SMT-related studies and career fields? (School models include: residential
schools, schools-within-schools, regional centers with half-day
courses.)&lt;br/&gt;3. To what degree do graduates from specialized SMT high
schools who pursue non-SMT degree concentrations and careers attribute value to
the SMT skills and content they experienced at their high school?&lt;br/&gt;4.
Do graduates from specialized SMT high schools differ in their professed
understanding and personal interest regarding science-related public issues from
graduates of regular non-magnet non-examination high schools with comparable
academic and demographic backgrounds?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
study will likely advance discovery and understanding about how schools should
be structured to ensure academically talented students, including those
historically underserved, reach their fullest potential. The results could
inform policy about the value of SMT schools to the STEM workforce, hence, in
that regard, it could e transformative. Key partners (e.g. schools,
universities, and corporations) have been assembled to provide broad-based
support to specific aspects of this project. The qualitative phase of the study
will target the perspectives of graduates on factors (e.g. education, success,
ethics), other than enrollment and achievement. The advisory board represents a
variety of expertise and stakeholder communities and will likely yield a wider
dissemination of results and findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;