* 0815065
* Practical and Theoretical Foundations for Informative Classroom Assessment: A Synthesis of Cognitive Science, Curriculum, Instruction, and Measurement
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2008,03/31/2013
* William Stout, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 03/31/2013
* USD 249,455.00

Project Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to strengthen the
theoretical and practical foundations for understanding, developing and
implementing assessments embedded in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) curricula. The project aims to interweave threads from four
research areas: 1) cognitive science, 2) curriculum development, 3)
instructional practice and teacher preparation, and 4) educational measurement
and psychometric modeling to advance knowledge of assessment in STEM. The main
product will be a monograph that will unify and extend disciplinary
understandings; identify important questions, issues and problems relevant to
informative assessment for future research; and articulate a broad-based
multidisciplinary research agenda for informative assessment. A key assumption
underlying this proposal is that successful implementation of effective
mathematics and science curricula depends on the presence in the classroom of
high quality embedded assessments that inform the teaching and learning
processes, and is sensitive to the needs of diverse learner
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The synthesis research in this project will be
structured by an organizing framework of aspects of assessment validity, based
on reviews of multiple research literatures, and guided by advice from a
outstanding panel of experts from across the four supporting research areas
whose work and expertise are centrally relevant to STEM teaching and learning
and whose interests include assessment, and the needs of diverse populations.
The project will enhance knowledge and understanding of assessment in STEM areas
and to improve the broader theoretical perspectives and practical foundations
underlying informative assessment. The project?s main goal to bring informative
assessments significantly into K-12 STEM classrooms nationwide, and other
education and training settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;