* 0815764
* Collaborative Research: Learning across the Expert-Novice Continuum: Cognition in the Geosciences
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2008,06/30/2013
* Joe Elkins, Western Michigan University
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 06/30/2013
* USD 563,653.00

Two related research projects will investigate cognition across undergraduate
geology majors, geology graduate students, and professional geologists. The
field-based studies involve authentic tasks commonly used by students and
professional geoscientists. Navigation (GPS) as well as cognitive (maps, audio
logs, and debriefing interviews) data will allow the investigators to study
complex natural problem solving. The laboratory studies involve a series of
cognitive tasks that allow the investigation of working memory function,
perceptual abilities, and the structuring of domain-specific content knowledge.
The investigators expect to produce: (1) Valid and reliable methods for
investigating field-based geologic cognition and navigation, which could allow
for field-based cognitive data to be readily collected from large numbers of
students enrolled in field courses; (2) New laboratory-based cognitive
experiments that push the boundaries of existing knowledge about the cognitive
processes underlying the learning and teaching of complex geoscience content,
which will bridge the geoscience education and cognitive science literatures on
STEM learning; and (3) A theoretical model for geocognition derived from
empirical data that describes how cognitive processes manifest and change as
students progress toward expertise, which will provide a foundation for
research-based instructional design and teaching in the geosciences.