* 0815398
* Collaborative Research: Interacting Controls on Ecosystem Function: Nutrient State and Omnivory in Salt Marsh Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* R. Scott Warren, Connecticut College
* Continuing Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 09/30/2012
* USD 36,881.00

Coastal ecosystems are experiencing changes in nutrient loading and species
composition much higher than previously measured, undoubtedly affecting
productivity and sustainability of coastal regions. Predicting the impacts of
these changes is important in salt marshes because marshes are among the most
biologically productive areas in the world and provide critical ecosystem
services, such as nursery areas for fisheries, removal of nitrogen, and
shoreline storm buffering. This project addresses a critical question: What are
the effects of increased nutrients and species change on ecosystem services
provided by salt marsh ecosystems? The project is the first to use whole-
ecosystem experiments that alter nutrient loading and reduce fish populations to
understand the effects on nutrient cycling, species diversity, food webs and the
long-term sustainability of salt marshes.

The damage by Hurricane Katrina due to degradation of coastal wetlands is one
example of the importance of salt marshes to society. A growing appreciation of
this role for marshes has led to estuaries becoming the focus of large-scale
restoration programs. This project will provide information essential for
developing water quality standards and providing perspective for multi-million
dollar coastal management decisions, such as construction of sewage treatment
facilities, regulation of fishing, or rebuilding of lost marshes.