* 0815808
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Decomposition in drylands:  Soil erosion and UV interactions
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2013
* Heather Throop, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 09/30/2013
* USD 279,860.00

Decomposition, the breakdown of dead plant and animal material, is a fundamental
process that affects soil fertility and ecosystem carbon storage. Most of what
is known about decomposition is from studies in high rainfall areas, but this
knowledge does not translate well to dryland ecosystems. Some recent studies
suggest solar ultra-violet radiation has a major influence on decomposition in
drylands; however, other studies indicate the level of mixing of wind/water-
transported soils with litter is the key factor. This project seeks to resolve
these competing explanations through a series of laboratory studies and field
experiments in Arizona designed to measure interactions among these factors.
These linkages will be assessed in the context of woody plant encroachment into
grasslands, a globally extensive vegetation change in drylands.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This investigation will yield new insights into processes
that affect soil fertility and carbon storage in drylands by combining the
disciplines of plant community ecology, ecosystem science and earth science in a
novel framework. The findings will be relevant nationally and internationally,
as dryland ecosystems characterize major portions of the US and global land
area, and may be significant carbon sinks. In addition to dissemination in the
scientific community, results will be communicated to land management personnel
and organizations through outreach programs. The study will provide training
opportunities for four graduate and numerous undergraduate students. The
collaborating institutions (University of Arizona, New Mexico State University,
University of Kentucky and Loyola University) have substantial minority
enrollments, and efforts will be made to recruit students from underrepresented
groups.