* 0815250
* On-Track for STEM Careers: Access to Rigorous and Relevant STEM Courses in Florida's High Schools
* EDU,DRL
* 10/15/2008,09/30/2012
* Kathryn Borman, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 09/30/2012
* USD 996,966.00

Intelligent Merit: This study will examine and clarify for policymakers and
researchers the impact of statewide policy changes that increased the
availability of advanced STEM courses for a greater number of schools and
students. The proposer will analyze the extent to which the policy changes
affect outcomes for all students, particularly students who are underrepresented
in STEM areas. This study, then, will provide critical information about the
effectiveness of policy changes for stakeholders who have a vested interest in
understanding the effects of advanced curricular programs on student enrollment
in STEM courses during high school and early college. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will address two key research questions: &lt;br/&gt;1. Who enrolls in
accelerated academic programs? What are the factors (the student and school)
that influence enrollment in different accelerated and non-accelerated
curricular programs? &lt;br/&gt;2. Do accelerated academic programs increase
students? STEM coursetaking in high school and during their first year of
postsecondary school (Grade 13)? Do some programs increase STEM coursetaking
more than others? Do these programs reduce gaps in STEM coursetaking among
historically underrepresented students and their peers?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposer will use a mixed method approach to address the research questions that
includes a quantitative analysis of extant longitudinal data in the state of
Florida and a qualitative assessment of non-statistical factors through site
visits to schools. Ten years of quantitative data from the Florida Department of
Education (FLDOE) will serve as the main source of information the proposer will
use to study the characteristics of both students and schools. The FLDOE dataset
includes a rich array of high school and postsecondary data (e.g. transcripts;
dual enrollment and achievement data in these courses; regular 1-12 grades
school test scores; demographic data; poverty index information). Two sets of
school site visits will be conducted in the state?s major urban centers as well
as small suburban high schools to provide insights not captured through
quantitative analysis. During the initial visits, data will be collected via
course catalogs and interviews with school personnel. For follow-up visits, data
will be collected through student focus groups about all aspects of course
offerings and course taking. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
Contribution to the field of knowledge about student enrollment in advanced STEM
coursework will likely advance discovery in this area. The extensiveness of the
work (examination of student and school factors from high school to college in
mathematics and science) increases the importance of results to local and
national policymakers and researchers. The wide range of expertise (individuals
and institutions) adds significantly to the strength of the proposal and
increases the credibility of expected outcomes. Lessons-learned from prior work
will serve as the foundation for the development of some of the study?s data
collection instruments. The dissemination plan is strong and the Urban Institute
appears well positioned to carry out this component of the scope of
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;