* 0815293
* Collaborative Research: Comparative Analysis of Salmon and Cod Population Responses
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Alan Hastings, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* David L. Garrison
* 08/31/2013
* USD 267,466.00

In GLOBEC investigations, causality is often inferred from observed
covariability between environmental indicators and populations, but mechanisms
of action (e.g., an effect on individual growth rate or survival at a certain
age) are seldom known, though they are frequently hypothesized. The population
dynamic effects of the mechanism of action are seldom elucidated, and
investigators are often not aware of the population dynamic differences between
variability at different ages or between variability in survival or growth.
However, research in population dynamics is increasing awareness of the
differences these make in terms of sensitivity of populations to the environment
and the time scales of variability of the environmental forcing and the
response. Salmon and cod are two taxa that have been of interest to GLOBEC and
they span the Pacific and the Atlantic Oceans in the Northern Hemisphere. Their
populations vary spatially in development rates and the consequent distribution
of spawning ages, and they experience inter-annual temporal variability in both
survival at various ages and development rates (and spawning age distributions).
The investigators will examine the role of the differences that population
dynamics makes in structuring the different responses of various salmon and cod
populations to environmental variability and climate change. Specifically, they
will describe how the mechanism of action (variable growth rate or survival rate
at age) influence population sensitivity to environmental fluctuations at
various time scales, including expected time scales of population response.
Examples of similar studies include out elucidation of the differences in
population responses of coho and chinook salmon to the regime shift in the
mid-1970s due to differences in spawning age distributions. Discovering that the
expected differences were slight re-focused attention on other potential causes
of the differences in response. Another example is identification of the causes
of cohort resonance in cod and the drawing of attention to the fact that
increasing resonance (sensitivity to specific time scales of environmental
variability) also led to increasing sensitivity to variability at very low
frequencies such as might be seen in climate change. Concern was expressed that
this heightened sensitivity to random noise could interfere with attempts to
detect slow climate change.

A societal benefit will be derived from this investigation of how the addition
of fishing mortality rate changes the basic response of populations to
environmentally induced variability in development rates and survival rates at
various ages. This will aid in the risk analysis associated with fishery
management. Also, description of the expected scales of variability to which
populations will be sensitive will aid in the design and analysis of ocean
observing systems. From a human resources point of view, this project will be
train one student and two postdoctoral scholars.