* 0815787
* Math and Science Achievement Gaps for Minority and Disadvantaged Students: Developmental and Environmental Influences from Nine Months to 8th Grade
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* David Grissmer, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 08/31/2012
* USD 1,023,592.00

This proposed project is an empirical study that falls within the contextual
research strand of the REESE program. The aim is to conduct research about STEM
education relative to achievement gaps that exist between minority and
disadvantaged students and their non-minority counterparts. The outcomes of this
study will help in addressing the convergence of several trends that may exact
increasing costs to individuals on the lower end of the gap, the economy, and to
social and political ideas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The achievement gap is a
deceptively complex scientific problem that will increasingly require studying
the origin and evolution of gaps from earliest childhood. In that regard, this
study will integrate research trends in the developmental sciences, the
cognitive and neurosciences and economics, and education research and other
strands of social science to develop interventions to address gaps in more
efficient ways. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first large nationally representative
longitudinal data collection will be used for this study. This large database
includes information from nine months to grade eight that will be used to test
and compare the leading hypotheses about the origin and evolution of gaps. To
meet the challenge of turning such data into credible evidence that might inform
intervention plans and further research, two statistical estimation strategies
(growth and econometric models), information from supporting meta-analysis, and
an extensive advisory network of experts will be used to conduct the study.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will focus on: &lt;br/&gt;(1) Building better
theoretical and empirical research models directed toward understanding how
these gaps develop from conception to school entry; &lt;br/&gt;(2) Identifying
effective strategies and inventions that might efficiently narrow gaps prior to
school entry; &lt;br/&gt;(3) Building better explanations about why gaps are so
difficult to close during schooling; (4) formulating stronger suggestions about
why gaps for some minority groups expand during schooling, while gaps for other
minority students narrow; and &lt;br/&gt;(5) Identifying the conditions
associated with significant positive changes in learning trajectories during
schooling for the small proportion of minority and disadvantaged students who
narrow their score differences with white advantaged
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The study is likely to advance
knowledge and discovery in the field in that it brings together researchers from
many fields to examine ways to better understand the achievement gap in STEM
areas. The results could benefit education stakeholders interested in improving
STEM education for all students. Potentially, this study could inform and
influence current policy considerations regarding mandatory pre-school
enrollment, and in that regard could be transformative. State and local
policymakers will assist with dissemination as well as national outlets
established through earlier studies.&lt;br/&gt;