* 0815020
* Collaborative Research: The Role of Culture and Experience in Children's Understandings of the Biological World
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Douglas Medin, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 08/31/2012
* USD 593,930.00

The current project is designed to discover how fundamental biological concepts
are understood in different learning contexts and across different cultural
groups. Mainstream European-American and Native-American populations are
compared to discover how concepts of the natural world are shaped by different
belief systems and practices; urban and rural populations are compared to
discover how both direct contact with the natural world and exposure to popular
media influence learning and reasoning. The investigators attempt to tease
apart: a) various sources of environmental input (e.g., habitual contact with
the natural world, native language, and belief systems); b) various formal and
informal contexts (e.g., school and home settings); and c) various media of
transmission (e.g., books, videos, and conversation). The research protocol
includes an array of categorization and reasoning tasks that have been adapted
to suit the cultural profiles of each community. In addition, the project
involves an analysis of the cultural practices and the input that parents and
teachers provide to children. Focal content points of this proposal are
children's intuitions about the place of humans in the natural world (e.g.,
anthrocentrism) and their tendency to engage in ecological or taxonomic
reasoning. An integral component of this research program is its integration of
members of under-represented communities and building of infrastructures to
support their lasting involvement in research.