* 0815631
* Molecular Structure and Function of Protective Plant Polymers
* BIO,MCB
* 09/17/2007,01/31/2009
* Ruth Stark, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 01/31/2009
* USD 44,965.00

The leaf and fruit cuticles of higher plants function principally as barriers,
controlling bacterial and fungal attack as well as the diffusion of water and
chemicals from the outside environment. Their major chemical constituents are
waxes that provide waterproofing and either of two insoluble structural support
polymers, cutin (for aerial organs) and suberin (at internal locations and in
wound tissue). This project aims to understand how the monomer units of the
biopolymers are covalently linked together and to cell-wall polysaccharides, how
the mechanical properties of the cuticular surface change in response to stress
conditions, and how suberin or related materials are involved in textural
hardening of potato tissues. Several biophysical approaches will be taken to
these problems. (1) Oligomeric fragments of lime fruit cutin and suberized
potato wound periderm will be produced by chemical and enzymatic means,
separated chromatographically, and identified by nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR) and mass spectrometry (MS). (2) NMR experiments on solvent-swelled samples
will be used to develop and apply methodologies to identify polymer chain
structures, cross-links, and cell-wall linkages in lime fruit cutin, potato
wound periderm, suberized green cotton, and hardened potato tissues. (3) The
impact of abrasion, chilling injury, and foliar delivery of pesticides on
cuticular mechanical properties and molecular flexibility will be assessed using
rheometry, atomic force microscopy (AFM), and solid-state NMR. (4) The
biosynthesis of hard polymeric substances deposited in potato tubers that have
'hard-to-cook syndrome' will be studied using texture analysis and NMR
spectroscopy.

The overall objectives of this project include understanding how the monomer
units of the protective cutin and suberin biopolymers are linked together and to
supporting cell-wall matrices, how environmental stresses such as wind abrasion
and temperature shock alter the mechanical properties of the cuticular membrane,
how fruit cuticles interact with aqueous detergents used in application of
agrochemicals, and how suberin or related polyphenols are synthesized during the
hardening process that degrades potato texture. Ultimately, this research should
have both agricultural and economic impact, aiding in the design of essential
crop protection strategies. More broadly, the microstructural and molecular
insights developed from this work may assist the development of synthetic
waterproofing materials for industrial or cosmetic use. Finally, this project
will serve to introduce methods such as solid-state NMR and AFM to the community
of plant scientists.