* 0815646
* The Archaeal MCM Helicase
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Zvi Kelman, University of Maryland Biotechnology Institute
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2010
* USD 447,000.00

DNA replication is required for the propagation and evolution of living
organisms. The mechanism of DNA replication ensures the duplication and transfer
of genetic information during cell division. Furthermore, the process needs to
be precise, and must occur once and only once per cell cycle. The process is
functionally and often structurally conserved in all life forms and can be
divided into three phases: initiation, elongation, and termination. DNA
replication has been well characterized in bacteria, viruses and bacteriophages,
whereas many aspects of the process in eukarya and archaea are still unknown. In
particular, the structures and biochemical properties of the proteins and
enzymes involved in the initiation process remain to be described. This research
will focus on a key enzyme participating in initiation and elongation -- the
minichromosome maintenance (MCM) helicase. Various techniques will be employed
to determine the structure and biochemical properties of the the MCM helicase
from the archaeon Methanothermobacter thermautotrophicus. These studies will
contribute significantly to the understanding of DNA replication in archaea. In
addition, because the biochemical properties of the archaeal MCM helicase are
similar to those of the eukaryotic helicase, the study will also contribute to
the understanding of replication in eukarya. Comparison of the results generated
in this study with those obtained with MCM helicases from other archaea will
provide a richer understanding of the evolution of the replication machinery.
Specifically, the study will focus on 1) the determination of the MCM active
form and structure, 2) the elucidation of the biochemical properties of the
enzyme, and 3) the identification and isolation of proteins that interact with
the helicase, and their effect on helicase
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although CARB is a research institution without
easy access to students, this project has a long and distinguished history of
recruiting students at all levels and providing them with a genuine research
experience. The current project will provide training for two graduate students,
four high school students (one per project year) and eight undergraduate
students (two per project year). There is also direct out reach to the
biotechnology program at Montgomery College, the largest and most diverse
community college in the Maryland. &lt;br/&gt;