* 0815751
* Understanding the hydrodynamic interaction among flagella of E. coli using the immersed boundary method combined with the Kirchhoff rod theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Sookkyung Lim, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 07/31/2012
* USD 144,874.00

A new mathematical model is developed to understand the swimming mechanism of
bacteria such as Escherichia coli. The bacterium E. coli is a single-celled
organism which swims in a viscous fluid by rotating its helical flagellar
filaments. Two successive motions are involved in the cell motility: Runs
(straight swimming propelled by flagellar bundling) and tumbles (random
reorientation by interspersing flagella). This project will focus on the study
of the hydrodynamic interaction among flagella and flagellar filament shapes
that arise through polymorphic transformations?local changes in helical
wavelength, helical diameter, and handedness?during swimming. A generalized
version of the immersed boundary method combined with the unconstrained
Kirchhoff rod theory is used to study biological fluid mechanics in the
bacterium. A new feature of this method is that the interaction of the immersed
boundary with the fluid now involves not only translation of the immersed
boundary points at the local fluid velocity, but also rotation of the associated
triads at the local fluid angular velocity.

This method will find numerous applications in biological fluid dynamics, where
filamentous structures interact with a viscous fluid. Examples include the
supercoiling of DNA during transcription and replication and protein folding. In
addition, one of the challenges in nanotechnology is to develop machines at the
nanoscale which can be used in the treatment of disease. Understanding swimming
mechanism by means of rotary motors will help to create a nanomachine, operated
by self-propelled biomolecular nano motors, that could be used for drug delivery
inside the body. Furthermore, such interdisciplinary projects give rise to
problems and activities that can be used to attract students to science through
the investigator's work with the Women in Science and Engineering program (WISE)
at her university.