* 0815364
* Refining, Operationalizing, and Describing Scientific Inquiry Instructional Practice Using the Inquiry Science Instruction Observation Protocol (ISIOP): A National Field Test
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2008,02/28/2013
* Jacqueline DeLisi, Education Development Center
* Continuing Grant
* Edith Gummer
* 02/28/2013
* USD 630,443.00

Project Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Education Development Center, Inc. has
proposed a three-year REESE Frontier Research empirical project (Measurement,
Modeling, and Methods) to develop a training manual and facilitate a national
field test of the Inquiry Science Instruction Observation Protocol (ISIOP). The
ISIOP was developed with NSF funding. The proposed project will develop
observation protocol and scoring rubrics that will be tested for use by science
education evaluators. The main objective of the project is to improve the
measurement technology and tools for capturing variation in scientific inquiry
instruction via classroom observation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The field test will
involve 40 evaluation professionals (20 teams) at different schools across the
country. They will generate an observation data set of 80 paired observations.
The field test will use a stratified sampling strategy to maximize the
representation of schools, classrooms and students across the nation in the
study. This data set will be used to demonstrate a scientifically sound validity
argument supporting the intended interpretation of the scoring rubrics for
measuring the nature and extent of scientific inquiry instructional practices
exhibited in middle-grades science classroom teaching. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
products generated from the project include (1) an observation protocol and
scoring rubrics that have been tested for usability and utility across a range
of science education program evaluators in various settings; (2) a user?s manual
that clearly describes the development process, the derivation of the evidence
of reliability and validity, procedural information for using and scoring the
protocol, guidelines for establishing inter-rater reliability using the included
videotaped examples of teaching, and suggestions about how to coordinate the use
of the ISIOP with other instruments to produce a comprehensive research or
evaluation plan. &lt;br/&gt;