* 0815051
* Collaborative Research:GLOBEC Pan-regional Synthesis: Pacific Ocean Boundary Ecosystems: response to natural and anthropogenic climate forcing
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* Andrew Thomas, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* David L. Garrison
* 08/31/2014
* USD 325,579.00

Intellectual Merits: Large-scale decadal Pacific climate indices such as the
Pacific Decadal Oscillation (PDO) have been linked to changes across multiple
trophic levels of marine ecosystems along the eastern and western boundaries.
Recent studies of the Northeast Pacific show that other independent climate
modes are equally important in explaining changes in coastal ocean upwelling and
transport dynamics ? the fundamental processes controlling regional nutrient
fluxes and planktonic ecosystem dynamics. This suggests that the interplay of
forcing functions associated with multiple large-scale climate modes must be
considered to adequately diagnose the dynamics and mechanics underlying
variations in regional ecosystems. With this framework, this project combines
extensive national and international in situ and satellite observations with
numerical and statistical physical-biological models to diagnose the response of
four Pacific boundary ecosystems to large-scale natural and anthropogenic
climate forcing. The focus regions are: the Gulf of Alaska, the California
Current System, the Peru-Chile Current System , and the Kuroshio-Oyashio
Extension region. This goal will be approached through four core research
objectives. First, the extent to which, and by which mechanisms, large-scale
climate modes (e.g. PDO, NPGO, ENSO, and others) drove coherent changes across
Pacific boundary ecosystems over the period 1960-2007 will be investigated.
Second, the investigators will quantify and explain how changes in regional
ocean processes (e.g. upwelling, transport dynamics, mixing and mesoscale
structure) at each boundary control phytoplankton and zooplankton dynamics.
Those results will be used to test the degree to which changes in each study
region reflect bottom-up control of their respective ecosystems. Third, the
extent to which changes in the statistics of shorter-period events (e.g. intra-
seasonal oscillation, timing of spring transitions) during different phases of
the longer-period climate modes (e.g. PDO, NPGO and others) determine the
climate state of boundary-current ecosystems will be quantified. Finally, the
range of uncertainties in the response of regional ocean dynamics and their
ecosystems to climate change using forcing scenarios from selected climate model
integrations that are part of the IPCC 2007 (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change) report will be explored. This last objective will begin an assessment of
the potential impacts of climate change on regional ocean ecosystems, a topic
poorly addressed in the latest IPCC report, but the chief instrument for most
fisheries and coastal management. The success of these analyses relies on the
diverse expertise of the investigators, which include physical biological
observations, numerical regional ocean ecosystem modeling, statistical physical-
biological modeling and IPCC coupled climate model projections.

Broader Impacts: This project will provide an improved and unified understanding
of low-frequency ecosystem dynamics in the economically vital eastern and
western boundaries of the Pacific Ocean. It will also deliver new methodologies
for assessing the uncertainties associated with regional climate change in
marine ecosystems with direct implication for fisheries management and future
assessment of the IPCC. The project team represents a close collaboration of
academic and government scientists, and the research will be conducted with the
support of international collaborators from South America, Japan and Canada.
These collaborations will provide training for both international and US
students through scientific exchanges, expanding the international network for
both the US investigators and foreign collaborators. Four young PIs will be
supported, including three female scientists, two of which have no previous NSF
support or other sources of funding. Activities and results from this project
will also extend to the undergraduate students through REU programs, and
underserved high school students through the SMILE (Science and Math
Investigative Learning Experiences) Program.