* 0816504
* Complexity and Stability of an Old-field Ecosystem: The Role of Asymmetrical Interaction Strengths and Food Web Toplology
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Oswald Schmitz, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 08/31/2013
* USD 473,346.00

Biodiversity provides important environmental services that support human health
and economic well-being. One important and as yet unanswered question is: How do
species fit together to provide the most stable supply of those services? This
question will be answered by experimentation with species of insect predators
and herbivores, and grassland plants. The study will test new theory that the
most stable supply of services comes from complex systems in which many weakly
interacting species counterbalance the effects of a few strongly interacting
species. The four-year field project will test this theory by assembling
experimental food webs containing different mixtures of strongly and weakly
interacting predator and herbivore species. The study will measure how well the
different species mixtures sustain important life-support services such as plant
production for forage and the nitrogen cycle. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Human
activities are fundamentally changing ecological systems with attendant loss of
biodiversity. This study will test the resilience of ecological systems by
quantifying the risks to ecological function of species loss. It will show how
seemingly benign, weakly interacting species can, in combination with many other
weakly interacting species, end up being the important threads that hold
ecosystems together. The results will help guide conservation strategies that
ensure long-term sustainability of vital environmental services. The project
will also train the next generation of undergraduate and graduate students in
methods for experimental analysis of natural ecosystem function in ways that
enable them to make productive, direct contributions to environmental policy.
&lt;br/&gt;