* 0816681
* The Influence of Hybridization and Polyploidy on Speciation in Houstonia
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Sheri Church, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 07/31/2011
* USD 135,000.00

Understanding the origins of the diversity of species on earth remains a
difficult question. In plants, it is apparent that much of this diversity is due
to both doubling of the chromosomes of species (polyploidy) as well as
hybridization among species. However, it remains unclear how these two processes
interact in the evolution of new species. This project will test the hypothesis
that polyploidy increases rates of hybridization among species relative to
nonpolyploids using a group of closely related native plant species (Houstonia)
as the study system. Chromosome numbers of natural populations of these species
will be determined using cytological techniques. Molecular markers will then be
used to assess the historical rate of hybridization among species with varying
chromosome numbers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research will
enhance our understanding of polyploidy and hybridization, two of the most
important modes of speciation in plants. Many of our most important crop species
are either polyploids or hybrids, or both, including corn, cotton, and wheat, so
understanding the interaction between hybridization and polyploidy could enhance
agricultural breeding programs as well. This research will train both
undergraduate and graduate students in biological research methods by giving
them an opportunity to participate in data collection, management, and analysis,
and conducting independent research. &lt;br/&gt;