* 0816538
* CSHL Conference on Molecular Genetics of Bacteria & Phages being held at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory on August 20-24, 2008
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/2008,03/31/2009
* David Stewart, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 03/31/2009
* USD 5,000.00

This award will provide funds for graduate student travel to attend the 2008
Molecular Genetics of Bacteria and Phages Conference held from August 20-24,
2008 at the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory on Long Island. Applicants will be
recruited by advertisements in scientific journals and e-mails to past and
probable attendees. The advertisements direct students to the conference web
site, which contains instructions for applying for a travel grant. The
application requires an abstract of the student's proposed oral or poster
presentation. The applications and abstracts are reviewed by the three meeting
organizers, who award the travel grants based on scientific merit and financial
need. The Molecular Genetics of Bacteria and Phages Conference is the direct
descendant of the original "phage meetings" organized by Delbruck, Luria,
Hershey and colleagues in the1940s, and thus it is the oldest scientific
gathering focusing on prokaryotic molecular biology. This annual, typically
6-day meeting was traditionally held at the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, but
since 1997 the meeting has been held in alternate years at the University of
Wisconsin in Madison and at Cold Spring Harbor. Although the scope of the
meeting has greatly expanded with time, its main thrust has remained constant.
This conference is intended to provide a forum for the exchange of ideas and
information and to discuss the latest research findings and technical advances
in modern prokaryotic biology. The meeting brings together scientists who use
the tools of molecular biology, genetics, biochemistry, structural analysis, and
cell biology to learn about bacteria and phages. The Molecular Genetics of
Bacteria and Phage Conference is the primary scientific meeting for most
laboratories working with prokaryotes, and when held in Cold Spring Harbor the
average attendance is 200. A major attraction is the wide range of topics
presented, ranging from basic phage genetics to organismal genomics/proteomics,
from atomic-level structure-function analyses to microbial cell biology, and
from single molecule biochemistry to viral self-assembly. Another key feature of
this meeting is that over half the attendees are graduate students, and most of
them present a talk or poster. In addition, leading senior scientists are
invited to this meeting to present comprehensive introductions to the 10
scientific sessions and remain on site for the entire meeting. With planned
close proximity of graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and junior and
senior faculty, a unique atmosphere is created for scientific interactions which
are beneficial for all, but especially for the graduate students. Many
postdoctoral mentors and job candidates are discovered at this meeting. In
summary, this award will provide travel grants to encourage and assist graduate
students working on various aspects of prokaryotic molecular biology to attend
one of the premier meetings in their field. This meeting provides a unique wide-
ranging education experience and encourages students to present their results to
their peers as well as senior scientists. Scientific experts are always in the
audience, which ensures high scientific standards and acute questioning and
commentary at the conclusion of talks. Furthermore, this meeting provides
opportunities for young and senior scientists to interact, which stimulates
everyone's research and often leads to future training and academic job
opportunities.