* 0816514
* Sensitivity Analysis of Populations: New Models, New Applications
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Hal Caswell, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 07/31/2012
* USD 750,000.00

&lt;br/&gt; Population models provide estimates of such important quantities as
population growth rate, short- and long-term population dynamics, population
structure, and extinction risk. In all these cases, it is important to evaluate
the sensitivity of model results to changes in parameters, such as rates of
birth, growth, death, and movement. Such changes can result from environmental
change, evolutionary change, management actions, or revised estimates from new
data. This project will produce new mathematical tools for the sensitivity
analysis of nonlinear population models. The results will be developed using
matrix calculus, and will be applied to spatial models, epidemic models, harvest
models, and models for breeding and pair formation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Sensitivity analysis is significant to several areas of population biology. In
evolutionary biology, sensitivity analysis shows the fitness consequences of
changes in life histories. In population management (including the conservation
of threatened species, the control of pests, and the harvest of resources) it is
used to evaluate the effects of management strategies. The mathematical methods
developed here will also be of value in many other areas of ecology. The project
will have broader impacts through educational outreach, advice to government
agencies concerned with population management, and training of a post-doctoral
researcher. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;