* 0816862
* Adaptive mate choice driven by sexual conflict in the brown anole, Anolis sagrei
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Ryan Calsbeek, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2013
* USD 607,990.00

One of the key ways that biological diversity arises is through variation in
success at obtaining mates. Females often control access to mating and choose
only to mate with males that display elaborate traits. Sexual selection remains
a controversial topic, due in part to the difficulty of understanding how mate
choice varies across environments. This proposal explores ecological factors
that drive adaptive mate choice in Caribbean Anolis lizards, a group noted for
its great variation in body size. Laboratory and field experiments on one
species will contrast the roles of natural selection and sexual selection in
shaping both mate choice and male body size, a trait that has different effects
on the success of males and females.

The study is designed to advance science training of middle and high school
students, graduate students, and a post-doctoral researcher, in both the field
and laboratory. Students from under-represented groups will be recruited. During
the year, high-school students will apply what they learn in their research and
coursework to teach middle-school students in the Bahamas about their local
environments. Island School students will present data at a local community
outreach fair and participate in a research symposium attended by government
officials, scientists, conservation groups, and locals. Grant personnel will
serve as mentors to six Island School students per semester and supervise
studies that feed into the research goals of this proposal.