* 0816400
* CNH: Coupled Natural and Human Ecosystems over Long Periods: Pueblo Ecodynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2014
* Timothy Kohler, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 12/31/2014
* USD 1,441,309.00

This project expands the temporal and spatial dimensions of prior research to
examine the interaction of social and natural factors that shaped the pre-
historic agricultural societies of Pueblo Indians in the Mesa Verde and Rio
Grande regions of the southwest United States. This project will conduct a
coupled socio-natural science analysis of one of the most dramatic migration
episodes in world prehistory; model the evolution of incipient market-based
economies from earlier economies of reciprocity, a major economic transformation
of global interest; and compare land-use strategies and outcomes for people of a
single cultural tradition in two different, sequentially occupied environments.
The project will collect new information on known archaeological sites, and
conduct a study of resource availability and use to model the evolution of
economic strategies among households and larger groups. Model simulations will
be used to explore processes leading to group-formation. This includes
identifying communities in the archaeological record, evolving them in
simulation models, and allowing them to compete and cooperate with other groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work contributes to understanding several near-
universal processes in societies undergoing population growth and economic
intensification following the development of new technologies. Equally important
is the enhanced understanding it will provide of the rich archaeological records
of Mesa Verde and Rio Grande regions, which together are visited by close to a
million people each year. The research team is highly interdisciplinary and
includes archaeologists, a geochemist, a computer scientist, an
ecologist/geographer, a specialist in ancient DNA, and an economist. Researchers
from the two national parks, the Santa Fe National Forest, and major museums are
an integral part of the team. Collaborating institutions will involve
undergraduate and graduate students and the public in research activities.
Results will be disseminated to school-age children and the general public
through interpreters at the parks, through the educational activities of Crow
Canyon Archaeological Center, and through exhibits and other interpretive
materials developed for museums and units of the National Park Service and US
Forest Service.