* 0816910
* RUI: An Ecological Guild-Based Biodiversity Inventory and Survey of the Aquatic Non-biting Midges (Diptera: Chironomidae) of the Altai and Hangai Mountain Drainages, Mongolia
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Barbara Hayford, Wayne State College
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Ranker
* 08/31/2012
* USD 110,476.00

Intensive grazing and gold mining threaten biological diversity of aquatic
macroinvertebrates in the Altai and Hangai mountains, and the Uvs Nuur Basin
UNESCO World Heritage Site of western Mongolia, a unique region characterized by
both pristine and impacted aquatic habitat. This project will document that
biodiversity and combine diversity data with ecological data to identify aquatic
habitat in need of conservation or monitoring. Research will be conducted as a
collaborative effort between researchers at a Primarily Undergraduate
Institution (PUI) who will focus on biodiversity and ecology of non-biting
midges and the Mongolian Aquatic Insect Survey (MAIS) which will cover most
other major groups of aquatic macroinvertebrates. The PUI research will focus on
non-biting midges because they often account for over 50% of aquatic insect
diversity in freshwater habitats and established methods exist for sampling
which allow researchers to combine surveys with ecological research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this project will be submitted to the
Mongolian government and MAIS for use in conservation and biological monitoring
planning. The project will provide extensive research opportunities for the
participants from the PUI and will be used to increase biodiversity and
ecological research activities at the PUI. Field experiences will foster
collaborations between U.S. undergraduate students and their Mongolian
counterparts.