* 0816727
* OPUS: Synthesis of 25 Years of Research on the Biogeochemistry of a Tropical  Rain Forest
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* William McDowell, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 08/31/2011
* USD 150,000.00

Tropical forests play an important role in the global cycles of carbon,
nutrients, and trace gases that affect global warming. Despite the significance
of tropical forests globally, few studies have examined the long-term inputs of
carbon and nutrients in rain, or their export in stream water. Drinking water
quality and the health of downstream rivers, coastal zones and coral reefs are
strongly affected by the delivery of carbon and nutrient from mountainous
tropical watersheds. Understanding how the cycling of carbon and nutrients in
these mountainous watersheds responds to catastrophic disturbances (e.g.
hurricanes) as well as long-term climate changes is critical for their effective
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will synthesize twenty-five years
of data collected by the lead investigator and his colleagues on the
biogeochemical cycles of watershed ecosystems in the Luquillo Mountains of
Puerto Rico. This includes 40 published papers describing rain chemistry, stream
chemistry, and controls on the delivery of nitrogen and other elements to
downstream ecosystems. The proposed synthesis will have two primary outputs
including a series of papers describing long-term patterns in elemental inputs
and outputs from the study watersheds, and a book entitled Biogeochemistry of a
Tropical Forest Ecosystem. The book will focus on understanding the importance
of soils, rock weathering, vegetation, riparian zones, and disturbance in
shaping stream chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;