* 0816325
* Knowledge Synthesis on the Implementation and Effects of Revising High School Graduation Credit Requirements in Mathematics and Science
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Edward Britton, WestEd
* Continuing Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 08/31/2011
* USD 249,826.00

Intellectual Merit: This proposal addresses a topic of national interest about
the effects of revising high school graduation credit requirements in
mathematics and science. The aim is to provide policymakers with information
about how mathematics and science courses are adjusted at the district and
school level following policy mandates. The proposal will also address policy as
it applies to graduation requirements for students historically underserved in
STEM fields. It will also provide insights about conflicting research relative
to the effect of these policy revisions on school funding, shortages of
mathematics and science teachers, special students populations, dropouts, and
career-technical education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research questions will
include:&lt;br/&gt;(1) While all states are seeking generally more study of
mathematics and science and better student achievement, what more specific
purposes do states have in legislating revised graduation requirements for
mathematics and science (if any)?&lt;br/&gt;(2) In district responses to policy
changes, what is the range of implementation plans with respect to funding,
mathematics and science courses offerings, staffing, addressing impacts on
various student populations, etc?&lt;br/&gt;(3) How do implementation plans and
their effects vary with the types of policy, i.e. unit-based versus content-
based requirements, and the range of different content-based
requirements?&lt;br/&gt;(4) How well does actual implementation at the school
level conform to the intended policy outcomes with respect to key aspects like
course offering and content, and student? course taking and
achievement?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposer will analyze and synthesize data
about these questions along four constructs: (1) empirical and descriptive
studies published in peer-reviewed journals; (2) research published via other
venues including online; (3) published expert knowledge and advice located in
periodicals or on websites; and (4) current practice-based knowledge acquired
through online experts. The synthesis methods will allow the proposer to
systematically and intensively evaluate the methodological integrity and
evidentiary utility of each research construct.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: This proposal will advance knowledge in the field by becoming the first
synthesis study of the impact of increased policy changes on the number of
mathematics and science credits required for graduation in high schools across
the nation. Therefore, this study could be transformative relative to how policy
changes impact STEM education and will add significantly to the limited studies
about this topic. An advisory board with strong representation in STEM
education, the arts and sciences, and research and evaluation will assist with
implementation. In addition to traditional pathways, dissemination will be
augmented by other outlets such as R&amp; D Alerts newsletters to policymakers,
coverage in Education week, and through collaboration with the National
Commission on Teaching and America?s Future that has agreed to include the
results of the study in the Weekly News Digest, an e-bulletin to thousand of
policymakers and education leaders. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;