* 0816875
* IMR: Development of Instrument:  Improving Homogeneity of Quantum Dot Size, Shape, Positioning for Student Training
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,02/29/2012
* Gregory Salamo, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 02/29/2012
* USD 168,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL PROJECT ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is to develop a new
instrument that will allow the fabrication of nanoscale particles with much
higher precision and quality. The instrument is designed to deposit uniform
nanoscale crystals at specific locations and overcome a roadblock faced by
current techniques which produce nanoscale particles with poor size uniformity
at 10 to 20% with positioning misalignment of 300 or 400nm. These numbers
severely limit the opportunities for innovation using nanoscale materials.
&lt;br/&gt;In contrast, the proposed instrument is based on a new growth
approach which uses a uniquely designed nanoscale nozzle to literally deposit
nanostructures with a demonstrated potential for 10 times improvement on current
uniformity and precision of location, enabling a new era of nanomaterials and
their application. It creates the opportunity to fabricate and explore new
materials by grouping nanoscale particles together to form highly organized
arrays in chain, molecule, or solid like lattice structures. For example, using
this instrument one can construct novel optical and chemical sensor arrays;
nanoscale circuits for smaller and more functional electronic devices; or memory
arrays that fit right on a processor chip, dramatically increasing the speed of
computation devices. The opportunity for innovative material structures with
novel properties that can lead to new and better devices is
enormous.&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will also give graduate and undergraduate
students the opportunity to lead the design and fabrication of an exiting new
instrument as well as the growth and characterization of unique nanostructures.
These students will explore a new path to achieve a more homogeneous array of
organized nanostructures and recognize their impact with specific
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL PROJECT ABSTRACT
&lt;br/&gt;Although the possibilities from nanotechnology are very exciting they
have yet to be fully realized due to the rather large inhomogeneity in the size
and shape and random position of nucleation that have persistently accompanied
the growth of quantum dots. While efforts to overcome this roadblock have
uncovered important basic science as well as techniques to achieve improved
homogeneity, nevertheless uniformity remains around 10 to 20% and positioning is
limited to the order of the quantum dot size. This proposal is to develop a new
instrument based on a relatively new growth approach, ?directed droplet
epitaxy?, with the potential for significant improvement on these numbers.
&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will construct and explore a new instrument to deposit
a controlled volume of liquid droplets at specific locations. The technique is
based on the simple idea of transferring liquid droplets, through a nanoscale
hole in a hollow scanning probe tip, directly onto a substrate before
crystallizing. This technique can reduce the inhomogeneity in size as well as
random positioning by at least an order-of-magnitude. It opens the possibility
of exploring the optical behavior of two QDs with varying distance between them.
The cooperative emission, in time, magnitude, and distribution, will be amazing
to study. Things even get more exciting as the number of QDs is slowly increased
to explore the superradiant emission expected. It makes possible investigating
different QD geometrical arrangements or even compositions. It creates the
opportunity to explore 2D or 3D QD arrays, or QD arrays with a missing QD. In
addition, one can explore quantum wires (QWR), QDs placed in a precise
arrangement in an optical cavity, or a new generation of an ?electrical circuit?
composed of QDs connected by QWRs. The opportunity for innovative material
structures with novel properties is enormous.&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will also
give graduate and undergraduate students the opportunity to lead the design and
fabrication of an exiting instrument as well as the growth and characterization
of unique nanostructures. These students will explore a new path to achieve a
more homogeneous array of organized nanostructures and recognize their impact
with specific applications.