* 0816616
* Consequences of Selection by a Specialized Florivore on Chemical Defense and Attraction in Pastinaca Sativa
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* May Berenbaum, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 07/31/2011
* USD 348,071.00

Globalization of trade has made understanding the biology of invasive species a
high priority. Many weeds utilize toxins to fend off consumers, but in areas of
invasion plants freed from their insect enemies often lose toxicity over time.
When their ancestral enemies catch up with them through accidental or deliberate
introduction, however, renewed damage may bring about increased investment in
chemical defense. Because plants also rely on chemicals to attract pollinators,
escape from and subsequent reacquaintance with ancestral enemies may also
influence the ability of invasive weeds to produce seed and expand their range.
These relationships will be examined in the flower-feeding parsnip webworm and
its hostplant wild parsnip. Although native to Europe, this interaction is
invasive in North America and, since 2004, in New Zealand. The recent invasion
of New Zealand provides an extraordinary opportunity to document evolutionary
responses in an invasive weed to re-association with an adapted specialist.
Methodological approaches include reciprocal transplant experiments,
phytochemical analyses, and quantitative selection analysis to measure impacts
of herbivory on phytochemicals involved in pollinator and webworm
attraction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this work include providing
interdisciplinary graduate training to insure 21st century scientific
competitiveness and providing professional development projects for middle/high
school math/science teachers, popular science publications, public lectures, a
user-friendly website, and a book for the general public. This work can also
contribute to designing programs for invasive species management, biodiversity
conservation, and restoration ecology. &lt;br/&gt;