* 0816541
* A Conceptual and Mechanistic Approach to Understanding Interactions among Multiple Disturbance Agents: Compound Effects of Fire on Resource Availability to Bark Beetles
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Philip Townsend, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2012
* USD 543,805.00

Bark beetles are native insects that exert dramatic effects on forest
ecosystems. These include contributions to basic ecosystem processes such as
nutrient cycling and gap formation, impacts on biodiversity, and, at times,
widespread mortality to millions of trees. The frequency and extent of
intermittent bark beetle outbreaks appear to be influenced by several human
impacts, including climate change, forest fragmentation, and various management
policies. This research will use ground sampling, tree physiological and
biochemical analyses, and satellite imagery to evaluate the effects of a major
form of natural and human disturbance, fire, on susceptibility of lodgepole pine
to the mountain pine beetle, and on mountain pine beetle reproduction. It also
will test how fire injury affects reproduction by other, non tree-killing bark
beetles that compete with mountain pine beetle. This work will contribute to our
basic understanding of how disturbance agents interact in conifer forests, and
provide useful information for resource managers. It will contribute to science
infrastructure through the training of undergraduate students, graduate
students, and postdoctoral associates. This interdisciplinary study will be
conducted in the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem, where it will interface with
other collaborators from various institutions.