* 0816486
* An Experimental Test of the Impacts of Rising Temperature on Carbon Input, Allocation, and Loss in Model Forests
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Christian Giardina, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 07/31/2011
* USD 163,780.00

Carbon storage in the terrestrial biosphere exceeds that in the atmosphere by a
factor of four, and represents a dynamic balance between carbon inputs and
losses. This balance is being altered by climate change and land-use, with
important impacts on terrestrial carbon storage and, hence, atmospheric CO2
levels. However, the response of terrestrial carbon cycling to warming and
interactions with land-use remain poorly quantified. This study will examine how
rising temperature and land-use interact to regulate carbon input, allocation,
and loss in a model study system, thereby enhancing capacity to predict how
terrestrial ecosystems will respond to the interactive effects of warming and
land-use. To do this, we will measure aboveground and belowground carbon storage
and exchange across a 6Â°C temperature gradient within the Hawaii Experimental
Tropical Forest. At each of four temperature regimes, paired and replicated
plots will be established in degraded pasture, secondary native forest, and
intact native forest to examine how mean annual temperature and land-use
interact to affect carbon input, allocation and loss in forest ecosystems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to examining how rising temperature and land-
use interact to impact terrestrial carbon balance, this study will also: (i)
build a model global change research platform that can be used by other
scientists; (ii) provide critical data on terrestrial carbon storage to the
global change community, including scientists, policy makers, and land managers;
(iii) enhance graduate and postdoctoral training and undergraduate science
education at a Native Hawaiian serving institution; and (iv) foster
collaboration between the University of Hawaii and the USDA Forest Service on
the newly established Hawaii Experimental Tropical Forest.&lt;br/&gt;