* 0816935
* The Influence of Tree Species on Soil Organic Matter Dynamics in Temperate Forests
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Katherine Freeman, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 07/31/2012
* USD 216,735.00

Forest soils contain more carbon than the entire atmosphere and thus the
exchange of carbon dioxide between forest soils and the atmosphere can influence
the global carbon cycle and climate change. Changes taking place in forests
today, including shifts in the identity of dominant tree species and exotic
earthworm species invasions, threaten to perturb the carbon balance of these
ecosystems. Unfortunately, the effect of these two disturbances on forest soil
carbon storage is largely unknown. The intent of this proposal is to study the
influence of tree species and earthworms on soil carbon storage at a unique
field experiment in Poland, where 14 different tree species were planted more
than 35 years ago. At this site, tree species are known to differ with respect
to the earthworm populations they support and other qualities that could
influence soil carbon, including leaf and fine root characteristics. The
research put forth in this proposal will relate these known species differences
to new studies of soil carbon dynamics using advanced molecular and isotopic
analytical tools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By defining clear relationships between
tree species, earthworms, and soil carbon storage, the consequences of changing
tree species composition and earthworm invasions on the carbon balance of
forests can be better understood. This information could be used to manage the
species composition of U.S. forests for the purpose of carbon sequestration,
facilitating participation in economic and political pursuits aimed at carbon
management and climate change mitigation.&lt;br/&gt;