* 0816957
* The Carbon Dioxide Concentrating Mechanism of Chlamydomonas Reinhardtii
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* James Moroney, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Slocum
* 08/31/2011
* USD 392,065.00

Phytoplankton and algae in aquatic environments account for almost 50% of the
carbon dioxide (CO2) fixed by photosynthesis on the Earth. Because the diffusion
of CO2 is almost 10,000 times slower in water than in air, almost all of these
phytoplankton and algae have a mechanism that concentrates CO2 from the
environment for photosynthesis. This CO2 concentrating mechanism is essential
for photosynthesis and the survival of algae. In photosynthetic cyanobacteria,
the CO2 concentrating mechanism includes membrane proteins that transport
bicarbonate (HCO3-) from the medium into the cell. A carbonic anhydrase enzyme
then converts the HCO3- to CO2 for fixation by Rubisco, the enzyme that fixes
CO2. The CO2 concentrating mechanism in eukaryotic algae is less well understood
but is known to involve transport proteins and multiple carbonic anhydrases. The
goal of this project is to characterize the CO2 concentrating mechanism present
in the eukaryotic green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. &lt;br/&gt; The model
unicellular organism, C. reinhardtii, is ideal for studying the CO2
concentrating mechanism because the genome is sequenced, it has a robust CO2
concentrating mechanism and mutant strains that have defects in the CO2
concentrating mechanism have been identified. These are important tools that
will be used to determine how the CO2 concentrating mechanism functions.
&lt;br/&gt; Three major experimental initiatives are proposed. The first set of
experiments builds on previous studies to further characterize the carbonic
anhydrase gene family of C. reinhardtii. Through bioinformatics and classical
biochemical studies, nine different carbonic anhydrase genes have been
discovered in C. reinhardtii. The expression and the intracellular location of
these proteins will be determined. RNA interference (RNAi) will be used to
reduce the expression of specific carbonic anhydrase genes to determine whether
or not they are involved in the CO2 concentrating mechanism. The second aim of
the proposal is to identify and characterize transport proteins that carry
HCO3-. For these studies, the genes encoding proteins thought to be bicarbonate
transporters will be introduced into a cyanobacterial strain that is missing all
known bicarbonate transporters. The third aim is to identify transport proteins
on both the chloroplast thylakoid and chloroplast envelope membranes. For these
studies proteomics will be used to identify proteins likely to be components of
the CO2 concentrating mechanism. &lt;br/&gt; This work will increase the
understanding of how the CO2 concentrating mechanism contributes to the global
carbon cycle and will facilitate the prediction of algal responses to rising
atmospheric CO2 levels. The proposed work will also play a role in the education
of graduate students, undergraduates and high school students from a wide
diversity of backgrounds. At Louisiana State University, there are many programs
to foster participation of a diverse group of undergraduates in research (NSF
REU, HHMI, etc). The proposed research will provide a framework for these
educational programs.