* 0816319
* Collaborative Research: The CATALST Project: Change Agents for Teaching And Learning STatistics
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Allan Rossman, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Michael Jacobson
* 07/31/2012
* USD 181,686.00

Mathematical Sciences (21)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Change Agents for Teaching
and Learning Statistics (CATALST) project is designed to develop, implement,
evaluate, and disseminate an introductory, non-calculus based statistics course
that involves changes in both content and pedagogy. This project builds on
several previously funded projects, connecting them in a way that enables the
project to design and teach a unique course. The project is also designed to
carefully research and study the impact of the course on students and faculty.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The project builds on and integrates
theory and research from several disciplines: cognitive science, statistics,
statistics education, mathematics education and engineering education,
connecting these to teaching and professional development. The project goals are
to: (a) develop and adapt innovative materials based on cognitive theory and
proven methods to promote deep conceptual understanding, problem solving
ability, retention, and transfer of learning; (b) implement the materials in all
sections of an introductory statistics class at the university; (c) adapt and
use a variety of high quality assessments aligned with student learning goals;
(d) conduct research studies on the effectiveness of the material and
approaches; and (e) develop expertise among a group of faculty at other
institutions to implement the materials and pedagogical
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project affects both content
and pedagogy, shaping a very different and much needed introductory statistics
course. Workshops familiarize statistics faculty members with the CATALST course
and motivate and support them to use the content and pedagogy. After the
workshops, online support assists faculty as they make changes in the their own
classes. Ten class testers receive more intensive training and support program
that prepares them to be catalysts for change in their own institutions and
communities.