* 0816720
* Does home-field advantage cause faster decomposition rates in temperate forest ecosystems?
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Matthew Wallenstein, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 08/31/2011
* USD 150,000.00

Decomposition of plant material is a fundamental ecological process that
controls carbon storage and nutrient cycling in ecosystems, which in turn help
determine plant production and can influence global climate. Decomposition rates
are known to be strongly dependent on both climate and litter quality (i.e. the
chemical composition of the material). However, these factors alone cannot fully
explain rates of decomposition, which indicates that other factors also
influence decomposition rates. This project will determine whether soil
communities associated with specific tree species specialize in decomposing leaf
litter from the same tree species growing above them. This phenomenon can be
termed ?home-field advantage?. It will be tested in montane forests in Colorado
by transplanting leaf litter from three tree species (trembling aspen, lodgepole
pine, and Engelmann spruce) among stands of all three tree species and measuring
decomposition over two years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An understanding of the role
of soil biota in decomposition is important for two reasons. First, this data
could be used to improve predictions of decomposition rates in forest
ecosystems, a critical process in global carbon cycling. Second, ongoing climate
changes are causing plant species to shift their ranges; however, the small size
and limited dispersal ability of many soil organisms may prevent them from
shifting their range in tandem with their host plant species. Thus, soil
communities that specialize in decomposing leaf litter from a certain plant
species may become geographically disconnected from that plant species, which
could alter decomposition rates and the carbon cycle of the ecosystem. This
research will train undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;