* 0816168
* CNH: Collaborative Research: Urban Vulnerability to Climate Change: A System Dynamics Analysis
* GEO,GEO
* 09/01/2008,09/30/2014
* Timothy Lant, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Ruth
* 09/30/2014
* USD 1,264,982.00

Exposure to excessive heat is a significant threat to human health and well-
being in cities around the world. Urbanization is strongly linked to increasing
temperatures through the formation of "heat islands" - places with higher
temperatures due to radiant heat from buildings, concrete, and other human
activities. Such local effects are likely to intensify with future trends in
global warming. Previous studies have shown that the urban poor are most
vulnerable to extreme heat, but little is known about the interplay between
changing urban climates and the coupled human-natural systems that amplify or
mitigate climate-related hazards for different socioeconomic and racial/ethnic
groups at finer spatial scales of neighborhoods and households. Taking account
of global trends in urban growth and climate change, this project investigates
the causes of variation in heat-related human vulnerability within the
metropolitan region of Phoenix, Arizona. An ideal laboratory for this research,
Phoenix has a naturally hot, arid climate. Rapid urbanization has increased
average summer nighttime temperature by five degrees Celsius during the past 50
years. The research will explain the character of complex urban heat
"riskscapes", assess the vulnerability of people in different neighborhoods to
heat-related health hazards, and identify the causes of variation of
vulnerability within cities. Ecological, meteorological, sociological, and
medical treatment data will be used to build an integrated system dynamics model
of vulnerability to climate change that incorporates substantial feedback
mechanisms from human adaptations. Researchers will use the model to test
hypotheses about complex interactions between human manipulation of the
environment and induced climate response, to explore relationships between
neighborhood and regional dynamics, and to forecast alternative future
scenarios. The results will be used to devise alternative neighborhood
landscapes and community coping mechanisms that can reduce vulnerability, and to
design programs for teaching and learning about climate and health. Innovative
methodological techniques used in this study are developing fine-scale, surface
energy balance models for integrating and extending climate research over
spatial and temporal scales; combining airborne and satellite remotely sensed
data with a meteorological model nested in state-of-the-art global climate model
output; conducting spatial analyses of heat riskscapes and heat-related
illnesses; and community-participatory research on coping strategies in low-
income and minority neighborhoods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Meeting the challenges
of sustainability in a rapidly urbanizing and warming world will depend on
decisions that allow humans to control or adapt to rising urban temperatures.
This project will identify community and demographic markers of high-risk
environments that decision-makers can use to develop spatially informed early
warning systems and heat-illness prevention programs. Model projections for the
distribution of future heat-related vulnerabilities and human responses that
impact particular places and population subgroups are important for cities on
several continents because enlarging heat islands, higher temperatures, and
associated adverse impacts on health are occurring globally. Model results will
be displayed in a visualization environment that will allow stakeholders to
examine alternative future vulnerability scenarios; this will make knowledge
accessible to the community and promote better decision-making. Educational
activities will be designed for low-income and minority populations, including
the production of a children's magazine issue on "people and climate" that will
reach thousands of households. Local residents, university students, and project
investigators will engage in collaborative community-participation research to
promote heat-hazard mitigation in inner-city Phoenix neighborhoods. Information
and materials will be shared with city planners and health agencies in many
cities.