* 0816113
* The Role of Fish Introductions and Eradications on Community Assembly in Ponds
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2015
* Jonathan Chase, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 07/31/2015
* USD 604,779.00

It is well-known that the introduction of predators into ecosystems in which
they were not historically present can dramatically reduce local biodiversity.
Yet the effects of predators at larger spatial scales may differ substantially
from their local effects if predators alter the mechanisms by which communities
assemble. This study will explore how the introduction and eradication of fish
predators in previously fish-free freshwater habitats affects patterns of
community assembly and the resulting local and regional biodiversity. First, an
experimental pond array will be constructed to test for the causal relationship
between fish introductions and biodiversity at different spatial scales. Second,
in cooperation with public agencies and private landowners, the PIs will
experimentally determine if eradication of introduced fish successfully restores
local and regional biodiversity, or whether other interventions are also needed.

Overall, this project will advance the understanding of how predator
introductions and eradications structure biodiversity at different spatial
scales. Furthermore, information from this project may ultimately lead to new
practices for restoring biodiversity at large spatial scales, including
protected natural areas. In addition to providing invaluable training for future
scientists by incorporating several graduate and undergraduate students, this
research will be integrated with an outreach program consisting of in-depth
research experiences for Saint Louis, Missouri, area high school students.