* 0816726
* Collaborative Research:  Root Induced Changes of Soil Physical Properties Using Synchrotron X-ray Microtomography (CMT) and Micromechanical Simulations
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Scott Tyler, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 08/31/2012
* USD 121,111.00

The rhizosphere, the zone of soil immediately surrounding plant roots, plays a
prominent role in supplying plants with water and nutrients. However,
surprisingly little is known about rhizosphere physical properties and how they
affect root growth, water and nutrient uptake. The lack of non-invasive and non-
destructive imaging techniques necessary to observe living roots growing in
undisturbed soil have been a main reason for this shortcoming. Recent advances
in synchrotron X-ray microtomography, or CMT, provide the potential to directly
observe soil physical properties around living roots in-situ. The goal of this
research is to quantify rhizosphere physical properties by (1) employing CMT to
visualize physical root-soil structure interactions, (2) using computer models
to simulate root-induced structural alterations to the rhizosphere using micro-
mechanical approaches, and (3) estimating changes in rhizosphere hydraulic
properties, such as water retention and hydraulic conductivity, based on CMT
imaging and inverse modeling.

This research seeks to provide transformative insights into the role of
rhizosphere physical properties for water and nutrient uptake by living plants.
It serves as a stepping stone for better understanding the role of plants in the
critical zone at the soil-atmosphere interface. The project cuts across
disciplinary boundaries of biology, soil physics, and soil mechanics to offer
new insights on surface runoff, soil compaction and erosion, losses to
agricultural productivity, land reclamation, and principles of soil-plant
interactions. Doctoral students and a post-Doctoral associate will be trained
through this project.