* 0816198
* Collaborative Research: Systematics and Evolution of Hemichordates
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Billie Swalla, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Robb Brumfield
* 08/31/2012
* USD 197,038.00

Last Modified Date: 07/22/08 Last Modified By: Richard M. McCourt &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Abstract &lt;br/&gt;Hemichordates are a group of marine invertebrates
comprising over 100 species of solitary and colonial wormlike creatures.
Hemichordates have figured prominently in hypotheses of the evolutionary origins
of chordates because they are relatively primitive relatives of vertebrate
animals. Because of their primitiveness, hemichordates also provide a key
comparison group to understand the evolution of key innovations of vertebrates,
such as gill slits and a hollow nerve chord. However, hemichordates have not
been studied in depth, and evolutionary relationships within the group are not
well understood. The proposed work will use genomic approaches to identify genes
that will elucidate evolutionary relationships among the hemichordates and
clarify the evolutionary history of the vertebrates in a broader sense. Results
of this research will provide a greater understanding of cellular, genetic, and
developmental programs that were likely present in the ancestral lineage that
led to chordates and have been evolutionarily conserved during vertebrate
evolutionary history. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding hemichordate evolution
is central to research in fields ranging from neurobiology to developmental
biology to physiology, and the results of this research will be of wide interest
to many fields of science. The project will support training of students at
various levels from K-12 to graduate school. Undergraduates, including members
of underrepresented groups, will participate in the project through courses on
the campuses of Auburn University, the University of Washington, and the Friday
Harbor marine laboratories. The research will be publicized through talks to
public schools, web-based outlets, and introductory biology textbooks.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;