* 0816245
* EAR-PF: Evaluating Strain Localization, Melt Localization, and Mantle Rheology in the Twin Sisters Ultramafic Body, Washington: A Multi-Scale Approach
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Seth Kruckenberg, Kruckenberg             Seth           C
* Fellowship Award
* Lina Patino
* 06/30/2011
* USD 160,000.00

Dr. Seth Kruckenberg is awarded an NSF Earth Science Postdoctoral Fellowship to
carry out a program of research and education at the University of Wisconsin -
Madison. Dr. Kruckenberg will create quantitative models of compositional,
fabric, and strain heterogeneities in the lithospheric mantle using different
components observed in the Twin Sister mafic massif (like melt pathways, shear
zones, and compositional variations of olivine rich and olivine+pyroxene rich
rocks). The results from this investigation will be of broad tectonic interest
and provide information on the naturally deformed mantle, as well as inform on
the dynamic feedbacks of melt segregation and deformation partitioning in the
upper mantle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, Dr. Kruckenberg will be
integrating the research with three educational activities at the undergraduate
level. First, he anticipates mentoring two undergraduate students in senior
research projects. Second, as part of his career development, Dr. Kruckenberg
also plans on participating in the NSF-sponsored Center for the Integration of
Research, Teaching and Learning (Delta Program), which is based at the
University of Wisconsin - Madison. Third, to maximize the impact of the
scientific results of this study, he will develop a teaching module with Dr.
Basil Tikoff (sponsoring scientist) that will inform of the results of this
study in the context of field-based investigations of metamorphic terranes.