* 0816358
* US GLOBEC Pan-Regional Synthesis--Comparative Ecology of Krill in Coastal and Oceanic Waters around the Pacific Rim
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* William Peterson, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 07/31/2012
* USD 552,589.00

This project will synthesize the knowledge of North Pacific krill through
modeling and comparative studies, across U.S. GLOBEC, Japan-GLOBEC, China-GLOBEC
and related study regions, with the goal of understanding climate impacts on
euphausiids in the North Pacific. The project will address the following
research themes: 1) Identify the processes controlling the population dynamics
and recruitment of krill as a function of ecosystem type and ascertain how these
processes would be affected by climate change, to be accomplished through
comparing and contrasting population responses from a number of different
ecosystems, and; 2) Determine the response of krill populations at local and
regional scales to basin- and global-scale change in climate forcing.

Intellectual Merit: Krill research funded by GLOBEC since 1998, and other
research conducted by biological oceanographers in the U.S. and other nations
bordering the North Pacific (China, Korea, Japan, Russia, Canada), have produced
new information on the phenology, seasonal cycles of abundance, feeding,
reproduction, and growth rates of North Pacific krill. This knowledge will be
summarized into a series of multi-authored synthesis papers that focus on
comparative life history of krill, how local populations interact with local
ocean conditions, and how climate impacts these processes. This project will
address questions such as: 1)What are the seasonal variations in distribution,
abundance, growth rates and egg production in krill populations, and how do they
vary regionally around the Pacific Rim? 2) Are growth rates and brood sizes
related to seasonal cycles of primary production? 3) How do populations in the
eastern and western Pacific respond to ENSO and PDO cycles? 4) How are
individuals of the same species (Euphausia pacifica) adapted to survive year-
around in the very warm water regions of the Yellow Sea, East China Sea and
Japan/East Sea; what mechanisms enable individuals to survive the long winters
in northern regions, e.g., the Gulf of Alaska, Sea of Okhotsk and northern
California Current? 5) What interactions between physical transport and life-
stage dependent dynamics control the local scale distributions of krill and are
similar interactions important at regional and basin-scales?

All krill research carried out within the U.S. GLOBEC study regions (California
Current and Gulf of Alaska) will be summarized, as will research carried out by
our overseas collaborators. Metadata summaries will be produced. Krill experts
from each nation will produce local "State of our Krill Knowledge" reports.
Using these reports, joint multi-authored monographs and collaborative papers on
krill ecology will be written. Furthermore, two international symposia on krill
ecology will be convened.

Broader Impacts: This synthesis project will support one graduate student and
involve three young scientists in China and Japan. Furthermore, krill are
harvested in Japan and Canada, and pressure will soon mount to allow harvest
elsewhere. Results of this synthesis will contribute to an assessment of krill
resources and vulnerability in coastal ecosystems around the Pacific Rim. A
tangible product of this research is a monograph of the population ecology, life
history strategies, and interactions of krill with their environment in multiple
regions of the North Pacific.