* 0816629
* Testing the consequences of the carbon-quality temperature hypothesis for soil organic matter decomposition
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Noah Fierer, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 08/31/2011
* USD 451,657.00

This research will investigate how sensitively carbon dioxide loss from soil
responds to increasing temperature and why this varies among different soils.
Soils from a variety of ecosystems across the United States will be collected
and assayed under controlled laboratory conditions in order to determine how
fast soil carbon is respired by microbes at different temperatures and how
increases in biologically available nitrogen affect this temperature
sensitivity. The research will be testing predictions as to whether recalcitrant
soil carbon loss will be more sensitive to increases in temperature than less
recalcitrant soil carbon. In addition, the research will test whether increases
in nitrogen availability decrease temperature sensitivity.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Globally, soil carbon is one of the largest repositories of carbon,
yet its fate in a warmer world will be impossible to predict without mechanistic
understanding of what controls how soil microbes utilize it. For global change
biologists, this research will test a critical set of hypotheses about soil
functioning and will provide data that are essential to improving models of how
ecosystems respond to climate change and deposition of biologically available
nitrogen. At the heart of the research is determining whether warming soils are
likely to provide a positive feedback to global temperatures while also
identifying those soils and components of soils that are most susceptible to
carbon loss due to warming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;