* 0816668
* Testing a conceptual model of the terrestrial nitrogen cycle including rapid stabilization of nitrogen in soil
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2013
* Carmen Martinez, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 07/31/2013
* USD 561,119.00

Human activities have doubled annual reactive nitrogen inputs to the biosphere
with major implications for water and air quality. Recent studies show that most
inorganic nitrogen is rapidly converted to organic form and efficiently retained
in soils for decades. This proposal will measure the rate and magnitude of
nitrogen retention in stable soil organic matter of forest, urban, and
agricultural ecosystems. The research is guided by a conceptual model for the
nitrogen cycle that explicitly includes a stable organic pool and its dynamics.
The proposal focuses on three questions: What are the rate and magnitude of
nitrogen retention in stable soil organic matter? What is the relative
contribution of the microbial pathway in stable nitrogen formation? What are the
molecular structures of the organic nitrogen forms?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results
will be integrated into high school curricula by a participant with expertise in
experiential learning and high school science instruction, linking to
Pennsylvania State Standards of Learning for the Environment and Ecology, the
newest learning standards in the state. Undergraduate students from
underrepresented groups will be recruited using established programs. The work
will also link three junior level scientists from diverse fields of ecology,
chemistry and education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;