* 0816739
* Collaborative Research:  Ecosystem  Responses to Progressive and Rapid Climate Change During the Holocene  in New England
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Yongsong Huang, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 08/31/2010
* USD 124,000.00

The future trajectories of natural ecosystems and consequences for human
societies will vary greatly depending on the extent to which relatively gradual
changes in average climate are accompanied by episodic instances of disturbance
or short-term extremes in climate that may, in turn, trigger abrupt shifts in
vegetation. For example, under a gradually changing climate, abrupt shifts in
species abundances and assemblages may be triggered by drought, fire, or human
activity. Our ability to anticipate future changes would benefit from insights
into the details of previous ecological transitions, particularly those that
have been abrupt. This project involves three collaborating research groups
employing complementary approaches to reconstruct past climate-ecosystem
dynamics. High-resolution analyses of lake-sediment records from southern New
England will reveal past changes in climate, vegetation, and disturbance for the
last 15,000 years, thus improving our knowledge of the mechanisms by which
climate change interacts with environmental extremes and disturbance to control
the pace and patterns of ecological change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of
this work will inform our understanding of fundamental ecological dynamics and
provide insights into the fine-scale, short-term interactions of vegetation,
disturbance, and climate. The project will yield samples, data, and analyses
that will be permanently archived and accessible in raw, processed, and
synthesized formats through a web-based information management system, numerous
publications, and international symposia. Public outreach efforts will involve
curriculum development for model courses, undergraduate film and journalism
projects, and collaborations with scientific museums. The interdisciplinary and
multi-institutional research environment will provide training for graduate
students and mentoring for undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;