* 0816838
* Connecting empirical and theoretical work on species interactions
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2014
* Brian Inouye, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 08/31/2014
* USD 239,082.00

A firm understanding of the mechanisms that allow multiple species to coexist is
necessary in order to explain patterns of biodiversity. Several researchers have
addressed this challenge by developing theory, while others have collected
natural history or experimental data. This creative project joins these two
separate approaches by explicitly addressing the intersection of theory and
data. The proposed projects focus on the interactions between a beetle and its
parasitoid wasp; parasitoids can play an important role in limiting insect
populations in natural and agricultural habitats. First, the theoretical
prediction that heterogeneity in parasitoid attack rates can promote coexistence
of predator and prey will be tested experimentally. Second, new theory will be
developed to pursue the idea that interactions between demographic stochasticity
and resource heterogeneity promote population persistence. Third, the
intersection of theory with data will be addressed through the development of
efficient experimental designs, with an emphasis on response surface
experimental designs. Through simulations, the investigators will study relative
efficiencies of alternative experimental designs for quantifying the functional
relationships that underlie species interactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is potentially transformative in that it will accelerate the use of new
experimental designs and analyses to compare alternative model structures, as
opposed to the standard practice of rejecting null hypotheses. The investigator
will develop open-source software to evaluate experimental designs in specific
contexts. This project will contribute to the training of undergraduate and
graduate students in research techniques, data analysis, computer programming,
and in independent research. Florida State University serves a diverse
undergraduate population, and the investigator plans to recruit students from
groups currently under-represented in science and mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;