* 0816453
* LTREB: KLEE- scaling up and out at the Kenya Long-term Exclosure Experiment
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2013
* Truman Young, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 07/31/2013
* USD 449,800.00

Semi-arid ecosystems cover large portions of the world. In Africa, these
savannas support some of the most spectacular large mammal biodiversity on the
planet. African savannas have been studied intensively, and considerable
literature documents effects of both cattle grazing and indigenous herbivores on
the vegetation of these ecosystems. Despite this extensive research,
surprisingly little is known about interactions among wildlife, domestic
livestock, understory vegetation and woody cover. The Kenya Long-term Exclosure
Experiment (KLEE) is the first controlled, replicated attempt to examine these
intereactions, the potential for co-existence among these players, and the
limits to this co-existence. To date, this controlled exclusion of livestock and
three guilds of large mammalian herbivores has answered diverse questions about
the ecology of a major, semi-arid ecosystem. This renewal proposal will support
years 13-17 of this long-term study. The goals of the next phase are to continue
studies of competition, compensation, and trophic cascades while initiating
controlled experiments on the causes and consequences of variation in tree
densities and to examine the ecosystem consequences of herbivore-induced and
experimentally manipulated changes in tree density.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to addressing fundamental questions in ecological science, this project
continues to contribute essential information for rangeland management and
biodiversity conservation in one of the world's most important biomes. The
project is highly collaborative and hosts both senior and junior investigators
from multiple US and African institutions. Both Kenyan and US graduate students
will participate in, and receive training from, the proposed research; the KLEE
study will continue to host undergraduate student research as well, along with
classroom visits from Kenya, the United Kingdom and the US. Researchers interact
closely with local pastoralist groups and landowners to support local efforts in
land and resource management. This award is co-funded by NSF's Office of
International Science and Engineering.