* 0816787
* Sterol Biosynthesis in the Marine Dinoflagellate, Karenia brevis
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Jeffrey Leblond, Middle Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/2011
* USD 156,246.00

The project will examine sterol biosynthesis in Karenia brevis, a unicellular,
eukaryotic alga of great environmental and economic importance that forms yearly
harmful blooms in the Gulf of Mexico. The biosynthesis of sterols, ringed lipids
thought to contribute to membrane integrity, has been elucidated in great detail
in yeast and some plants, but not in dinoflagellates. Preliminary data suggest a
more plant-like pathway for K. brevis rather than the yeast-like pathway that
has been hypothesized to date in other dinoflagellates. The objective of this
project is therefore to elucidate important biochemical steps in the
biosynthesis of brevesterol and gymnodinosterol, the primary sterols of K.
brevis, by determining structures of selected intermediates that accumulate
during exposure to particular fungicides. This project will be the first to
elucidate specific biosynthetic steps in the production of K. brevis sterols.
This is of particular importance because, despite the significant historical
attention given to dinoflagellate sterols as environmental biomarkers for this
class of algae, few have turned their attention to how these molecules are
produced.

Undergraduate students will actively participate in the laboratory studies at
Middle Tennessee State University (MTSU). The chance for undergraduate students
to participate in such a project will both train the students and hopefully
excite them, thereby helping to propel them into strong Ph.D. programs at other
institutions. This training and motivation of students in areas of basic
scientific research is an important component of the activities. The forecasted
shortfalls in young scientists in the United States is of concern to all, and
including students in basic research at earlier points in their careers has been
recommended as a means of encouraging more students to pursue careers in
science. The goal is therefore to produce valuable information on a very
economically and environmentally important marine alga, while at the same time
enticing students into this exciting area of biochemistry.