* 0816618
* Collaborative LTREB: Long-Term Ecosystem Response to Chronic Atmospheric Nitrate Deposition
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2008,10/31/2010
* Kurt Pregitzer, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 10/31/2010
* USD 96,439.00

As the Earth's climate warms over the next century, ecosystems throughout the
northern hemisphere also will be exposed to elevated rates of atmospheric
nitrogen (N) deposition. Understanding this complex environmental change lies at
the heart of our ability to anticipate the degree to which forests will
sequester human-produced carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. An
interdisciplinary team of scientists will investigate the interaction between
climate warming and simulated atmospheric N deposition using a long-term,
regional-based, field experiment located in sugar maple-dominated forest
ecosystems common throughout eastern North America. Over the past 10 years,
simulated atmospheric nitrogen deposition at rates expected to occur by 2050
have increased tree growth and slowed the decay of dead leaves and roots,
increasing the amount of carbon stored in this wide-spread ecosystem. However,
it is uncertain whether carbon storage will stabilize at a higher equilibrium
over the long-term as atmospheric nitrogen deposition increases, or whether
expected warming will counteract this effect. The proposed research will
quantify the amounts of carbon stored in overstory trees, forest floor and soil
over the next decade, allowing this team of scientists to test hypotheses
regarding the interaction of climate warming and atmospheric nitrogen deposition
on ecosystem carbon sequestration.

The results of this project will be disseminated to other global change
scientists, K-12 teachers, and the general public through the development of
user-friendly, web-based tools. In addition the team of investigators will
continue conducting the annual Global Change Teachers Institute. Through
lectures and field-based learning, middle and high school teachers develop an
understanding of the causes and ecological impacts of global environmental
change, thereby bringing this information into science curricula.