* 0816621
* Soil Microbial Community Dynamics Associated with Garlic Mustard Invasions
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Kelly McConnaughay, Bradley University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 08/31/2012
* USD 212,817.00

Garlic mustard (Alliaria petiolata) is an aggressive invasive plant of temperate
forests, and constitutes the single greatest threat to forest health throughout
much of the northern US. Garlic mustard produces chemicals within its tissues
that are toxic to insects that would normally consume forest plants. This plant
has also been found to be toxic to soil bacteria and fungi normally responsible
for making nutrients available to other plants. The goal of the study is to
examine a particularly aggressive garlic mustard infestation in pine plantations
located in Sand Ridge State Forest (IL). The objectives are to identify changes
that garlic mustard makes to soil organisms, as well as soil nutrient
availability to other plants. Should garlic mustard result in decreases in soil
nutrient availability in forest soils, forest productivity could decrease, which
would in turn alter harvestable biomass and the amount of carbon that could be
stored in forests. The researchers will investigate changes in soil chemistry
and microbial communities in response to garlic mustard invasion across a range
of forest sites using a combination of lab and field studies including:
experimental site manipulations (e.g., additions of garlic mustard or nitrogen);
site and experimental plot characterization of general soil chemistry (pH, C, N,
cations, P) and microorganisms (biomass, diversity, enzyme activities). These
analyses should provide information as to whether garlic mustard alters forest
health and suggest changes that will occur to stands as this invasive plant
moves into new areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As garlic mustard is currently
invading forests at high rates, infestations that result in reduced nutrient
availability in North American forests can lead to serious long-term
consequences for forest health. The long-term goal of this project will be to
evaluate the impacts of garlic mustard across a broad range of forest soils, and
to improve our understanding of the mechanisms by which garlic mustard invades
and subsequently acts as an ecological change agent in these forests. All
research on this project to date has been a collaborative effort involving
Bradley University undergraduate students during the academic year, expanding to
include local community college students, local high school students and K-12
educators during the summer, including large numbers of women and members of
underrepresented groups in science. Funds acquired through this grant will
support continued collaborations among these groups. &lt;br/&gt;