* 0816743
* Collaborative Research: Why Does the Efficiency of Methane Production Vary Dramatically Among Wetlands?
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Jason Keller, Chapman University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 07/31/2012
* USD 164,500.00

The objective of this research is to understand the factors that control the
production of the greenhouse gases carbon dioxide and methane in wetland soils
under anaerobic (i.e., waterlogged with oxygen depletion) conditions in current
and future climates. These two gases are the end products of a complicated,
interlinked set of microbial processes during the anaerobic decomposition of
soil organic matter, and the goal of this project is to understand the relative
ratio at which these two gases are produced within the context of the larger
anaerobic carbon cycle. Both field and laboratory experiments will be used to
examine the chemical, environmental, and biological factors (including microbial
community structure) that control the ratio at which these important greenhouse
gases are produced in six wetlands in northern Michigan. These wetlands
represent a broad range of conditions in terms of hydrology, chemistry, and
plant community composition. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proportion of soil carbon
that ends up as carbon dioxide and methane during anaerobic decomposition varies
by several orders of magnitude among different types of wetlands, and the
factors that control this variation are not well understood. Because methane is
a much more potent greenhouse gas than carbon dioxide, the ratio at which these
two gases are produced can have a substantial impact on the Earth?s climate
system. Also, methane emissions from wetlands have been sensitive to climate
change in the past and may have strong feedbacks to future human-induced climate
change.