* 0816972
* RUI: Biodiversity of the terrestrial cyanobacteria of the Atacama Desert, Chile
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2013
* Jeffrey Johansen, John Carroll University
* Standard Grant
* David Mindell
* 09/30/2013
* USD 400,000.00

An award has been made to John Carroll University under the direction of Dr.
Jeffrey Johansen to study the diversity and biogeography of cyanobacteria that
grow in soil crusts in one of the driest habitats on earth, the high altitude
deserts of Chile. The team of researchers will travel widely in this region to
sample soils for analysis of the cyanobacteria (blue-green algae). Soil
cyanobacteria are photosynthetic microorganisms critically important in many
deserts because they help prevent soil erosion. The Atacama is one of the driest
and harshest environments on the planet. We will use a combination of microbial
and molecular methods to survey the majority of species in the soils of this
region. This is a significant biodiversity project, as the harshness of the
environment means that many of the species we isolate and describe will likely
be new to science. Because the cultures will be deposited in public culture
collections, they will be available to the scientific community for further
research and technology development. New taxa will be described when they meet
the criteria of the phylogenetic species concept, a modern approach to the study
of biodiversity that will be applied to related lineages of these cyanobacteria.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will facilitate collaboration between two
North American universities, two Chilean Universities, and a German University.
At least two graduate students will be supported by this project. Six
undergraduate summer fellowships are included, as well as support for two high
school students to conduct summer research. Cyanobacteria and soils from this
project will be incorporated into science laboratories in an existing outreach
program to Hispanic middle school children in Cleveland, Ohio. We will
contribute to several public research depositories, including the Culture
Collection of Algae at the University of Texas at Austin, the Herbarium for
Nonvascular Cryptogams at BYU, the Museo Nacional de Historia Natural in Chile,
the Culture Collection of Algae at the University of GÃ¶ttingen, Germany. New
sequences of DNA will be deposited in GenBank, an online repository widely used
by biologists. Educational and research websites will be include images and
descriptions of all species collected. &lt;br/&gt;