* 0816905
* Ecology, Evolution, and Genetic Architecture of Reproductive Isolation in Iris Nelsonii: A Homoploid Hybrid.
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Noland Martin, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 08/31/2011
* USD 135,000.00

Understanding the origin and maintenance of species diversity is of primary
importance to evolutionary biologists. Speciation is thought to primarily occur
as populations diverge from each other. However, many species have arisen
through a different and more poorly understood route, the process of homoploid
hybrid speciation, in which hybrids form without genome duplication and are
isolated reproductively from their parents. Questions such as the following can
be addressed easily using species that have arisen by this process: What
reproductive barriers are most important in maintaining species in nature? What
is the genetic architecture of reproductive isolation? This project utilizes
molecular and field techniques to examine homoploid hybrid speciation in the
well-studied Louisiana Iris complex, using the hybrid species Iris nelsonii.

This project will provide high school students, undergraduates, MSc, and PhD
students with important preparation for answering some of the most fundamental
questions in biology. It will support three students throughout their training
at Texas State University, while also providing funds for traveling to
scientific meetings to present their work. The project will promote diversity in
science by immediately providing needed funds for female students. Further, the
PI will recruit students from a primarily Hispanic background through a variety
of outreach programs.