* 0816610
* Fire, Atmospheric pCO2, and Climate as Alternative Primary Controls of C4-Grass Abundance: The Late-Quaternary Perspective
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2013
* Feng Sheng Hu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 06/30/2013
* USD 426,143.00

Grass-dominated ecosystems cover about one-third of Earth's land surface,
influence global biogeochemical processes (e.g. water, carbon, and nutrient
cycling), and serve as major food sources for humans and herbivores. These
ecosystems are among the most sensitive to future changes in climate and
atmospheric chemistry. This sensitivity can be partially attributed to the
differential responses of two major functional groups, C3 and C4 plants. C4
plants gain competitive advantages under certain environmental conditions (e.g.
fire, heat, drought, and low pCO2). C3 and C4 plants in turn have distinct
influences on major biogeochemical processes; for example, the role of C4 plants
in global net primary production is disproportionately large. Despite these
well-known differences, it remains controversial what environmental factors
directly control the relative abundances of C3 and C4 plants. Paleoecological
studies can help decipher the responses of C3 and C4 plants to a wide range of
environmental conditions, thereby offering information for anticipating future
changes. This project will evaluate the effects of fire, climate, and
atmospheric CO2 concentration on the variation of C4-grass abundance over the
past 25,000 years in East Africa and Australia. The researchers will analyze
sediment cores for a suite of ecological proxy indicators and develop a novel
technique to estimate the abundance of C4 plants in geological records. This
project provides an excellent context for educating the general public on
climate change and grassland ecology. The researchers will organize summer
courses targeting middle and high school teachers as well as land managers.