* 0816962
* Phylogenetic Systematics of Orthoptera (Insecta): Evolution of Male Genitalia and Study of Nuclear Mitochondrial Pseudogenes
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2008,10/31/2010
* Hojun Song, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Timothy M. Collins
* 10/31/2010
* USD 418,000.00

A team of entomologists at Brigham Young University will investigate the
evolutionary relationships within Orthoptera, an insect group that contains
grasshoppers, crickets, and katydids. They will generate DNA sequences from 168
species to address three fundamental questions: How are the major groups of
Orthoptera related to each other? How has the male reproductive system, one of
the most important characters in orthopteran classification, evolved? How do
non-functional copies of mitochondrial genes evolve in Orthoptera? Investigators
will conduct international field studies to collect specimens and then analyze
the data using advanced analytic software and high-resolution digital imaging
technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The results from this project will not only
advance our understanding of orthopteran diversity, but also provide an
excellent model system to study the evolution of the male reproductive system
and mitochondrial DNA. The comprehensive scope of this project will facilitate
domestic and international collaborations. A six-week summer workshop for each
of the three years of funding will provide training in modern methods of
systematic analysis and scientific communication to three undergraduates of
Pacific Island descent. Additionally, one postdoctoral researcher and two
undergraduates will be trained by thoroughly being involved in all aspects of
this project.