* 0816925
* Integrating Genetic Information into Demographic Models of Linked Populations
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* James DeWoody, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 07/31/2011
* USD 200,144.00

Most animal populations are linked spatially by movement. Dispersal between
populations can significantly influence population dynamics and genetic
variation, but these effects are difficult to quantify or predict because data
on rates of movement are difficult to obtain. The first part of this project
will fuse into a common framework two recent methodological advances in the
study of dispersal: ?capture-mark-release? statistical models that estimate
rates of movement from animals censused in multiple populations, and ?genetic
assignment tests? which use molecular genetic techniques to determine where
animals came from before they were captured. The second part of the project will
validate the new methods using data from a long-term study of kangaroo rats, a
model species for the study of animal dispersal.

The methodology developed by this project will be applicable to a wide variety
of animals, including those of conservation concern as a result of habitat
fragmentation and climate change. Once the methodology is developed, a general-
use program implementing it will be made available via the USGS Patuxent
software archive. The project also will provide educational benefits, including
research-based training of undergraduate honors students, where possible
involving students associated with the Tecumseh Project, a Purdue initiative to
encourage the participation of Native American students in science.