* 0816885
* Do Host-virus Coevolutionary Interactions Structure the Variable Gene Pool of S. islandicus?
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* Rachel Whitaker, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 08/31/2014
* USD 554,649.00

This project investigates the coevolutionary arms race between viruses and their
microbial hosts in two, geographically isolated, geothermal hot springs
populations. Microorganisms swap genes on mobile elements such as viruses. It
has recently been discovered that bacteria and archaea maintain an acquired,
heritable immune system that allows them to fight off viral infections. This and
other forms of microbial resistance can prevent infection and therefore limit
the transfer of genes on viruses. In response to host resistance, viruses evolve
rapidly to evade host immunity. This project will use comparative full genomic
analysis of viruses and their archaeal hosts, Sulfolobus islandicus, combined
with laboratory infection assays, to test for the genomic causes of infection or
resistance among viruses and their hosts. The unique physical isolation of
geothermal archaeal populations presents an ideal system in which to study
whether the intimate local interaction between hosts and their viruses leads to
specificity that restricts the movement of genes to endemic populations of
microbes.

Microbial genomes harbor the vast majority of genetic diversity on earth, yet
little is understood about how this diversity evolved. The movement of genes on
viruses is critical to microbial evolution, and can lead to the transfer of
antibiotic resistance and other pathogenic factors. Specifically, how microbial
immune resistance and viral evolution affects the flow of genes among
microorganisms is unknown. Studying these interactions will increase
understanding of microbial immunity and how it effects the evolution and
diversity of both viruses and their microbial hosts. This project will include
training two graduate students and three undergraduates in an interdisciplinary
approach to biology which combines microbiology, virology, evolutionary ecology,
and genomics. In addition, this project brings the exciting fields of microbial
diversity and evolution to eleventh grade classrooms through a month-long
laboratory module in experimental evolution, where students will witness, first-
hand, microbial populations adapting to resist viral infection.