* 0816678
* News Media Coverage and the Construction of Public Health Problems
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Laura Carpenter, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2012
* USD 114,808.00

SES-0816678&lt;br/&gt;Laura Carpenter&lt;br/&gt;Vanderbilt
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many threats to health exist, but
only some are treated as serious problems by the public and policy makers.
Scholars have previously explored how state, activists, and medical actors
influence the construction of health-related public problems, but there are
currently no scholarly models that integrate news professionals? decisions about
which issues to cover and how. This project investigates the ways journalists
and key stakeholders selectively problematize and respond to health-related
issues, by comparing the controversies over female genital cutting (FGC) and
male circumcision (MC) as practiced in the United States, Great Britain, and
Canada, from 1985-2007. Whether they should be viewed as issues of health, human
rights, gender oppression, or religious/cultural identity is hotly debated.
Specifically, this study asks: How does the status of different stakeholders,
and alliances among them, affect debate processes and policy outcomes? What
factors influenced stakeholders? framing of the issues and those frames?
effectiveness? How do news media practices shape the coverage of issues,
stakeholders, and frames? In what ways did the broader social/historical context
affect these processes? Three types of data will be gathered and analyzed using
grounded theory techniques: materials produced by activist, medical, religious,
and other stakeholder groups (e.g., press releases, brochures); accounts from
national and regional newspapers and news magazines; and interviews with
journalists, editors, activists, medical association leaders and media liaisons,
and other key actors. The intellectual merits of this project include
contributions to the research literature on social problems, health and
medicine, journalism, and social movements. The research will shed light on the
theoretically important but rarely studied matter of ?failed? domain expansion,
whereby activists concerned with one issue attempt to capitalize on the success
of a similar, successful issue. The study also will help to delineate the causes
and consequences of defining problems in medical terms (i.e., medicalization).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will have a broader impact by expanding
knowledge of the ways journalists, activists, state, and medical actors
contribute to the construction of health-related public problems and policies.
It will also produce more effective communication among, and public-policy
engagement by, journalists and stakeholders; inform ongoing debates around MC
and FGC in the three nations while illuminating local politics of gender,
race/ethnicity, immigration, and religion; and provide tools for addressing
concern about the ?over-medicalization? of society. Scholarly training
opportunities for graduate students will also be provided.