* 0816207
* Investigating Trajectories of Learning &amp; Transfer of Problem Solving Expertise from Mathematics to Physics to Engineering
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* N. Sanjay Rebello, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 08/31/2012
* USD 999,955.00

The investigators of the project Measurement, Modeling, and Methods Category are
studying how science and engineering students build towards problem solving
expertise throughout a major part of their academic careers and how they
transfer their knowledge and skills across undergraduate STEM courses. They are
observing students' problem across 3 years of courses starting with mathematics
and continuing through introduction to physics to engineering courses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three year research plan consists of longitudinal and
cross-sectional studies that take place both in-class and out-of-class and
involve 3000 students through seven classes at Kansas State University. The
research team is studying the following variables associated with problem
solving: the problem features of structuredness, complexity, domain specificity,
and dynamicity; problem representation of form, organization, and sequencing;
and individual differences of domain knowledge, problem solving experience,
reasoning skills, and epistemological maturity. Quantitative data and
qualitative evidence are being used to study the variables. An on-line homework
system created with previous NSF funding (DUE 0206923) will enable quantitative
analysis of the variables with large numbers of
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data of subjects from underrepresented groups
will be analyzed and compared to the larger groups of students. Results of this
project are expected to advance the knowledge and understanding of STEM teaching
and learning in undergraduate education. &lt;br/&gt;