* 0816330
* SGER: Membrane Contactor Reactors for Environmental Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2008,09/30/2009
* Theodore Tsotsis, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 09/30/2009
* USD 100,000.00

CBET-0816330&lt;br/&gt;Tsotsis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Grant for
Exploratory Research (SGER) project is aimed at developing a catalytic reactor
to remove toxic components of landfill gas (LFG) so that it can be used as an
alternate source of energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Nationwide
about ~1 MM ftP3P/min of LFG is generated. LFG is potentially an important
renewable fuel, as it typically contains more than 50% CHB4B. At the present
time a large fraction of LFG is flared. The rest is utilized for electric power
generation, and for medium BTU gas-type (e.g., use in boilers) applications. One
of the major roadblocks to the utilization of LFG is its miscellaneous corrosive
contaminants, e.g., halogen and sulfur containing compounds, which necessitate
frequent energy producing equipment servicing, and may lead to eventual failure.
Worst of all, halogen and sulfur containing contaminants are emitted to the
atmosphere, during flaring or energy production, contributing significantly to
air pollution, particularly to acid rain. The removal of these contaminants from
LFG prior to combustion is a difficult problem, because of their wide
concentration range, and their presence at trace amounts. These factors present
difficulties for conventional clean-up technologies, which have proven
ineffective for LFG clean-up. The PIs plan to evaluate a catalytic oxidation
technology appropriate for LFG clean-up, based on the concept of a "pore-flow
reactor" (PoFR) endowed with an oxidation nanocatalyst. This is an important
goal as economical, environmental, and energy advantages can be realized, if a
process is developed that cost-effectively removes the LFG toxic contaminants.
The emphasis in this project is on fundamental investigations of the complex
reaction and transport processes that occur in such a reactor; a major
fundamental scientific advance will be understanding and modeling the catalytic
combustion of the complex heteroatom compounds encountered in LFG. It is such
better fundamental understanding that will lead to the main technological
advances needed for the further technical development of the PoFR concept. The
project will be developed with collaboration with industrial partners M&amp;P
and GCE. M&amp;P is an inorganic membrane manufacturer dedicated to the
development and application of these novel materials. GCE is an Engineering
Company specializing in LFG collection and utilization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This research project will provide
students with the opportunity to prepare and characterize novel new materials,
and to learn a host of state-of-the-art computational and experimental
techniques. The project will also provide the students involved with the
opportunity to interact with industrial researchers. The urban setting of USC
affords the opportunity to work with a variety of 2-4 year colleges in the area,
several of which are predominantly minority Institutions. The PIs plan to
recruit qualified undergraduates as summer interns, and potentially as incoming
graduate students. They will also take advantage of the ever-evolving
undergraduate curriculum program at USC, which emphasizes vertically- and
horizontally-integrated "degree projects" consisting of emphasis-specific
experimental/laboratory modules associated with each core Chemical Engineering
course. The PIs envision integrating research findings and aspects of their work
as the "degree projects? in the Reactor Analysis, Transport Phenomena, and
Separation courses. This catalytic reactor technology will cost-effectively
remove the toxic contaminants from LFG, offer significant economical,
environmental, and energy advantages, and will allow LFG (and biogas in general)
to gain its full potential as a valuable renewable fuel.