* 0816675
* Climate change as an agent of selection that alters fundamental interactions among a foundation tree species and its herbivore, mutualist and competitor communities
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Thomas Whitham, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2013
* USD 691,005.00

Global climate is predicted to change dramatically in the 21st century with
warmer temperatures and more extreme climate events expected over most land
areas. The consequences of these changes may include shifts in the geographical
range of animal and plant species, including many species of trees. Models
developed to predict plant and animal response to climate change often do not
consider the importance of genetic variation within members of a species or the
interactions of that species with other organisms, which could slow or hasten
distribution shifts. This study tests the hypothesis that the ultimate effect of
climate change on a tree species and its associated community will result from
the interplay between the responses of different tree genotypes to both climate
stresses and to the herbivores, competitors and mutualists with which the trees
interact. Specifically, this research examines the influence of genetic
variation in resistance and susceptibility to insect herbivory on tree responses
to drought as mediated by interactions with shrubs that compete with trees for
water and soil fungi that enhance uptake of soil resources. The project involves
population genetic analysis, and field, common garden and greenhouse studies of
pinyon pine (Pinus edulis), a widespread tree particularly sensitive to climate
change. The broader impacts of this project include student training with an
emphasis on recruitment of underrepresented minorities, student exchanges
between Mexican and US institutions, education of prisoners through the Arizona
Department of Corrections and outreach to managers whose lands are dominated by
pinyon pine suffering high mortality.