* 0816216
* Modeling Cyber-Enabled Learning and Teaching:   Addressing Methodological and Measurement Issues
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2010
* Anthony Kelly, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Janet L. Kolodner
* 08/31/2010
* USD 199,976.00

&lt;br/&gt;This proposal responds to the need for realizing the potential of
cyber-infrastructure for education and argues that in order for cyber-enabled
learning to be realized and used, three important issues must be addressed: (a)
It is critical to be able to characterize what is meant by cyber-enabled
learning; (b) multiple approaches to gathering evidence of sophisticated cyber-
enabled learning must be developed; and (c) learning must be attributable to
participation in the identified cyber-enabled learning. The project, therefore,
has three goals: (1) to characterize cyber-enabled learning using a case study;
(2) to identify the assessment and psychometric issues related to assessing
cyber-enabled learning; and (3) to propose methodological solutions to modeling
learning in such complex learning environments. The focus of the stduy is on a
substantial case study in geoscience, which employs science content that is
accessible to a wide range of the education community, and which draws on known
areas of research, particularly scientific visualization: the study of
earthquakes, tsunamis, and related phenomena. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
asks: What is the character of analytical reasoning for geoscience within a
networked, cyber-infrastructure framework, and what counts as evidence for such
reasoning? What assessment and psychometric issues must be addressed? What are
the methodological challenges in modeling and assessing learning within this
cyber-infrastructure project? For example, how are claims of causality handled
in a complex networked and nested learning environment, and what evidence would
make such claims credible? This project addresses potentially new concepts by
examining the transformative and dynamic nature of cyber-infrastructure.
&lt;br/&gt;