* 0816661
* Evolution of Tropical Heliconia: Temporal and Spatial Diversification at the Species Level
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* W. John Kress, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* David Mindell
* 08/31/2014
* USD 625,000.00

An award has been made to the University of California at Berkeley under the
direction of Dr. Chelsea Specht to study the diversification of floral form and
the classification of a family of tropical plants known as heliconias. The goal
of the proposed research is to develop an understanding of the evolutionary
history of Heliconiaceae, an ecologically and economically important family of
tropical plants. The family Heliconiaceae (heliconias) comprises approximately
215 species (190 currently recognized with an estimated 25 remaining to be
described) in the single genus Heliconia, distributed primarily in the
neotropics. While heliconias are grown as tropical ornamentals throughout the
world, the native range extends from central Mexico to central South America
including the Caribbean, with a group of six closely related species native to
Indonesia, New Guinea, and several South Pacific islands. Although heliconias
are frequently cultivated as ornamentals, there have been no well-supported
hypotheses on relationships among species of Heliconia, primarily due to
similarities in flower traits that are specific to hummingbird pollination.
Species have been divided taxonomically into subgenera based on morphology, but
this classification has not been tested.

Heliconia species each maintain intricate and specialized evolutionary
relationships with pollinating hummingbirds and herbivorous rolled-leaf hispine
beetles, as well as other mutualistic, parasitic, and predatory partnerships. A
comprehensive, well-supported phylogeny is necessary to determine species-level
relationships within the family and to understand the evolution of floral and
vegetative characters involved in such complex interspecies interactions. This
phylogeny will be used to (a) reconcile and revise the taxonomy of the family
using evolutionary relationships to determine specialized features of subgeneric
groupings and (b) interpret evolutionary trends in pollination relationships,
herbivore interactions, and tropical biogeography. Training will take place at
both graduate and undergraduate levels, incorporating students into all aspects
of the research, including field collections, phylogenetic and biogeographic
analyses, and the description of new species and higher-level taxonomic
groupings.