* 0816068
* Models for the ecological effects and evolution of dispersal
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* George Cosner, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 07/31/2012
* USD 270,000.00

The goal of this project is to use mathematical models to gain insight into the
effects that dispersal can have on ecological interactions between species and
their environment or other species, and into the factors that influence the
evolution of dispersal strategies. The research effort will be focused on
understanding the effects and evolution of conditional dispersal strategies,
that is, dispersal strategies that depend on population densities and
environmental conditions. Dispersal strategies will be studied from the
viewpoint of evolutionary stability. The mathematical models will primarily
consist of reaction-diffusion-advection equations or systems of such equations.
There has been a great deal of research on ecological models with simple
diffusion, but much less on models involving more complex conditional dispersal
strategies. Models based on simple diffusion describe random dispersal that does
not depend on environmental conditions. By incorporating factors such as
advection along environmental gradients, toward prey, or away from predators,
and variable diffusion rates that depend on population densities or
environmental conditions, the research in this project will extend such models
to describe various types of conditional dispersal and to study their effects.
The general mathematical methods that will be used include the classical theory
of partial differential equations, dynamical systems theory, and nonlinear
analysis. Key mathematical ideas include using bifurcation theory, persistence
theory, and the theory of monotone semidynamical systems to translate estimates
on eigenvalues of differential operators into conclusions about the dynamics of
systems involving those operators. Since the models that will be studied include
strongly coupled quasilinear parabolic systems (as opposed to standard reaction-
diffusion systems which are usually weakly coupled and semilinear) it is
anticipated that the project will involve the development of new mathematical
results. Some of the research in the project will be aimed at understanding
specific ecological questions. As an example, one aspect of the project will be
the study of situations such as intraguild predation or apparent competition
where a top predator preys on two other interacting species and influences their
dispersal patterns. Some of the research will be aimed at understanding the
selective pressures that influence the evolution of dispersal. That research
will involve models for competing populations that are ecologically identical
except for their dispersal strategies, which will be studied from the viewpoint
of evolutionary stability. Previous research suggests that in this context an
important aspect of dispersal strategies is how well they allow a population to
match the resources available in the environment, so that conditional dispersal
leading to something like an ideal free distribution of organisms may be
favored. That idea will be explored further. The models that will be used to
study evolutionary questions are in some sense special cases of the types of
models used to study ecological questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dispersal of
organisms is clearly an important aspect of many ecological processes. It drives
biological invasions, allows populations to colonize empty habitats, and allows
individuals to track resources and avoid predators or competitors. In this
project mathematical models for interacting and dispersing species will be used
to gain theoretical insights into how dispersal patterns can influence the
persistence, distribution, and/or extinction of species, and what dispersal
patterns are likely to appear as organisms evolve to adapt to new or changing
environments. Dispersal may reflect purely random movement or may be conditioned
on properties of the environment or the presence of other organisms. This
project will be focused largely on conditional dispersal. Conditional dispersal
has not been studied as much as random dispersal, even though there is empirical
evidence that it occurs and there is some theoretical evidence that it may be
favored by natural selection in some situations. Developing models that
incorporate conditional dispersal will expand the scope of the current
ecological and evolutionary theory of dispersal. A broader motivation for the
project is that developing models for the effects and evolution of dispersal
should provide insights that may be useful in formulating policy to address
ecological issues such as the conservation of biodiversity under environmental
change or the assessment of the possible results of introducing exotic species
or altering environments.