* 0816517
* Infusing Quantitative Literacy throughout the Social Science Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* William Frey, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/2014
* USD 998,000.00

Sociology (86)&lt;br/&gt;Political Science (85)&lt;br/&gt;Economics
(82)&lt;br/&gt;Geography (88)&lt;br/&gt;Social Sciences - Other
(89)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is working to transform teaching in the
social sciences by infusing quantitative literacy throughout the curriculum and
by providing undergraduates opportunities to engage in active research
experiences using the most advanced social science data. The primary project
activities are creating, disseminating, and assessing teaching materials that
make it easy for instructors to integrate data analysis in non-methodology
courses. The goal is to reduce the "quantitative reasoning gap" between what
students learn in early courses and the importance of empirical research in the
social sciences. The partners in this project are building upon two extant
sources of data (1) the Social Science Data Analysis Network (SSDAN), which
distributes teaching modules based on US Census data, and (2) the Inter-
university Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR), the world's
largest social science data archive. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A second goal of the
project is to recruit experienced faculty members to develop new tools for
assessing student learning and to conduct assessments in their classes. These
assessment tools are intended for distribution with existing and new teaching
materials. New software and teaching strategies are being developed to simplify
complex data for presentation to undergraduates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A third
goal is to provide training for faculty members to introduce them to the
characteristics of new data sets, relevant statistical techniques, teaching
strategies, and assessment procedures. Much of the dissemination to end users is
taking place through the use of cost-effective Webinars. The communication
resources of the American Sociological Association, the American Political
Science Association, the National Numeracy Network, and the more than 600
colleges, universities, and research institutions who are members of ICPSR are
to be mobilized to disseminate information about new teaching materials. Web
sites are to be enhanced to help faculty form teaching communities within
disciplines. This approach is expected to help bring about a transformative
change in the ways that undergraduates encounter and understand the role of
research in the social sciences.