* 0816916
* RUI: Soil carbon sequestration and turnover after twelve years of CO2 fertilization at the Duke Forest FACE experiment
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* John Lichter, Bowdoin College
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 08/31/2012
* USD 185,092.00

The Duke Forest Free-air CO2 Enrichment (FACE) experiment is the longest running
experiment in which an intact forest ecosystem is exposed to elevated
concentrations of atmospheric CO2. The experiment addresses fundamental
questions about how human emissions of CO2 to the atmosphere affect carbon
sequestration and nutrient cycling in forests. The soils in the FACE experiment
will be sampled and chemically analyzed to better understand how soil nitrogen
availability controls carbon sequestration and enhanced tree growth in response
to rising CO2 concentration. To date, the experiment has shown that elevated CO2
increased carbon storage in trees and in the forest floor (i.e., the litter
layer). However, increases in the carbon content of the mineral soil were not
observed. It is likely that the rates of soil carbon sequestration are too slow
to be easily detected. Information from further soil chemical analyses will
identify the source of the additional nitrogen required to support the observed
increase in tree growth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding nitrogen limitation
of tree growth and productivity is vital for predicting the long-term response
of forest ecosystems to rising atmospheric CO2 concentrations. Carbon
sequestration in forests can potentially mitigate climate change associated with
human CO2 emissions. Undergraduate students at Bowdoin College will conduct much
of this research during year-long honors projects in biology and chemistry.
Additionally the results of this research will be presented in environmental
science courses and research seminars to reach a greater number of students.
&lt;br/&gt;