* 0816123
* Building a Methodology for Developing and Evaluating Instructionally Sensitive Assessments
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* Min Li, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,015,927.00

Project Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this project is to build and
empirically test a comprehensive approach for developing instructionally
sensitive assessments that can provide a better picture of the extent that
science instruction impacts student achievement. The project will develop and
test an assessment approach that can improve the way that assessments are
conceptualized and used for evaluation studies and/or accountability purposes.
The large-scale, standardized, assessments students take may not be directly
tied to the curriculum they are studying. This situation sets up a tension
between the knowledge and competencies students are able to demonstrate on a
particular assessment and those they may have which the assessment does not in
fact probe. The goal of the project is to address this tension. The project will
advance knowledge about validity that is critical to the evaluation of the
effectiveness of instruction or instructional programs; it will expand the
strategies available for developing and evaluating instructionally sensitive
assessments; and it will provide evidence about the importance of implementing
assessments varying in instructional sensitivity for accountability or program
effectiveness purposes. The proposed research activities will guide future
evaluation research and assessment development. The project aims to improve the
science assessment practices in the participating school districts, mostly
serving disadvantaged student populations. The project will provide training to
participating teachers on how to develop and evaluate instructionally sensitive
assessments, introduce strategies that can be used in their daily practice to
judge the quality of the assessments and link assessments to instruction, and
disseminate the approach and relevant materials to teachers in non-participating
schools or school districts.