* 0816810
* METAALICUS Part II:  The Fate of Mercury in Watersheds and the Recovery of Lake 658 from Elevated Mercury Deposition
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Cynthia Gilmour, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 820,000.00

This project builds on ongoing, large-scale experiments where for six years
mercury has been added to whole watersheds including upland forests, wetlands
and their associated lakes. The goal is to understand trace metals cycling and
to assess how newly deposited substances move through the watershed into
wetlands and lakes. In this experiment, additions were originally made to the
uplands, wetlands and lakes using different enriched stable isotopes, so that
now the pathways of biogeochemical cycling within and among these ecosystems can
be determined. Methylmercury levels in fish responded rapidly to the mercury
added directly to the lake. But almost all of the mercury applied to the
watershed has thus far remained there, through biogeochemical mechanisms of
internal ecosystem recycling and retention that remain unknown. Researchers have
a unique opportunity to determine the biogeochemical mechanisms responsible for
the high degree of retention. Controls over the uptake, storage, transformation
and movement of mercury among the vegetation, mineral soil, and soil and
sediment organic components will be determined. The results will reveal the time
scales at which trace metals are cycled in different types of ecosystems, a
major unknown variable critical to modeling future dynamics. Knowing the time
scale at which lakes respond to increases in deposition is especially important
for the formulation of environmental policy. This interdisciplinary project will
have educational impacts through support of graduate students and post-doctoral
associates.