* 0816613
* Measures and Models of Phylogenetic Structure in Community Composition and Dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2014
* Anthony Ives, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 08/31/2014
* USD 298,455.00

Understanding how ecological communities function is a central problem in the
science of ecology. A first step to understanding how communities function is
explaining why they contain the species that they do. The two principle forces
determining the composition of communities are the environment and the
interactions among species. Environmental conditions often limit the composition
of communities to only those species that can tolerate the environment. For
example, lakes with low pH contain only fish species that can tolerate acidic
conditions. Interactions among species affect community composition, because
some species exclude other species from communities. For example, the presence
of a predatory fish might exclude another fish species that is particularly
vulnerable to predation. The proposed research will investigate the composition
of communities using statistical methods that incorporate information about the
evolutionary (= phylogenetic) relatedness among species. The reason for using
phylogenetic information is that ecologists often do not know what environmental
factors or what interactions with other species drive community composition.
Because closely related species share many of the same characteristics that
determine their environmental tolerances and vulnerability to interactions with
other species, phylogenetic information can be used to identify which
environmental factors and which interactions among species are most important in
structuring communities. The broader impacts of this work include training
undergraduate and graduate students at the interface between mathematics and
biology to develop and apply new statistical techniques, and to develop user-
friendly statistical tools and a network of collaborators to investigate the
composition and function of ecosystems.