* 0816923
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Ergativity and Constituent Order in Chol
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2010
* David Pesetsky, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 06/30/2010
* USD 11,944.00

A central aim of linguistics is to discover which properties are shared by all
human languages, and in which respects languages may vary. To further this goal,
Ms. Jessica Coon, under the supervision of Dr. David Pesetsky and Dr. Norvin
Richards, will conduct linguistic fieldwork on the word-structure and syntax of
the language Chol. Chol is an under-documented Mayan language spoken by
approximately 150,000 indigenous inhabitants of Chiapas, Mexico. This study
addresses the question of linguistic variation in the grammatical marking of
clausal participants through the study of Chol's split-agreement pattern. While
most of the best-studied languages exhibit "nominative-accusative" systems of
person marking, many of the world's languages show "ergative-absolutive"
patterns. In an ergative-absolutive system, the object of a transitive verb is
marked similarly to the subject of an intransitive verb. Most members of the
Mayan language family exhibit an ergative-absoulutive pattern. Chol, however,
shows a split system: perfective clauses are ergative-absolutive, but
imperfective clauses are nominative-accusative. Initial findings suggest that
this split may be connected to nominalization of non-perfective clauses. Despite
its unique system of agreement, Chol has received relatively little description
or analysis compared to many Mayan languages, and there is no comprehensive
grammar. The significance of this study will be to both advance our
understanding of the possible points of variation among word order and agreement
systems in human language, as well as aid in efforts to further document and
maintain the Chol language.

Data for this investigation will come from elicitation sessions with native
speakers, as well as from texts recorded and transcribed by Coon, collected
during three trips to Chiapas. Coon will spend the fall of 2008 as a visiting
student at the Centro de Investigaciones y Estudios Superiores en Antropología
Social (CIESAS), an interdisciplinary social sciences research institution in
San Cristóbal de las Casas. This study will have an important impact not only
within theoretical linguistics, but also in areas of concern to the local
community, and to indigenous communities more generally. While at CIESAS, Coon
will be actively involved in working with students in the Masters in Indo-
American Linguistics program, which trains speakers of indigenous languages in
language documentation, revitalization, and linguistic theory.