* 0816789
* REVSYS - COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: A Model System Revisited: Phylogenetic Relationships and Species Limits Among Diploid Taxa of Boechera (Brassicaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2013
* Loreen Allphin, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* joseph miller
* 07/31/2013
* USD 111,761.00

The flowering plant genus Boechera, with 110 North American species and a number
of endangered taxa, is frequently the focus of studies in plant ecology and
evolutionary biology. Such studies seek to understand processes of divergent
evolution and hybridization in a group that exhibits both sexual and asexual
modes of reproduction. Unfortunately, conclusions drawn from previous studies on
this group have been severely constrained by a poor understanding of the
phylogenetic relationships among its members. Bailey et al. will combine studies
from fieldwork across North America, DNA sequences, morphological assessments,
and chromosomal information to clarify the phylogenetic relationships among
species of Boechera, establish the number and distribution of divergent sexual
species vs. asexual species, and assess species boundaries. The resulting
phylogenetic tree will be used to test hypotheses about the evolution of
reproductive modes over time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative effort
involves four researchers with extensive experience in diverse areas of biology.
The project provides extensive training of graduate and undergraduate students
in wide-ranging aspects of organismal and molecular biology. The fact that
Boechera is a close relative of the primary plant model organism Arabidopsis
adds to the synergistic value and broader impacts of the research. Lastly, the
completion of web resources for the dissemination of information on Boechera
will provide a valuable asset for researchers and members of the public
interested in these fascinating plants.