* 0816475
* CNH: Collab Research: The Interactions of Climate Change, Land-Management Policies, and Forest Succession on Fire Hazard and Ecosystem Trajectories in the Wildland-Urban Interface
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2008,03/31/2014
* David Hulse, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 03/31/2014
* USD 1,109,002.00

This project will identify ways to reduce wildfire hazard and the loss of
imperiled ecosystems by exploring the joint effects of climate and land use
changes in western Oregon's Willamette Valley Ecoregion. Three hypotheses will
be tested: climate change will increase fuel loads and wildfire hazard; land
development will increase the area of wildland-urban interface and alter
vegetation in ways that increase the risk of wildfire and loss of imperiled
ecosystems; and some management options will be more robust than others in
mitigating fire risk and sustaining imperiled ecosystems across a range of
future climate scenarios. The work will employ a biophysical model that
downscales from the coarse spatial scales of current climate change models to
the fine spatial scales at which human land use and management decisions are
made, and then scales back up to represent the landscape-scale effects of human
actions on vegetation and fire hazard. The biophysical model will be coupled
with an agent-based model in which decision makers on individual land parcels
respond to climate, land use regulation and incentives, land markets, perceived
fire hazard, land management costs, and aesthetics. This research will advance
knowledge of how to bridge key theoretical and practical issues related to
multiple types of system uncertainties, different spatial and temporal scales,
and complex interactions and feedbacks among coupled natural and human systems.

The risk of catastrophic wildfire in the wildland-urban interface is a growing
nationwide threat that projected climate change is likely to exacerbate. This
project supports emerging national, regional and local initiatives by providing
tools to forecast risks and mitigate the impacts. Global climate change models
have become increasingly mechanistic, sophisticated and spatially explicit.
However, the development of interactive models of how biological and human
cultural systems will respond to climate change at the spatial scales at which
land use and management decisions are made is in its infancy. This research will
produce a transferable methodology for modeling such systems that is tractable,
spatially explicit, and directly linked to policy-based decision-making. The
development of solutions that are robust to future uncertainties is an important
approach toward adaptively managing complex systems that include strongly
coupled ecological and socio-economic processes. The project engages graduate
and undergraduate students in interdisciplinary research at two universities. It
also involves students with stakeholder groups in workshops designed to support
policy makers and the public in making more informed decisions that address the
challenges of climate change.