* 0816904
* Survey of the Aquatic Insects of Northern Venezuela with an emphasis on Coleoptera
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2008,12/31/2013
* Andrew Short, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* David Mindell
* 12/31/2013
* USD 521,552.00

Freshwater resources are critical to ecosystem and human health. Aquatic insects
are effective indicators of these resources but are not widely used in northern
South America because many species remain undescribed and their disturbance
tolerances are unknown. This project will address this problem by extensively
surveying aquatic insects, particularly beetles, in northern Venezuela in tandem
with water chemistry and human disturbance data. Subsequent laboratory work will
focus on describing newly discovered species as well as examining patterns of
species richness, seasonality, and distribution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
4-year project will (1) discover an estimated 400 undescribed species of aquatic
insects and result in the description of ca. 200 new beetle species, (2) Add
more than 150,000 specimens to US and Venezuelan museum collections, (3) provide
quantitative, baseline water quality data to detect and examine the impact of
and differentiate between environmental change and human development, and (4)
train US and Latin American graduate students and provide research experiences
for undergraduates students at the University of Kansas and the University of
New Mexico. Collaborations with several Venezuelan universities and development
of extensive cyberinfrastructure, including online-accessible specimen
databases, historical literature, and identification resources, will provide a
foundation for future work on aquatic insects throughout tropical South America.
&lt;br/&gt;