* 0816593
* Collaborative Research: Exploration of the mechanistic basis and biogeochemical implications of differential nutrient limitation among trophic levels
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Pallaoor Sundareshwar, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 08/31/2012
* USD 328,960.00

The structure and function of ecosystems is governed by patterns of nutrient
limitation of plants and those organisms that consume plant remains, such as
soil microbes. Often, plants and consumers are limited by the same nutrient.
However, increasing evidence indicates that different nutrients can be limiters
in some ecosystems, a situation known as differential nutrient limitation. This
study examines why differential nutrient limitation occurs in some ecosystems
but not others, and what the consequences are with respect to the utilization
and storage of carbon. These questions will be tested using a network of
fertilized plots in four wetlands from Rhode Island to Georgia, including both
freshwater and saline systems. Standardized sampling at all sites will ensure
comparable measurements of plant and microbial productivity, phosphorus cycling
and ecosystem metabolism. It is expected that differential nutrient limitation
will occur in ecosystems with higher rates of phosphorus mineralization and will
yield less carbon storage.

This study has implications for ecosystem management and provides a conceptual
framework to integrate ecological studies at multiple scales by understanding
how nutrient ratios affects the biogeochemical cycles that govern ecosystem
energetics. It includes a commitment to students from under-represented groups,
including American Indians and African Americans, through a research mentoring
program.