* 0816762
* Collaborative Research: The effect of landscape context on the sensitivity of vegetation to climate change
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* Randolph Calcote, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 216,328.00

This project uses pollen and charcoal in lake sediments to ask how soil texture
and firebreaks influenced the response of oak- and pine-dominated ecosystems to
climatic changes of the past 7000 years. Previous results demonstrate that
during the last 2000 years the vegetation and fire regimes on a 450 square
kilometer sand plain in northwestern Wisconsin were remarkably dynamic.
Individual sites within the landscape responded differently to relatively small
climatic changes. White pine increased during the Little Ice Age at most sites,
apparently due to slight differences in soil texture and the abundance of lakes
and other firebreaks. The current research extends the time period studied to
include more extreme climatic changes, and tests hypotheses about the importance
of soil types, firebreaks, and vegetation feedbacks in determining the response
of local vegetation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Predicting the response of local
vegetation to climate change is an important goal of ecosystem modeling.
Federal, state and county agencies are actively engaged in pine barrens habitat
restoration in the area being studied, and the results of this work will be
directly applicable to establishing realistic restoration goals and management
strategies. Students from Luther College, the University of Minnesota, and the
University of Wisconsin will participate in a collaborative learning environment
in which skills in collection and interpretation of long-term records of
environmental change are applied to questions about ecosystem
management.&lt;br/&gt;