* 0816782
* Mitochondrial Cell Death Signaling in S Male-Sterile Maize
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Christine Chase, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Robert Slocum
* 08/31/2011
* USD 298,533.00

The regulated, or programmed, death of cells is central to normal development,
and to disease and defense response, in both plants and animals. Despite the
importance of programmed cell death, little is known about this process in
plants. This project seeks to identify the molecular and cellular events leading
to genetically controlled cell death in maize pollen. A particular gene, part of
the maternally inherited mitochondrial genome, is suspected to cause cell death
associated with the S-type of pollen sterility in maize. To unequivocally
identify the responsible gene, the University of Florida investigators will use
genetic transformation to introduce the products of suspect or candidate genes
into the mitochondria of normal maize pollen. They expect that the death of the
genetically transformed pollen will identify the gene for this pollen sterility
trait. To determine whether problems with mitochondrial function precede pollen
cell death, these researchers will introduce protective gene products into the
mitochondria of S-type pollen. Here, they expect that the rescue of pollen
function will confirm links between specific mitochondrial events and programmed
cell death in plants. The Bennett College for Women collaborators will use
genetic transformation to introduce a highly regulated form of the cell death
gene into plant cell cultures, such that cell death events can be induced and
studied at will in the laboratory. The broader scientific impacts of this
project include new tools and insights to better understand and manipulate cell
death pathways for plant improvement. Educational impacts include not only the
training of undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral students at the University
of Florida, but also the establishment of a research program involving
undergraduates at Bennett College for Women. Bennett College for Women is one of
only two colleges that historically served black women. This project will
therefore establish a legacy, engaging students who are members of
underrepresented groups in the scientific process.