* 0817793
* RUI: Characterization of Metabolic Genes Involved in Bacillus Sporulation
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Jason Reddick, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2012
* USD 324,637.00

During periods of starvation some bacterial species undergo a type of cell-
differentiation which results in a highly resilient and dormant form called a
spore. The study of sporulation is important since the spores of several
bacterial species are harmful for a wide range of reasons. The main objective of
this project is to discover how starving Bacillus subtilis cells still manage to
have the energy to fuel sporulation. The central hypothesis is that when
sporulating B. subtilis cells deplete their stores of glucose, the enzymes
encoded by the mother cell metabolic gene (mmg) cluster contribute energy and
material through the digestion of the cell's own fatty acids. The enzymes
specified by the mmg cluster will be isolated, and their ability to participate
in the necessary steps of fatty acid digestion will be examined. To determine
the effects these genes have on sporulation, the energy state of sporulating
mutants which lack these genes will be measured. Sporulation genes which are
redundant or function in support of the mmg cluster will also be discovered by
gene array experiments with these mutants. Successful completion of this
research will be significant, because this knowledge will enable new
investigations of other metabolic pathways used during sporulation.

Broader Impact: Published results from this project will provide missing
chemical data for previously unstudied genes, and will thus help improve the
utility of the public genome sequence database for B. subtilis. Such data will
also improve the predictive power of the overall set of genome databases, which
will in turn impact the broad array of biotechnological fields which depend on
genomics. Perhaps the most significant impact of this project on science and
society will come from the large and diverse group of chemistry and biochemistry
students that will receive training from this project at UNC-Greensboro. As they
ultimately embark on their own science careers, the student participants will
benefit science and society by contributing the broad range of communication and
scientific skills they will learn from this project. The interdisciplinary
project will advance discovery while promoting teaching and learning by
inspiring students to pursue science careers in industry or graduate level
research in NSF-sponsored fields. Former students from this lab are currently
pursuing Ph.D's in organic chemistry and biological engineering, are working at
biotechnology companies, or teaching high school science. New students will
continue to perform all of the lab work, using diverse techniques including
bacterial culture, DNA and protein methods, analytical chemistry, and synthetic
organic chemistry. The students will also receive strong career mentoring
related to professional life, graduate school, and scientific integrity. The
Principal Investigator, a first-generation college graduate, will continue to
recruit and mentor a diverse group of undergraduate and Masters students, which
will include underrepresented groups and first-generation university students.
For example, this large research group has been comprised so far of 62% female
and 46% underrepresented minorities. The students will gain skills in written
and oral communication through wide dissemination of their research in the
scientific literature and presentations at scientific meetings. The project will
also enhance the educational and research infrastructure at UNCG, not only from
the student research opportunities, but also through the biochemistry lecture
and laboratory courses. These courses will use this research to teach metabolic
pathways along with the methods used to study them. Finally, this research will
benefit society by adding needed experimental data to the theoretical gene-
function assignments available in the publicly-funded B. subtilis genome
database.