* 0817544
* Female Reproductive Tract Development in Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2013
* Martin Yanofsky, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Amy Litt
* 12/31/2013
* USD 645,000.00

MARTIN F. YANOFSKY &lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL NUMBER: IOS-0817544&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL
TITLE: Female reproductive tract development in
Arabidopsis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fertilization in plants is fundamental to
producing fruits and seeds, which are the harvested product for many crop
species and critical for agriculture. For successful fertilization the male
sperm cell, contained within the pollen tube, must reach the female egg cell.
However, the progress of land plant evolution is marked by increasing protection
of the egg cell, with the majority of plant species burying these cells deep
within many layers of female tissues. The project focuses on the problem of how
the female tissues help the pollen tube grow to the relatively inaccessible egg
cell. The specific focus is on the reproductive tract, which is the part of the
female plant tissue that interacts with pollen tubes. Development of the female
reproductive tract in plants has received relatively little research attention
despite its complexity and fundamental importance. This project will identify
the major regulatory genes that control how the plant makes the reproductive
tract using a combination of genetics and molecular biology in the model plant
Arabidopsis thaliana. Several genes have already been identified that control
different parts of the reproductive tract and are providing unique insights into
the process of fertilization. It is likely that these Arabidopsis genes will
have counterparts (orthologs) in diverse plant species, including many
agriculturally important crops. Therefore, this project will form the foundation
for a wide range of future studies aimed at understanding the genes that control
fertilization in diverse plant species and lead to significant increases in
overall yield of important crops. The broader impact of this project will derive
from the identification of key regulatory genes that pattern the Arabidopsis
reproductive tract in the carpel and fruit. It will provide excellent training
opportunities for students and postdoctoral fellows, and the resources created
by this research will be incorporated into laboratory courses and outreach
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;