* 0817622
* IMR: Acquisition of a SAXS Facility for Research and Education in Nano-Structured Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Lilo Pozzo, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2009
* USD 261,910.00

Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This NSF IMR proposal requests funds for a small
angle x-ray scattering (SAXS) facility for studies of nano-structured materials
at the University of Washington (Seattle, WA). This multi-user facility will
address our immediate research and educational needs for the characterization of
bulk engineering materials at nanometer length scales. Several groups will
immediately use this facility in research projects where bulk nano-structures
play critical roles in controlling the resulting macroscopic material
properties. Some of these projects include the optimization of protein
separations through the use of novel surfactant nanostructures and self-
assembled sieving matrices; the development of semiconductive polymers for solar
energy conversion; the structural design of molecular assemblies with non-linear
optical properties; the enhancement of dispersion and interfacial toughness in
fiber-nanocomposites; the design of superlattices with collective magnetic
properties and the characterization of structural defects in electrochemical
ceramics. This facility addresses our long-standing research needs for the non-
invasive characterization of bulk materials at the nanoscale. It will also serve
as an essential tool for the training and education of engineers and scientists
that work in all areas of materials research. The SAXS facility will be
immediately incorporated into existing graduate and undergraduate laboratory
courses and into specialized scattering courses that will be developed. The
facility will also enhance the undergraduate experience through its
incorporation into on-going undergraduate research programs. The facility will
be the first and only SAXS user facility in the region.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;If funded, this NSF IMR
grant will provide funds for the acquisition of a small angle x-ray scattering
(SAXS) facility at the University of Washington (Seattle, WA). SAXS provides
information about the structural order of materials over distances of nanometers
(billionths of meters). This nano-scale structural information is critical for
the development of new engineering materials that are based on a high level of
molecular organization. This facility, which will be the first and only SAXS
user-facilty in the region, will immediately benefit several research groups at
UW who are currently using nano-scale ordering to improve the performance of
materials. These projects include the optimization of biomolecular separations
for fast ?point of care? medical diagnosis, the development of semiconductor
polymers for efficient and inexpensive solar power, the design of composite
materials with enhanced toughness and gas permeability and the control of
magnetism in particle assemblies. This facility will also serve as an essential
tool for the training and education of engineers and scientists that work in all
areas of materials research. The SAXS facility will be immediately incorporated
into existing graduate level and undergraduate level laboratory courses and in
specialized courses that will be developed in the future. The facility will also
enhance the undergraduate experience through its incorporation into on-going
undergraduate research programs.