* 0817744
* Dissecting Gene Regulatory Networks Controlling Petal Organogenesis
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Vivian Irish, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Alexander McClure
* 08/31/2011
* USD 509,950.00

Vivian F. Irish&lt;br/&gt;Proposal # IOS-0817744&lt;br/&gt;Dissecting gene
regulatory networks controlling petal
organogenesis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The formation of an organ depends
on the coordination of a variety of cellular processes, including cell division,
tissue organization, and patterning of the organ as a whole. Plant organogenesis
is not well understood, despite the importance of plants as sources of food, and
increasingly, fuel. This project focuses on analyzing the regulation of petal
organogenesis in Arabidopsis as a model for understanding how other, more
complex tissues and organs are generated. Several complementary approaches will
be taken to identify new genes involved in petal organogenesis. These will
include microarray-based approaches to identify genes required for the initial
stages of petal organogenesis; genetic strategies to identify quantitative trait
loci controlling petal shape and size; and molecular approaches to identify
microRNA-dependent processes controlling petal organogenesis. Genetic and
molecular interactions between newly discovered and previously identified genes
will define pathways essential for petal organogenesis. These results will be
used to develop a genome-level regulatory network that functions in controlling
different steps in petal organogenesis. In turn, characterizing the petal
organogenesis network will be valuable in developing a systems level
understanding of plant organogenesis, and the emergent properties of such a
system. This interdisciplinary approach will provide a unique perspective as to
how the spatial and temporal aspects of cell division, cell type
differentiation, and the coordination of growth and development result in the
formation of a particular organ type. Furthermore, this comprehensive
characterization will also be important for generating new tools to understand
and manipulate organogenesis in other, economically important plant species. A
component of this project is to provide a variety of training opportunities for
a postdoctoral associate, a graduate student, and undergraduates that will
foster critical analytical skills in the next generation of researchers.