* 0817829
* Collaborative Research: CPSF30 at the Convergence of RNA Processing, Cellular Signaling, and Development in Plants
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Qingshun Li, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Wyatt
* 08/31/2013
* USD 230,934.00

Arthur G. Hunt and Q. Quinn Li &lt;br/&gt;IOS-0817829&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative
Proposal: CPSF30 at the convergence of RNA processing, cellular signaling, and
development in plants&lt;br/&gt;Gene expression is controlled at many levels,
including the processing of RNAs. There remain many questions as to the
mechanisms by which environmental inputs (stimuli) lead to changes in RNA
processing. The research to be pursued in this project deals with one possible
mechanism, involving the role of one RNA processing factor (CPSF30) in regulated
gene expression in plants. This work is inspired by prior observations that
mutant plants that do not make the protein have an interesting range of
phenotypes, and that the protein itself is regulated by a central component of
cellular sensory systems. This project will combine genetic, biochemical,
molecular, and systems approaches to understand the interplay between cellular
signaling and the function of CPSF30. The outcome of the research component of
the project will be a better understanding of the ways in which stimuli can
cause changes in the processing of RNAs in the plant cell. This will in turn
contribute to a better understanding of the ways by which plants respond to
environmental cues and disease-causing organisms. &lt;br/&gt;This project will
have an impact that extends significantly beyond an understanding of gene
expression in plants. The expected results will be of help in developing new
genetic and biotechnological strategies for improving the performance of crop
plants in adverse conditions. This project will involve postdoctoral scientists,
graduate students, and undergraduate students. There is a decided cross-
disciplinary nature to this project, in that it involves molecular/biochemical,
whole-plant, and systems biology approaches. As such, these studies will help to
prepare trainees to make contributions in a scientific field (plant biology)
that is becoming more cross-disciplinary. Participants (including PIs) will
participate in community programs so as to promote interest in and appreciation
of science in the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;