* 0817128
* Generic Language in Development
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Susan Gelman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 08/31/2012
* USD 304,060.00

A central form of human knowledge is generic knowledge, that is, general
information about categories, from animals to numbers, from celestial objects to
machines, from economic systems to social systems. Human progress is marked by a
search for understanding principles that apply broadly across varying instances
within a category. A fundamental means of expressing general knowledge to
children is via language, and in particular generic noun phrases (e.g., "Insects
are 6-legged"). Prior work has demonstrated that generic noun phrases are
frequent in parental speech to children, used in diverse cultural and linguistic
contexts (U.S., China, Peru), produced by children exposed to minimal linguistic
input (deaf children not exposed to sign language), understood appropriately by
preschool-aged children, and stored by children in long-term memory. These
component pieces all suggest that generics are important, meaningful, acquired
early, and have the potential to influence children's world knowledge. However,
prior work on generics leaves two major questions unanswered: (1) Does generic
language affect and guide children's concepts, or does generic language merely
reflect children's concepts? (2) What is the process by which generic language
is acquired in childhood? The project will investigate both these core issues.
An in-depth training study will teach young children a new concept under varied
wording conditions to chart the effects of generics and labeling on children's
categorical reasoning. Furthermore, a set of experiments will test competing
claims regarding the process by which generics are learned. These studies will
make use of experimental research and naturalistic language analyses to provide
converging and precise evidence regarding the links among concepts and language
in children between 2 and 5 years of age.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
promote more effective learning strategies by providing much-needed information
on how the language that parents and teachers use (generic vs. specific) affects
how children acquire and generalize new information. These findings will help us
understand better how children learn language, and have implications for science
education. Furthermore, understanding how and when children form generalizations
within categories informs the development of stereotyping, as well as how
children come to understand human diversity. Finally, the work will benefit
society at large, by providing scientists, educators, and parents with an
understanding of children's early cognitive processes and the effects of
language on such processes. Understanding how these basic processes unfold in
normally developing children also provides a framework for eventually
understanding how they can go awry, for example, in children with specific
language impairment.