* 0817249
* Renewal:  Lowering Transaction Costs through Institutional Arrangements:  The Causes and Consequences of the Rectangular Survey in Assigning Property Rights to Land
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Gary Libecap, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2011
* USD 122,774.00

The demarcation of rights to land is likely one of the earliest activities
undertaken by human societies. Yet, despite the observation that a system of
demarcating rights to land will be important in determining use and value, the
literature in economics and in law is completely absent on that point. Secure
property rights can play an important role in effective management of
environmental and natural resources. Locating exogenous factors that influence
the security of property rights has been a challenge in analyses of their
development and impact on resource use and value. The project is the first
systematic economic analysis of property measurement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project examines an important institutional innovation that has exogenous
effects on the precision and security of property rights to land: the systematic
demarcation of property boundaries relative to indiscriminate land claiming and
bounding. The former results in a uniform grid of square parcels (named the
rectangular survey or RS), whereas the latter results in haphazard localized
bounding of properties, referred to as metes and bounds (MB). MB is used
throughout the world. In the U.S. they are found in the original 13 states,
Kentucky, and Tennessee, as well as in the Spanish and Mexican land grants in
the Southwest. The rectangular survey outlines boundaries in terms of a
centrally-controlled grid of square plots. In the US, the RS was established by
the Land Ordinance of 1785, which divided federal government frontier lands into
square mile ?sections? that were further divided into smaller uniform allotments
for individual claiming or purchase. This project develops an economic framework
for examining land demarcation systems, focusing on a comparative analysis of RS
and MB. It begins by considering how a decentralized system of land claiming
would generate patterns of land holdings that would be unsystematic and depend
on natural topography and the characteristics of the claimant population. It
then considers how a centralized system generates different ownership patterns
and incentives for land use, land markets, investment, and border disputes. RS
is likely to lead to more market transactions, fewer border disputes, greater
investment, higher land values, and more infrastructure investment than metes
and bounds. This project examines a region in central Ohio in which the metes
and bounds system (within the Virginia Military District) is adjacent to land
governed by the rectangular survey. The primary data include U.S. census
manuscripts; court opinions; state reports on infrastructure, legal disputes,
and productivity; GIS measures of topography; soil quality; and parcel-level
data on boundary shape. This project is constructing parcel-level, township and
county measures of boundary irregularity; topography; soil quality; land value;
land use; legal disputes; and transportation development. These data will be
used to test hypotheses regarding the economic impact of RS relative to MB. The
investigators are seeking another year of funding to complete the data
collection, more complex than anticipated; to finalize modeling and testing; and
finally to extend the study to include analysis of the political economy of the
survey and the location of base meridians, the economic history of the Land
Ordinance, and examination of the adoption of the RS in Canada and
elsewhere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The research addresses broader
issues of the definition and enforcement of property rights to resources and the
impact on resource use and economic welfare. The project involves law, graduate
and undergraduate economics students in the research, one of whom already has
decided to pursue PhD training as a result of the
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;