* 0817049
* Measuring Detailed Abundances of Extragalactic Globular Clusters
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2007,06/30/2009
* Rebecca Bernstein, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Donald M. Terndrup
* 06/30/2009
* USD 125,988.00

AST-0507350 Rebecca Bernstein University of Michigan Ann Arbor Measuring
Detailed Abundances of Extragalactic Globular Clusters Our understanding of the
formation and chemical enrichment processes of normal galaxies is largely
constrained by evidence from one galaxy: the Milky Way. That evidence is largely
revealed in the detailed abundance patterns of old stars, which bear the fossil
record of the Galaxy's gas chemistry at the time they formed. It has never been
possible to obtain similar evidence in even one other normal galaxy. This is
simply because old stars beyond the nearest dwarf spheroidal galaxies of the
Local Group are too faint to be observed at the high signal-to-noise and high
spectral resolution needed for abundance analysis. Unlike single stars, high-
resolution spectra can be obtained of unresolved globular clusters at distances
as large as 4 Mpc with current telescopes. Globular clusters are bright enough
and have low enough velocity dispersions that even weak lines could be detected
in spectra of their integrated light. Detailed abundances have never been
obtained for unresolved globular clusters only because current methods of
abundance analysis only work for individual stars. A method for abundance
analysis of integrated-light spectra will make it possible to measure detailed
abundances in the massive galaxies of the Local Group and well beyond. To
develop this technique, a training set of resolved globular clusters in the
Milky Way and Large Magellanic Cloud will be created. In these training set
clusters, color magnitude diagrams and fiducial metallicities from single stars
can be obtained, supplying a wealth of information for developing and testing
the proposed method for analyzing the integrated light spectra of unresolved
globular clusters. Crucially, the training set includes globular clusters of a
wide range of ages and abundances, so that the necessary strategies can be
developed to deal with such variations in unresolved globular clusters.
Preliminary results demonstrate the potential of this technique, with reasonable
abundances being derived from the integrated spectra of NGC 6397 and 47 Tucanae.
However, a number of additions/improvements will also be added here. These
include incorporation of blended lines in the synthesis (including the effects
of hyperfine splitting), profile matching of strong lines, and consideration of
possible non-local thermodynamic equilibrium effects. In addition, issues which
may affect the confidence of the results will also be explored: horizontal
branch morphology and what constraints can be applied through spectral
indicators (e.g., hydrogen line widths), the sensitivity to the luminosity
function of stars at the low mass end, as well as the giants, and the importance
of assumed alpha-element enhancements in the modeling process. This method for
measuring abundances will let astronomers study the detailed chemical enrichment
histories of galaxies beyond the Milky Way for the first time. This will
dramatically increase the pool of observational constraints on galaxy formation
theories and therefore have broad impact on our understanding of galaxy
formation. The training set spectra themselves will also provide abundances of
Magellanic Cloud clusters which are not yet well known, provide a calibration
library for line index systems, and help astronomers understand the initial mass
function of stars in globular clusters and the nucleosynthetic yields of
supernovae. The training set spectra will also be made available through
existing database as soon as they are published. A majority of the funding goes
to supporting the training and education graduate students using state of the
art observational facilities and computational tools.