* 0817782
* Functional Tradeoffs in Specialization for Locomotion Versus Fighting
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2014
* David Carrier, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 07/31/2014
* USD 290,921.00

Both rapid, economical running and fighting are important in the life histories
of most or all terrestrial species. Nevertheless, musculoskeletal "design" that
allows rapid, economical running is likely to be incompatible with
musculoskeletal design that is appropriate for fighting. This locomotor versus
fighting tradeoff may explain many cases of divergence in body form among
closely related species and may also help explain why males and females of the
same species often differ in the size and proportions of their musculoskeletal
system. This study will use comparative methods to test hypotheses of functional
tradeoff between specialization for rapid, economical running versus
specialization for fighting. The first aim of the investigation is to test a
broad set of hypotheses of functional design of the skeletal system in two
mammalian orders: Artiodactyla (e.g., deer and antelope) and Carnivora (e.g.
wolves and lions). Using museum collections, limb bone proportions will be
measured in a large number of species and compared with proxies for male-male
aggression (size sexual dimorphism) and maximum running speed. The second and
third aims of the study are to quantify sexual differences in the properties of
limb bones and muscle architecture in 2 species exhibiting high levels of male-
male competition (black bears and bisons) and 2 highly cursorial species (wolves
and pronghorns). Hence, this investigation will test hypotheses of functional
tradeoff between musculoskeletal specializations for running versus fighting and
it will significantly expand our knowledge and understanding of the sexual
dimorphism of the mammalian musculoskeletal system. The study will also provide
research opportunities for 6 to 9 undergraduate students. We will also create an
open access, online library of high resolution CT scans of anatomically aligned
cross-sections of the whole limb bones from all of the subjects. Finally,
although sexual dimorphism is poorly understood by the general public, it is of
broad importance to physiology, evolutionary biology, and human evolution and
behavior. We expect the research proposed here to be of general interest and to
provide opportunities to educate the public about the biological significance of
sexual dimorphism.