* 0817254
* Collaborative Research: A Disciplinary Commons in Computing Education
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Dennis Bouvier, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* Valerie Barr
* 08/31/2012
* USD 80,005.00

Computer Science (31)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project
establishes a Disciplinary Commons: a group of educators, from diverse
institutions within a geographic region, who teach the same computing course.
Building on a model previously piloted on a smaller scale in the United Kingdom
and in the United States, these teachers meet together regularly for over a
year. In addition, the teachers each prepare a detailed portfolio describing
their own teaching of the course, critique each other's portfolios, and visit
each other's classrooms. This combination of critical self-examination and peer
review helps them understand their own teaching, identifies places where
innovation and change are needed, shares what works, borrows from others, and
sees their own teaching in the context of a broad range of possibilities.
Finally, this project has a third, larger goal: to establish a new scholarship
of teaching within computing education by modeling a rigorous, peer-reviewed
forum to describe what is done when teaching.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
Intellectual Merit is that the Commons advances knowledge and understanding
within computing education in two ways. First, it produces exemplary materials
within specific subfields of the computing discipline in the form of multiple,
evaluated portfolios. Second, it builds a community of reflective (and
communicating) practitioners, whose interactions lead to improvements in the
teaching and learning in the discipline; more generally these communities
promote a scholarship of teaching, involving public evaluation and review of
teaching materials and approaches. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impacts are
that as the participants bring reflective and collaborative practices back to
their home institutions, it promotes local change within a large number of
different contexts. The participants become part of a regional community, with
deep understanding of the teaching and learning in classrooms at a variety of
other institutions serving different student populations, giving them
perspectives that few educators obtain. Collaborations among members of these
communities (and others who are brought in) have the potential for innovations
that are regional and national in scope. &lt;br/&gt;