* 0817136
* Undergraduate Science and Technology Education Using Low Cost Radio Telescopes
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Alan Whitney, Northeast Radio Observatory Corp
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 08/31/2012
* USD 443,564.00

This project is developing a comprehensive science and technology educational
program using low cost, very small radio telescopes (VSRT). These systems have
already been successfully tested in a community college setting under a CCLI
Phase 1 grant. MIT Haystack Observatory is working with faculty and students in
a variety of colleges and universities to enhance the capabilities of the
existing VSRT systems and widely disseminate the resulting curriculum
applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The project involves the
enhancement of a very small radio telescope (VSRT) system to introduce students
at a wide range of undergraduate academic settings to radio science technology
and radio astronomical observations. All components in the VSRT are commercially
available through radio equipment outlets and can be easily assembled according
to instructions the project has developed. The VSRT uses a 0.5m satellite TV
antenna operating at 12.5 GHz. It can be easily pointed at the Sun to observe
its emitted radio flux and can be used with two or three similar antennas for
higher resolution radio-interferometry experiments using transit or pointed
observations of the Sun. Laboratory experiments to demonstrate the principles of
interferometry have been developed and are being widely disseminated. New
enhancements to the hardware allow new projects to be developed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Importantly, and quite serendipitously, observations of
the 11 GHz line of mesospheric ozone are possible. The first-ever measurements
of this important spectroscopic line were recently made during the development
of the VSRT. Since this is a new discovery, it opens a scientific area to
students to allow them to participate in cutting edge research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The VSRT program also provides faculty with hands-on
workshops to introduce the technical materials, the software and data analysis
procedures to enable them to effectively include the systems in the classroom. A
web forum is being developed to allow students and faculty to share ideas,
discuss their results and communicate their successes and failures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: MIT Haystack Observatory has a long
history of undergraduate education programs. Having a small, portable, simple,
and low-cost system, that does not require permanent installation, can be
extremely valuable in developing teaching materials in science and engineering.
Haystack Observatory also has a strong record of public outreach. These venues
provide excellent opportunities to use the VSRT as a demonstration of radio-wave
science.