* 0817369
* Teaching Mathematical Knowledge for Teaching (K-8):    Adapting Local Materials for Use in Diverse Institutions and Settings
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Mark Hoover, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Michael Jacobson
* 12/31/2012
* USD 499,822.00

&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical Sciences (21)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The "Teaching
Mathematical Knowledge for Teaching (K-8): Adapting Local Materials for Use in
Diverse Institutions and Settings" builds on extensive foundational work in
identifying, characterizing, and measuring the "mathematical knowledge for
teaching" (MKT) that enables and empowers K-8 school teachers to successfully
improve their student's achievements in learning mathematics. The project
develops, field-tests, produces, and disseminates a set of three large learning-
units which are collectively a one-term course curriculum for future K-8
teachers. These materials can also be integrated separately into undergraduate
mathematics content or methods courses for future elementary and middle school
teachers. The project promotes faculty learning through the establishment of
collaborative structures called "instructor planning groups" which support the
development of faculty knowledge and skills for successful implementation of the
materials. Additionally, an online community is used to contribute to the
professional knowledge-base for mathematics education of teachers. The
dissemination of this project helps build the foundation for launching research
on teaching and learning of MKT nationally, thereby setting the stage for major
innovations in the mathematical education of teachers and the evaluation of its
overall effects.