* 0817114
* Expanding Mesolore:   Adding Three, Pedagogically-Interactive Aztec Documents and Supplementary Materials to an Interdisciplinary Project for Teaching and Learning Mesoamerica
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Elizabeth Bakewell, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 08/31/2013
* USD 235,018.00

Archaeology and Anthropology (81) &lt;br/&gt;History (83) &lt;br/&gt;Linguistics
(84) &lt;br/&gt;Geography (88) &lt;br/&gt;Interdisciplinary (99) &lt;br/&gt; The
Mesolore Project (TMP) was developed at Brown University and tested by
instructors in a variety of institutions of higher education during its initial
phase of NSF support in the late 1990s and early 2000s. The first phase of TMP
concentrated on creating upper-level seminars focused on Mixtec documents from
the pre- and post-1520 period in Meso-America in a set of connected social
science fields. This was the period in which the cultural influence of Spain was
interjected into the native culture. This CCLI Phase 2 project is building on
the initial collection of interactive and interdisciplinary learning materials
by &lt;br/&gt;(1) Adding three more interactive "laboratories" of Aztec-related
primary documents to its holdings, namely the "Lienzo de Tlaxcala," the
"Matr√≠cula de Tributos," and a 16th century Nahuatl-Spanish
"Vocabulario."&lt;br/&gt;(2) Engaging in national dissemination activities to
assist instructors in the social science fields of history, geography,
archaeology, and cultural anthropology in the task of integrating these online
materials into undergraduate courses. &lt;br/&gt;(3) Adding supplementary
teaching sources--tutorials, essays, a new debate, an expanded list of secondary
listings and links, and an interactive atlas to include Central Mexico, not only
the Mixteca. &lt;br/&gt;(4) Engaging in a variety of evaluation
activities.&lt;br/&gt; A CD ROM set ("Mesolore: Exploring Mesoamerican
Cultures") was disseminated during TMP's first phase. In this phase 2 Project,
Mesolore is expanding its presence using the Internet and is also continuing to
cultivate a national community of faculty and student users by placing them at
the center of research on Mesoamerica. This expansion connects learning
materials from the disciplines of archaeology, anthropology, linguistics,
geography, and history in the study of a real-world situation.