* 0817261
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Social Change, Livelihoods, and Nutritional Outcomes Among Mikea of Southwest Madagascar
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/2008,04/30/2010
* Bram Tucker, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 04/30/2010
* USD 19,300.00

Graduate student Amber Huff (University of Georgia), supervised by Dr. Bram
Tucker, will undertake research in a new biodiversity conservation protected
area in the Mikea Forest of southwestern Madagascar. The focus of the research
will be on the experience of rural poverty, social change, and health among
diversified forager-farmers. The researcher will use the results of a seasonal
questionnaire, anthropometric measurements, a self-report health survey, and
life history interviews to determine (1) if conservation policies impact
people's livelihoods and vulnerability in terms of food insecurity, nutritional
status, and perceived health status; (2) if local social and economic
inequalities cause different levels of psychosocial stress, and (3) if lifelong
exposures to hazards and stressors are embodied in different nutritional and
general health outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is important
because it will contribute to understanding how people throughout the world cope
with rapid social change through livelihoods diversity, social support, and
integration into markets. It also will connect the concept of equity and
environmental justice in conservation policy formulation to specific issues of
livelihood security for vulnerable populations. By elucidating the ways in which
restrictive biodiversity conservation projects can affect people whose
livelihoods depend on access to natural resources, this research will illuminate
the economic, biological, and psychosocial pathways by which conditions of
poverty and social inequality are actually transmitted.