* 0817084
* RUI: Speciation in the Sea: Developmental Evolution and Host Shifts in the Sacoglossa
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2008,12/31/2012
* Patrick Krug, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Robb Brumfield
* 12/31/2012
* USD 335,259.00

To effectively conserve biodiversity, we must identify existing species and
recognize the forces that generate species richness. Rivers and mountains can
separate terrestrial populations for millions of years, allowing them to split
into distinct species; however, we have little idea how species form in the
ocean where there are few such boundaries to movement. Speciation could follow
if some individuals inherited a preference for a new habitat or food source, or
if populations became genetically fragmented after a species evolved non-
migrating larvae. To test these ideas, we will construct a family tree of
herbivorous sea slugs from across the globe, inferring relatedness among species
by phylogenetic analysis of their DNA. For each species we will determine the
host seaweed used as both food and habitat, and the type of larvae produced
(dispersing versus non-migratory). By establishing algal hosts, larval types,
and relationships among species, we can determine which traits have contributed
to speciation in this group.&lt;br/&gt; If new species form when slugs switch
onto different host algae, this will overturn long-held assumptions about
speciation in the sea. This study will also test whether non-migratory larvae
evolve due to pressure on mothers to make bigger offspring, and whether such
larvae in turn promote the formation of new species. The results will advance
our understanding of why certain regions or groups of animals have more species
than others, and lead to the description of many new sea slug species. Both
aspects are critical to preserving the ocean's biological richness.