* 0817707
* Comparative Evolutionary Genomics of Cotton
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2017
* Andrew Paterson, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* carlos vallejos
* 02/28/2017
* USD 5,078,573.00

PI: Jonathan F. Wendel (Iowa State University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPIs: Adah
Leshem-Ackerman (Iowa State University), Alan R. Gingle and Andrew H. Paterson
(University of Georgia), Joshua A. Udall (Brigham Young
University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Senior Personnel: Barry Marler and Junkang Rong
(University of Georgia) and Nikki Hanegan (Brigham Young
University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The convergence of modern genomic approaches
with other areas of biology holds great promise for providing insight into the
origins of plant form. In this project a multifaceted program will be
implemented to further our understanding of the complex genetic architecture
that underlies phenotypes, and to elucidate the processes involved in
developmental, agronomic, and evolutionary change. Using a well-developed model
system from the cotton genus (Gossypium) and new genomic resources, the
complexities involved in transforming primitive epidermal seed hairs to the
economically important fibers of modern cotton cultivars will be revealed.
Experiments involves four interrelated components: (1) developing and
characterizing immortal introgression lines to reduce complex morphology into
smaller units amenable to functional genomic analyses; (2) developing a novel
gene expression profiling platform using a vastly enriched EST resource; (3)
studying perturbations in genetic networks and gene expression associated with
naturally occurring variation in fiber phenotypes, using the introgression
lines; and (4) providing a foundation for understanding the effects of selection
on genetic diversity in cotton. Because cotton is a polyploid, the research will
explore the possibility that polyploid formation created distinct opportunities
for phenotypic evolution. Two different polyploid species were domesticated,
thus enabling an evaluation of parallelisms in the underlying genetic
architecture associated with domestication and morphological evolution. In
addition to addressing fundamental biological questions, the project will
generate physical resources and intellectual tools for cotton research and
improvement, including: (1) a new public microarray platform and a vastly
enriched, web-accessible EST resource for cotton; (2) publicly available
immortal introgression populations for functional genomic and genetic analyses;
(3) insight into the genes and biological processes important in fiber
development and agronomic improvement; and (4) a framework for future diversity
analyses in cotton. All data and germplasm resulting from this project will be
made freely available to the community in a timely manner. Data will be made
accessible to the public via appropriate channels (e.g., GenBank and GEO) and
also through our project website, the Cotton Portal (http://gossypium.info).
Introgression lines will be maintained at two project locations and distributed
through the project and through the USDA National Collection of Gossypium
Germplasm (College Station, TX). Oligo microarrays will continue to be available
on a cost-recovery basis through the project website. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to providing scientific training to undergraduate and graduate students
and post-graduate scholars, this project has a special focus on middle school
and high school science and technology educators. Through this project an
inquiry-based internship program will be implemented that provides the
opportunity for secondary teachers to conduct bona fide research in different
laboratories at the participating institutions. The program will be open to
teachers nationwide. Teachers will receive instruction from faculty, staff and
master teachers on the conceptual foundations associated with plant biology and
genetics. Additionally, professional development efforts will be expanded to
include K-4th grade teachers by offering summer workshops. Web-based
instructional units will be developed and interfaced with commonly accessible
technology to provide ready access to classroom teachers, with developments
posted at www.plantgdb.org and disseminated at national education conferences. A
master teacher internship program will be developed, available to those with a
strong interest in networking with and transferring technological knowledge to
other teachers in their regions or districts.&lt;br/&gt;