* 0817940
* Computational Study of Catalytic Mechanisms and Specificities of Serine-Carboxyl Peptidases
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2013
* Hong Guo, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/2013
* USD 297,485.00

The objective of this project is to apply molecular dynamics and free energy
simulations along with hybrid quantum mechanical and molecular mechanical
potential function in combination with experimental studies to understand
serine-carboxyl peptidases (sedolisins), a recently characterized and poorly
understood family of proteolytic enzymes. Sedolisins have altered catalytic
triad and oxyanion hole compared to those from classical serine peptidases. They
are present in a wide variety of organisms, including archaea, bacteria, molds,
slime molds, amoebas, fishes and mammals and are active under acidic
environments and often at high temperature. There are considerable uncertainties
concerning the catalytic processes and origins of substrate specificities for
sedolisins, and detailed investigations of these enzymes through integrated
computational and experimental approaches are therefore of considerable
importance. This family is also of particular interest from the point of view of
enzyme catalytic mechanism, because it seems to exhibit a novel mechanism that
combines the features of classical serine and aspartic peptidases.
Crystallographic, mutagenesis and other experimental studies will be performed
to confirm the predictions obtained from computer simulations. The new
mechanistic principles and catalytic mechanism studied from this project will
benefit the general biochemistry community and may have a fundamental impact on
understanding enzymes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project
are diverse. The PI will integrate the research activities with education at
different levels. Graduate and undergraduate students, including those from
underrepresented groups, involved in this project will receive training and they
will be invited to go to one of the nations premier national laboratories to
interact with experimentalists. The opportunity to collaborate with the
outstanding Japanese experts in the field of serine-carboxyl peptidases will add
an international dimension and provide additional benefits to the research and
educational activities. The PI will interact closely with the students at local
high schools. High school students will have the opportunity to do research in
the PIs lab through a variety of programs. This activity will enhance the
learning experience of high school students and encourage them to pursue science
as their careers. The PI will develop a website for understanding enzyme
mechanisms and protein conformational changes, and this will make the teaching
and learning processes much easier.