* 0817805
* RUI: Thermal Adaptation of Killifish: The Role of Calsequestrin in Glycolytic Skeletal Muscle
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2013
* Theresa Grove, Valdosta State University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 07/31/2013
* USD 322,194.00

Changes in temperature affect all biological processes, including the functions
of and interactions between proteins that undergo conformational changes during
normal physiological processes. Poikilothermic fishes have body temperatures
similar to the surrounding environment, and they must overcome the physiological
challenges associated with temperature fluctuations during both seasonal and
daily tidal cycles. Killifish (Family Fundulidae) have adapted to temperate and
tropical environments, making these fish excellent model organisms to study
thermal adaptation. The calcium-binding protein, calsequestrin (CSQ) modulates
muscle contraction by "soaking-up" calcium pumped into and regulating release of
calcium from the sarcoplasmic reticulum. CSQ thus enables rapid muscle
relaxation and contraction cycles of fast twitch muscle necessary for burst
swimming associated with predator avoidance and prey capture. The dramatic
conformational changes CSQ undergoes during calcium-binding and release cycles
lead to the following question: Is the calcium buffering ability of CSQ
conserved in Fundulus species that have adapted to different environmental, and
thus physiological, temperatures? To address this question, the following
hypotheses will be tested using molecular and biophysical techniques: (1) CSQ
expression is correlated with relaxation and contraction rates along the fast
twitch muscle of Fundulus species adapted to different temperatures; (2) CSQ
exhibits conserved thermodynamic parameters at the native physiological
temperatures of closely related Fundulus species; and (3) Changes in amino acid
sequence of CSQ from Fundulus species adapted to different thermal regimes are
correlated with physiological temperature and the calcium-binding ability of
CSQ. The results of this research will expand understanding of molecular
mechanisms responsible for thermal adaptation of organisms to different
environments. Funding will enhance the research infrastructure and training of
undergraduate and graduate students at Valdosta State University, which serves a
large population of minority students and first generation students from the
regional area of southern Georgia. In addition, funding will help strengthen
relationships with neighboring research universities.