* 0817250
* A Machine Learning Approach to Human Visual Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2013
* Robert Jacobs, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2013
* USD 371,621.00

The proposed research program consists of experimental and computational studies
of human visual learning. The project focuses on the information processing
mechanisms mediating the perceptual learning that underlies expertise in a
variety of STEM fields, such as biology, astronomy, and geoscience. In
particular, the investigators attempt to take advantage of insights from the
field of Machine Learning (e.g., its formalisms for conceptualizing the
properties of different learning environments, its powerful sets of statistical
learning algorithms for each environment, and its numerous mathematical and
empirical findings about the advantages and disadvantages of these algorithms).
The studies look at learning performance on lower-level and higher-level
discrimination tasks in four types of learning environments: supervised,
unsupervised, semi-supervised, and reinforcement learning environments. The
project also explores visual learning based on correlated perceptual signals in
multisensory or multi-cue environments, such as when a person both sees and
touches surfaces. The computational studies compare people's learning
performances with the statistically optimal performances of "ideal learners",
and also with the performances of on-line learning algorithms from the Machine
Learning literature. A key hypothesis is that people can visually learn with
"unlabeled" data items (i.e., items that are not labeled by an instructor as
examples of a particular category of interest) by transferring knowledge gained
with "labeled" data items or by transferring knowledge gained from other sensory
modalities. The work has important implications for the design of STEM training
environments.