* 0817712
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Semiotics of Social Differentiation in the Southern Peruvian Andes
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Guillermo Salas Carreno, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2009
* USD 14,916.00

Graduate student Guillermo Salas Carre√±o, under the guidance of Dr. Bruce
Mannheim, will undertake research on the sociolinguistic construction of
hierarchical social relations. The researcher will take a micro-scale,
ethnographic approach, which will permit comprehension of usually unseen aspects
of interactions that are at the heart of the construction and reproduction of
social inequalities in multicultural and multiethnic societies. Social
interactions that ratify and shape social hierarchy can look superficially
similar. This research investigates the possibility that apparent similarities
may be misleading, if the social interactions simultaneously are being
understood differently.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be carried out in
the region of Cuzco, Peru, chosen because it has an appropriate diversity of
languages and ethnicities. The research will compare a community of Quechua-
speaking herders on a former plantation, a community of Quechua-speaking
agriculturalists, and an urban Spanish-speaking population from the city of
Cuzco. The research methods include participant observation and description of
daily interactions, during which the researcher will pay particular attention to
non-verbal semiotic practices. The researcher also will conduct open-ended
interviews with a sample of informants, and carry out sociolinguistic analysis
of natural speech samples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will go beyond
identifying the practices that mediate the construction of differences and focus
as well on the ideologies through which such practices are interpreted and which
themselves are rooted in distinctively different sets of ideas about the nature
of social reality. Thus, the research will contribute to better social science
understanding of how and why social differences persist in daily life, and
ultimately to better interventions for fostering inter-cultural communication.
The research also will contribute to the education of a graduate student.