* 0817297
* Collaborative Research:   A Model for Data-driven Reform in Chemistry Education
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2008,02/29/2012
* Stacey Lowery Bretz, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Pamela Brown
* 02/29/2012
* USD 70,830.00

Chemistry (12)&lt;br/&gt;This project leverages results from several
collaborators who have conducted research in the development and validation of
instruments for assessing learning and cognition in chemistry. The project seeks
to multiply both the efficacy and impact of these instruments by developing,
implementing, and studying multiple instrument measures of student learning. The
project uses the collective expertise of the collaborators to build a robust
suite of cross-validated assessment instruments and to determine how these items
can best provide information to chemistry instructors on the effectiveness of
their teaching. By enhancing the ability for educators to make teaching choices
based on sound data, from validated instruments for measuring learning, large
scale change in the teaching of undergraduate chemistry can transform the
educational experience of students in STEM disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this project lies along two vectors. First, assessment
research and validation of new assessment instruments in chemistry provides
important data not only from the perspective of teaching, but also in terms of
building the knowledge base of the fundamental processes of cognitive growth in
chemistry. In order to learn about knowledge acquisition, better measurement
technology must be devised, developed and implemented. Second, using assessment
instruments to ascertain the effectiveness of teaching methods provides an area
rich in opportunities for discovery. Innovation in the measurement of learning
in situations where new teaching methods are used is capable of driving
decisions based on data rather than anecdotes and enhances the scholarship of
what works in teaching. The multiple-instrument methods used in this project are
at the cutting edge of educational measurement in chemistry and therefore open
the possibility of novel scholarship related to teaching methodology
&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this work are tied largely to its potential
for improving assessment practice within chemistry. Both the Exams Institute of
the American Chemical Society and the ChemEd DL of the National Science Digital
Library are involved in this project and have large communities of users,
national in scope, so improvements made in assessment based on the findings of
this project are expected to translate to widespread usage within chemistry.
Because chemistry is a cognitive domain with multiple representations used to
understand many phenomena, the improvements of assessment instruments in this
field are capable of informing similar instruments in other STEM fields, thus
broadening the potential impact of this project beyond chemistry. This project
is data-driven, and therefore involves the collection of data that can be useful
in developing and improving rigorous models of cognition. &lt;br/&gt;