* 0817644
* RIG: Mosquito Circulatory System: Hemolymph Flow and Associated Immune Cells
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Julian Hillyer, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 07/31/2011
* USD 175,000.00

Mosquitoes are globally important organisms because of their role as a pest and
a disease vector. To date, mosquito control has been primarily via chemical
insecticides that act as contact poisons or fumigants that enter the mosquito
circulatory system by absorption through the cuticle or tracheoles. Another form
of mosquito control employs biological agents that can penetrate the mosquito
midgut and cause death by overpowering endogenous immune responses and causing
lethal septicemia. Given the important role of the mosquito circulatory system
in these processes it is surprising that it has gone virtually unstudied. This
research aims to functionally and molecularly scrutinize the mosquito
circulatory system and the immune cells associated with it. Objective #1 uses
light and electron microscopy to elucidate the structure of the mosquito
circulatory system and develop a comprehensive map detailing the direction,
rate, and speed of blood flow. Objective #2 morphologically and functionally
characterizes pericardial cells and sessile hemocytes that are thought to be
involved in phagocytic antimicrobial responses. Lastly, objective #3 uses
molecular methodologies to characterize a mosquito gene family that codes
proteins believed to be involved in phagocytosis of microbes. It is expected
that a better understanding of the mosquito circulatory and immune systems will
lead to the development of novel or improved pest control strategies. This
project also involves extensive training of young biologists (including
underrepresented minorities), and the majority of the work is being done by
graduate and undergraduate students under the direct supervision of the
principal investigator.