* 0817185
* Enhancing Student Learning in Introductory Physics through the use of Multimedia Learning Modules
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* Timothy Stelzer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2014
* USD 500,000.00

Physics (13) This project addresses a documented and persistent problem in
introductory physics instruction: Students taking introductory physics are loath
to read the textbook prior to coming to class and are unprepared to participate
in classroom activities aimed at refining conceptual understanding and promoting
problem solving skills. The project's Multimedia Learning Modules (MLM) for the
two-semester calculus-based introductory physics course incorporate established
learning principles from research on multimedia learning by combining animated
video with accompanying audio to engage students' auditory and visual working
memories which improves their mastery of the material. The MLM teach basic
conceptual knowledge and are used with Just in Time Teaching (JiTT) to improve
students' pre-class preparation, thus freeing up class time for other uses.

A pilot study demonstrated that the use of the MLM results in significantly more
student learning than the use of traditional textbooks immediately following the
lessons and that students retain significantly more of the learned material
presented via the MLM two weeks later. The gains favoring the MLM over the
textbook were sizable and statistically significant.

The impact of the MLM on learning are evaluated by developing a set of questions
that are administered to students prior to coming to each lecture both before
and after the MLM are implemented, and by comparing performance on secure final
exams both before and after implementation of the MLM. The materials are also
being tested at partner institutions that have a very dissimilar student
demographic profile from the students at the University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign.