* 0817701
* The Dynamics of Political Choice: the Third Module of the Comparative Study of Electoral Systems (CSES)
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Ian McAllister, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2012
* USD 404,272.00

There has been a significant increase in the number of democratic nations over
the last two decades. The Comparative Study of Electoral Systems (CSES) project
is especially well-positioned to study this wave of democratization. The current
project seeks support to complete the activities of the third module of the
CSES, and to plan and design the fourth module. The project encompasses the
coordination and leadership of the social science research efforts of
approximately 60 nations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Now over ten years old, the CSES
is a systematic cross-national study of comparative electoral behavior.
Theoretically informed, the project has the potential to transform the study of
comparative politics; it has become accepted as one of the principal resources
for scholars investigating cross-national public-opinion and political-
behavioral research. Involving the collaboration of more than 200 scholars, CSES
advances the understanding of enduring and fundamental questions about electoral
choice in ways not otherwise possible. CSES coordinates the operation of
approximately 60 national election studies across the world, thereby ensuring
that information about citizens' behavior and attitudes gathered at each site is
comparable. The goals of this unique research program are: to illuminate how
societal, political, and economic institutional and structural contexts, most
especially electoral institutions, shape the beliefs and behaviors of citizens
and condition the nature and quality of democratic choice as expressed through
popular elections; to understand the nature of political and social divisions
and alignments; and to shed light on how citizens living under diverse political
arrangements evaluate democratic institutions and
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CSES has broader impacts for both the
academic and policymaking community. In addition to the survey data, information
about the institutional arrangements and other social-, political-, and
economic-contextual conditions that characterize each participating country are
also collected, again in comparable form. CSES designs, receives, rationalizes,
cleans and checks, and merges all of these data, and then makes them freely and
immediately available to the world's scholarly community via the project website
at: http://www.cses.org. This public-use facility is a resource for comparative
researchers worldwide, and that is reflected in the large and growing number of
publications that utilize the data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Only through the kind
of comparative analysis that CSES makes possible, where comparable samples of
citizens are observed with comparable instruments under different institutional
settings, can the impact of institutions be properly ascertained and measured.
And only through genuinely comparative analysis can the merits and shortcomings
of different democratic arrangements be discovered. The output from the CSES has
policy implications for the design and implementation of electoral systems
around the world, as well as implications for the normative study of democracy.