* 0817263
* IMR: Development of High Speed SPM for Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,12/31/2012
* Bryan Huey, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 12/31/2012
* USD 311,111.00

Technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scanning Probe Microscopy has advanced
tremendously in the 25 years since its invention except in one crucial
category?speed. To address this limitation high speed surface property mapping
(HSSPM) will be developed, allowing continuous image acquisition at rates up to
10 frames per second (&gt;1000x improvement over standard systems). Based on a
commercial atomic force microscope and standard test and measurement hardware,
this method employs recent advances with cantilever contact resonances and high
speed data acquisition for nanoscale amplitude and phase contrast at tip
velocities approaching one cm/sec. Initial applications during development
include previously impractical large area scanning on high temperature alloys
and integrated circuits, as well as surface dynamics studies such as
ferroelectric domain nucleation and growth mechanisms and kinetics. These
enhanced capabilities will be openly available as part of a campus user facility
already leveraged by more than 50 academic and industrial researchers.
Furthermore, HSSPM is readily transferrable elsewhere as it is compatible with
both legacy and next generation SPM systems. The enhanced interactivity of high
speed SPM imaging will feature in new outreach activities for undergraduates,
high school teachers, and high school students, particularly targeting youth
from underrepresented groups in science and engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lay abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scanning
Probe Microscopy has been an enabling tool for nanotechnology over the past 25
years, providing the capability to measure and manipulate materials with
nanoscale resolution. However, slow operating speeds remain a crucial limitation
for more widespread application, typically requiring 4 minutes or more per
image. In this work, a high speed SPM (HSSPM) with a several thousand-fold
improvement in imaging rates will be developed and installed in a campus user-
facility. This will allow nearly video-rate mapping of surface properties,
crucial for academic and industrial research requiring large area scanning
and/or rapid measurements on numerous samples. Significantly, HSSPM will also
enable previously inaccessible research on the nanoscale dynamics of materials
properties, including the influence of temperature on polymer composites
(increasingly common in automobile components) and ultimate read/write speeds
and densities for ferroelectric thin films (next generation data storage
materials). Finally, high speed imaging is especially interactive, and will
therefore feature in teaching and demonstrations for undergraduates, high school
teachers, and high school students, particularly to reach underrepresented
groups in engineering.