* 0817787
* The Role of the Nuclear Periphery in Chromosome 3D Structure
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Lindsay Shopland, Jackson Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 08/31/2012
* USD 498,481.00

The overall goal of this study is to determine how structures at the periphery
of the nucleus aid in the folding and organization of genetic information
encoded in DNA. Within the cell, genomic DNA is packaged and folded several
times to fit within a small organelle, the nucleus. This three-dimensional (3D)
folding further influences gene activity. Genes can be positioned close to each
other in the nucleus and "interact", even though they are far apart in the DNA
sequence. Genes also can be in contact with different nuclear compartments,
small regions within the nucleus with specific sets of proteins and specific
activities. Though critical for genome function, the positions of most mammalian
genes within the nucleus and the mechanisms that mediate their 3D organization
are poorly understood. The PI has assembled state-of-the-art techniques to probe
nuclear structures. These include fluorescent probes targeted to large regions
of chromosomes, mouse genetic resources, and new high-resolution 3D microscopy
to image the nucleus at an unprecedented level of detail. Using these tools,
this study tests the roles of candidate structures found at the nuclear
periphery in the 3D organization of mammalian DNA. One candidate structure is
the nuclear lamina, a network of DNA-binding filaments. This study tests the
hypothesis that the nuclear lamina plays a role in both DNA 3D folding and
associations between specific genes. This project also tests the hypothesis that
some genes cluster near nuclear pores, protein channels that span the nuclear
membranes and act as "gene gates" to the cytoplasm. Finally, to complement these
studies of nuclear structures, specific DNA sequences also are tested for roles
in nuclear periphery targeting. Thus, this study advances fundamental concepts
of genome architecture and has far-reaching implications for structure-function
constraints shaping genome evolution. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Studies of
genome 3D structure in the nucleus require an interdisciplinary approach, where
cell biology is combined with genomics, genetics, and biophysical methods to
visualize structures in the nucleus that are smaller than one millionth of a
meter. The PI is a founding member of the Institute for Molecular Biophysics
(IMB), an interdisciplinary partnership that brings together the genetics and
genomic resources of The Jackson Laboratory with the physics resources of the
University of Maine. This study specifically applies the IMB's 4Pi confocal
microscope to resolve structures in the nuclear membrane previously unresolvable
with the light microscope. The PI's interdisciplinary research program offers a
comprehensive approach to research and training. Her research is integrated into
core curriculum modules in the Functional Genomics graduate program at the
University of Maine. This graduate program provides education and training to
Maine students in genetics, genomics, and biophysics to prepare them for the
next frontier in biological systems research. Furthermore, this study integrates
high school and college students in The Jackson Laboratory's Summer Student
program, which successfully targets women and minority students and provides
them with an outstanding first research experience. Further developing our
understanding of genome structure and function also has broad-reaching societal
impacts. The public sector has heavily invested in whole genome sequencing
projects, and the proposed research program puts this investment into action by
dissecting the molecular mechanisms that take the DNA sequence and form it into
its active state in 3D within the cell. The knowledge gained from this study
will become key building blocks of the systems biology of genomes on a large
scale, providing a structural framework for how genes can physically associate
together and interact within the nucleus. Because genomic primary sequence
organization is similar in many organisms, findings uncovered here for 3D genome
organization are likely to apply to many species.