* 0817301
* RNA Polymerase: Mechanism of Action
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Ronald Johnson, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 07/31/2011
* USD 172,230.00

RNA polymerase (RNAP) is the key enzyme in the process of gene expression. This
project will address the mechanism of translocation of RNAP during elongation
and the mechanism for transcription initiation. The mechanism of translocation
is hotly debated. In the case of transcription initiation, it is the most
regulated step in gene expression. However, the mechanism for initiation and the
reasons for the greater rate of nucleotide incorporation during elongation
relative to initiation are unresolved. Stopped-flow kinetic studies based on the
intrinsic protein fluorescence of RNAP will be used to monitor conformational
events in RNAP upon the binding of different ligands, quench-flow kinetic
studies will be conducted to ascertain the overall rate of nucleotide
incorporation and stopped-flow kinetic studies will be used to monitor PPi
release after nucleotide incorporation. The results of these studies will
provide a detailed picture of the mechanism for translocation during elongation
involving conformational changes in RNAP associated with the various steps in
the process. A comparison of corresponding rate constants obtained during
initiation and elongation will allow identification of the step(s) that result
in the differential rate of nucleotide incorporation during initiation and
elongation. Moreover, the data will provide a detailed mechanism for nucleotide
incorporation during initiation. The results obtained in these studies should
provide new insight into the mechanism of action of RNAP.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the proposed studies will be the
exposure of a diverse group of young investigators to the scientific process in
approaching studies in the area of basic science. The group will include college
and medical students from underrepresented groups. Medical students will have an
opportunity to conduct basic research in the summer after their first year in
medical school. College students will be employed mainly in the summer months.
All participants will contribute to the scientific studies and will be
encouraged to try to develop their own ideas. They will use state-of-the-art
equipment and will be exposed to a wide range of techniques. They will present
their results in local and state meetings. Presentations at national meetings by
the students will occur whenever feasible. This program will demonstrate to the
young investigators that a career in science can be rewarding and fulfilling.