* 0817527
* Functional Genomics of a Dietary Shift in a Mammalian Herbivore: Creosote Feeding in Neotoma Lepida
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2014
* Maria Denise Dearing, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Inna Sokolova
* 08/31/2014
* USD 420,587.00

Principal Investigators: Dr. M. Denise Dearing, Dr. Kirk
Thomas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Number:
IOS-0817527&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: Functional Genomics of a
Dietary Shift in a Mammalian Herbivore: Creosote Feeding in Neotoma
lepida&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For mammals that consume plants, one of
the greatest challenges in shifting from one diet to another is the
detoxification of novel plant toxins. We propose to advance our knowledge of the
mechanisms used by mammalian herbivores by capitalizing on population
differences in the feeding behavior of the desert woodrat. Approximately 11,000
before present, populations of desert woodrats occupying what is now the Mojave
desert, underwent a major shift from feeding on a diet of juniper to that of a
natural invader, creosote. Populations of woodrats that currently live in the
Mojave have adapted to highly toxic creosote as evidenced by their ability to
ingest greater quantities of creosote compared to populations that have no prior
experience. In this project, the investigators will determine the underlying
mechanisms for this difference in ability to process creosote. The investigators
will use a combination of approaches from pharmacology and molecular ecology as
well as cutting edge genomics techniques. The investigators expect to find
specific liver enzymes that convey the ability to consume creosote toxins. The
differences in liver enzymes between woodrats may be valuable in explaining
differences among human populations in the metabolism of pharmaceutical and
nutraceutical compounds. This work will promote the understanding of how mammals
adapt to radical changes in diet after natural climate change. The data can be
extrapolated to predicting how woodrats will respond to current and future
climate change. One of the broader impacts is a contribution to scientific
infrastructure in the form of a transcriptome of a non-model organism that will
be available to other scientists. The investigators are committed to scientific
outreach and participate in one or more outreach events annually in the
community (e.g., science fairs, public lectures). The project will provide
cutting edge, interdisciplinary training for a postdoctoral fellow, graduate
students, undergraduates, summer high school students and for an assistant
professor from an undergraduate institution. Trainees on this project will come
from underrepresented groups in science, e.g., women and ethnic
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;