* 0817647
* Mechanics and Energetics of Muscle-Tendon Systems
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2008,07/31/2013
* Brad Moon, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 07/31/2013
* USD 284,015.00

&lt;br/&gt;Human and animal movements are often more efficient than expected due
to energy-saving mechanisms in muscles and tendons. This project aims to
determine how tendons affect the physiology (energy use) and biomechanics
(strength) of muscles. The tail muscles of rattlesnakes are good muscles for
understanding energy-saving mechanisms because they can sustain extremely high
levels of exercise without becoming fatigued, and they show very clear
relationships among anatomy, mechanics, and physiology. Similarly, the muscle-
tendon networks along the snake spine are a good model because their complex
interactions via tendons actively modulate force and work. One set of
experiments will use the tail shaker muscles of rattlesnakes to test the
hypothesis that muscles lacking tendons use significantly more energy than
muscles that have long tendons. Similar predictions have been made for
locomotion in humans and other animals, but cannot be tested in their muscles
because the presence of diverse muscle fiber types makes it difficult to sort
out the effects of tendon anatomy from those of muscle physiology (fiber type).
This problem is circumvented by studying the muscles in snake tails, because all
of the muscles have the same fiber type. A second set of experiments using
muscles along the spine of the snake will test the hypothesis that muscular
interconnections via long tendons enable the muscles to generate higher forces
and use less energy than do muscles with short or no tendons. These results will
help explain how muscle-tendon interactions actively modulate force output and
energy use. Overall, this work will be important for understanding: (1) the
factors that limit or enhance exercise performance in humans and other animals,
(2) how complex and poorly understood muscle-tendon systems work, such as those
in the human hand, and (3) how to design flexible robots and control their
movements, for use in automation, search-and-rescue operations, and other
applications. This work will also enhance mentorship and scientific training of
students from underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;