* 0817678
* Investigation of Inductive Mechanisms in Arthropod Germ Line Specification: Analysing The Role of Dpp Signaling
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2008,12/31/2012
* Cassandra Extavour, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 12/31/2012
* USD 387,841.00

Germ cells are the cells responsible for making eggs and sperm in
all&lt;br/&gt;multicellular, sexually reproducing animals. Because they are one
of the most&lt;br/&gt;important cell types, it is important to understand not
only the genes that&lt;br/&gt;control their development, but also their
evolutionary history. Early&lt;br/&gt;multicellular animals probably did not
have a dedicated group of germ cells,&lt;br/&gt;but rather used stem cells to
make eggs and sperm. This means that the&lt;br/&gt;development of a dedicated
group of cells responsible for reproduction can be&lt;br/&gt;considered an
evolutionary novelty. This problem will be examined with&lt;br/&gt;comparative
developmental genetics. Probably the first genetic program&lt;br/&gt;used to
specify germ cells was that used in mice, which involves signalling between
cells. Fruit flies use a completely different genetic program,&lt;br/&gt;raising
the question of whether or not the fruit fly program is representative of all
arthropods (insects, crustaceans, millipedes, centipedes, spiders
and&lt;br/&gt;scorpions), or is specific to flies. Genes will be isolated from
both the mouse&lt;br/&gt;and the fly and their expression and function will be
studied to determine whether the inductive signals used in mice are also used in
crickets and spiders. This project will help to bridge a gap in our current
understanding of the evolutionary origins of germ cells, as almost nothing is
known about germ cell origin in arthropods besides fruit flies. It may also
provide the first demonstration of an inductive mechanism for germ cell
specification in invertebrate animals. The project will provide training for a
postdoc, a graduate student and undergraduate students. The PI is committed to
providing a positive role model for women and under-represented minorities in
academic science.