* 0817394
* Collaborative Research: Assessing Technical Entrepreneurship Learning in Engineering Education
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2008,06/30/2014
* Philip Weilerstein, National Collegiate Inventors and Innovators Alliance
* Standard Grant
* Don Millard
* 06/30/2014
* USD 262,341.00

Engineering - Other (59)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project, a collaborative
effort between the University of Pittsburgh and the National Collegiate
Inventors and Innovators Alliance (NCIIA), is building on previous work to
investigate the teaching and learning of entrepreneurship in engineering
programs and defining ways to measure changes in entrepreneurial knowledge and
thinking. The investigators are conducting a nationwide study to determine the
status of entrepreneurship education in 330 engineering schools across the U.S.
and to identify similar types of approaches using a clustering algorithm.
Specifically, they are collecting information on programs and courses in
entrepreneurship, other extracurricular learning opportunities and resources for
entrepreneurship, and the individuals catalyzing entrepreneurship education in
each context. With this data they are selecting a representative sample of 30 to
35 schools and performing an in-depth cross-institutional analysis of students'
learning in upper-level engineering courses that address entrepreneurship and
related topics. In doing this, they are administering two assessment instruments
that have been developed under separate funding: a knowledge inventory that
measures self-reported familiarity with entrepreneurial concepts and terms and
an entrepreneurial "mindset" rubric that appraises students' written responses
to engineering-based entrepreneurship cases. Through statistical and modeling
efforts, they are mapping student outcomes directly to teaching practices and
institutional characteristics. With these results, they are developing
guidelines for best practices in teaching, program development, and assessment.
Under the leadership of an independent evaluator, the project is using expert
analysis of the instruments and protocols, data modeling, and workshop
participation and survey data to conduct formative and summative evaluation.
Results are being disseminated through influential faculty and entrepreneurial
leaders in engineering using NCIIA's network, through journal publications,
through conference presentations for engineering education and entrepreneurial
audiences, and through faculty workshops. Broader impacts include the
dissemination of the results and the instruments and protocols, especially
through faculty workshops and the NCIIA network, and by helping to meet a need
in industry for engineers with entrepreneurial skills.