* 0817205
* Functional Analysis of Small Auxin Up-Regulated (SAUR) Genes in Arabidopsis
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* William Gray, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 08/31/2014
* USD 767,998.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;The plant hormone auxin regulates many aspects of
growth and development by modulating the expression of several hundred genes.
Among the most rapidly and strongly auxin-induced genes are members of the Small
Auxin Up-Regulated (SAUR) gene family. Although these genes appear to be present
and are highly conserved as large gene families in all plants, virtually nothing
is known regarding what role, if any, they play in auxin-mediated growth and
development. Using a reverse genetic approach, we have found that overexpression
of members of the Arabidopsis SAUR19 family containing N-terminal tags confers
numerous phenotypes indicative of perturbed auxin-mediated growth. In contrast,
overexpression of untagged SAUR19 results in no obvious affects on plant growth
and development. Dr. Gray's findings suggest that SAUR19 is a highly unstable
protein and the addition of an N-terminal tag to SAUR19 has a stabilizing effect
on the protein. Studies to date lead to the hypothesis that SAUR19 plays a
crucial role in auxin-mediated cell expansion, perhaps by functioning as a
regulator of auxin transport. The goal of this project is to understand the
function of SAUR19 and closely related SAUR family members in auxin regulated
growth. Both forward and reverse genetic strategies will be employed to
elucidate SAUR19 function, characterize SAUR19 interacting proteins, and
investigate the auxin transport defect of SAUR19 transgenic seedlings in
relationship to known components of the auxin transport
machinery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;Sequence and
expression analyses suggest that SAUR genes are present as large multigene
families in all plants, including mosses, monocots, and dicots. Virtually
nothing is known regarding the function of the SAUR genes. Since auxin plays a
central role in regulating many aspects of plant growth and development,
including several traits of agricultural import such as biomass, fruit set and
size, and root system development, elucidation of SAUR functions is essential
for understanding auxin action, and will be of broad interest. Additionally, it
is expected that this work will also contribute to our understanding of the
regulation of protein stability in plants and other eukaryotes. &lt;br/&gt;This
project will provide support for one graduate student and one postdoc, both of
whom will obtain broad training in genetics, molecular and cellular biological
approaches. Additionally, integration of original research and undergraduate
education is an integral component of this project. Dr. Paul Overvoorde and his
undergraduate students at Macalester College will play vital roles in this
project. Students in Dr. Overvoorde's courses will analyze the expression of
SAUR genes using promoter-beta-glucuronidase reporters and will assemble this
information into an online, searchable database that will be made available to
the plant research community. The creation of this database will be used as a
project-based learning assignment for Macalester students in computer
science/bioinformatics courses taught by the co-PI and his colleague, Dr.
Elizabeth Shoop. Additionally, one undergraduate student from Macalester will be
selected each year to work in the Gray lab over the summer months. These
students will interact closely with the PI, co-PI, and grad students and
postdocs in the Gray lab where they will obtain a valuable and unique research
experience in plant molecular genetics.