* 0817815
* Paleogenetics of Pleistocene Deep-Water Corals from the Mediterranean Sea: The Rise and Fall of Coral Populations within the Basin
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2007,01/31/2011
* Rhian Waller, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 01/31/2011
* USD 176,109.00

This project examines processes controlling deep-water coral dispersal through
time in&lt;br/&gt;the Mediterranean Sea, an area where many biogeographical
barriers to gene flow impede the entrance and settlement of larvae over time.
Until recently, only sub-fossil scleractinian Lophelia pertusa banks, reefs and
mounds had been conclusively discovered (dated as late Pleistocene, ~11,000
years ago). Current hypotheses contend that this, and many other, species were
isolated from thriving populations in the outer NE Atlantic by the Gibraltar
Sill, and that the Mediterranean acted as a refuge for deep-water corals during
the stresses of the Pleistocene, later becoming cut off by oceanographic
conditions, and eventually dying out. However, in 2001 a thriving L. pertusa
reef was discovered in the Ionian Sea, leading to many fundamental questions
regarding the population dynamics and ecology of this species. In collaboration
with international scientists our proposed work takes advantage of novel ancient
DNA approaches on coral skeletons to investigate the genetic connectivity of
sub-fossil and live deep-water coral mounds throughout the Mediterranean Sea, as
well as their connection to the outer Atlantic Ocean, in order to enable us to
answer fundamental questions regarding the ecology and phylogeography of deep-
water corals in this region through time. This project will further our
knowledge of the population dynamics of both the Mediterranean region, and of
deep-water coral species and their reaction to the changes within the last
11,000 years. There are over 100,000 fishermen on 40,000 vessels that work
within the confines of the Mediterranean Sea. Over the last 20 years stocks of
many traditional fisheries in this area have been in rapid decline. With this
decline in traditional fisheries, a move to exploit deeper water fisheries
within the Mediterranean will occur soon, as already observed in the outer North
Atlantic. Deep-water corals are firmly established as an important habitat for
many commercial fish species, and in areas where deep-water fishing occurs (e.g.
NE Atlantic, New Zealand, Australia) damage from commercial trawlers is evident.
By providing essential information on the genetic connectivity, dispersal and
colonization of Mediterranean deep-water corals, this project will allow a
better understanding on these populations and allow for more informed decisions
on designating marine protected areas. Results from this study will also be
provided to the HMAP (The History of Marine Animal Populations) and FMAP (Future
of Marine Animal Populations) projects, two of the major elements of the Census
of Marine Life (CoML) program. This information will also provide insight into
the role of climate on historic coral populations, and improve predictive models
of population responses to future climate change. &lt;br/&gt;