* 0817265
* Collaborative Research:  Improving the Geoscience Major:  Developing Community Expertise in Curriculum Design and Assessment
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* P. Geoffrey Feiss, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* David Matty
* 08/31/2010
* USD 25,440.00

Geosciences (42) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a student point of view, the
ultimate goal of an undergraduate experience is the completion of a major - an
integrated course of study in a specific discipline. Curricular aspects of the
major are enhanced by departmentally focused co-curricular elements including
research experiences, community service, and informal social interactions that
together constitute the undergraduate program. While programs should vary
between institutions in response to institutional mission, student population,
faculty expertise, and local resources, programs could be strengthened
substantially through the application of educational research and the sharing of
expertise among the geoscience community. This project is grounded in previous
work defining characteristics of thriving departments. It enhances the design
and implementation of geoscience curricula and programs using three workshop
strategies: 1) a topical workshop focused on a single issue facing departments -
in this case strategies for evaluating departmental programs; 2) a dissemination
workshop for departmental teams showcasing successful strategies for addressing
a range of issues; and a 3) a visiting workshop program, offered in
collaboration with the National Association of Geoscience Teachers Distinguished
Speaker Program, that brings experienced leaders and a customized program to a
specific department. The web resources developed in association with the
workshops support further dissemination of existing strategies for strengthening
departments. The evaluation plan uses a longitudinal design to measure impact on
departmental programming on timescales from six months to two years and is
designed to determine the relative impact of the three models on the ability of
the departments to strengthen their programming. This effort will produce a
tested model for conducting national and/or regional workshops and related
supporting activities that help departments address important issues identified
as impediments to building a stronger department. This program addresses the
challenges faced in building strong geoscience departments. In addition, it
seeks to provide support for enhancing the ability of departments to review or
evaluate their departmental programs and build skill in effective program
assessment. This skill is both underdeveloped in the geoscience community and
critical to the collection of data needed to understand the impact of various
aspects of departmental programs as well as the entire curriculum on student
learning for all types of students.