* 0817552
* Estimation and Inference with Nonparametric and High-Dimensional Econometric Models
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Joel Horowitz, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2012
* USD 220,000.00

The research addresses three general topics: (1) nonparametric instrumental
variables (IV) estimation, (2) estimation with high-dimensional data sets, and
(3) imposing shape restrictions given by economic theory on nonparametric
estimates of demand functions. Nonparametric IV estimation is a promising new
econometric method that has received much recent attention in the econometrics
literature. The research aims at solving two barriers that stand in the way of
practical application of nonparametric IV methods in applied econometrics. The
first is finding ways to choose the tuning parameters required to implement
nonparametric IV estimators. The other is finding a way to construct confidence
bands for functions estimated by nonparametric IV. The second topic is extending
methods for estimating sparse, high-dimensional regression models in ways that
make them more useful for economics and other social sciences. High-dimensional
data sets are widely available in these fields. The statistical problem is to
decide which variables to include in a model and to estimate the resulting
model. Many existing methods for simultaneous model selection and estimation
were motivated by problems in genomics. They are designed to identify
empirically regression coefficients that are zero and estimate the ones that are
not. In social science applications, however, it is more likely that some
coefficients are "too small to matter," whereas others are "large." The proposed
research will develop methods to discriminate empirically between "small" and
"large" coefficients. The third topic is concerned with imposing the Slutsky
condition of economic theory on nonparametric estimates of demand functions.
Previous research has shown that imposing the Slutsky condition on a
nonparametric estimate of average demand greatly improves the estimate's finite-
sample performance and practical usefulness. The current research will develop
ways to impose the Slutsky condition on estimates of non-separable demand
functions. It also will develop ways to carry out estimation subject to the
Slutsky condition when, as often happens, the income data are interval censored
and, consequently, the demand function is not point identified.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first research topic is important because it relaxes
arbitrary assumptions that are frequently used in economic research, and thereby
enables investigators to achieve results that are more accurate and realistic.
The second topic is important because economic data often include many
variables. It is rarely clear a priori which ones are relevant to the questions
of interest, and decisions about which variables to use are often quite
arbitrary. The research will provide systematic ways to make these decisions,
enabling investigators in economics and other social sciences to achieve results
of improved reliability. The third topic will yield improved methods for
estimating demand functions. This is important for assessing the effects of
economic policy interventions, including changes in taxes and prices.