* 0817966
* Fluorescence Fluctuation Spectroscopy to Investigate Molecular Recognition Specificity
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2012
* Anita Corbett, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/2012
* USD 518,126.00

The objective of this project is to develop advanced single molecule
spectroscopy methods for quantitative analysis of protein-nucleic acid
interactions, as well as in their application to understand the physical
mechanisms by which the zinc finger protein Nab2 binds to nucleic acids with
sequence specificity and discriminates between single stranded RNA and DNA.
Protein-nucleic acid interactions control all phases of gene expression from
maintenance of the genome to RNA expression to translation and protein
synthesis. This project has two broad research aims: advancing fluorescence
fluctuation spectroscopy (FFS) methods as quantitative tools to investigate
molecular interactions; and applying these methods to investigate the
biophysical mechanisms underlying molecular recognition in the interaction of an
essential mRNA processing and export protein, Saccharomyces cerevisiae Nuclear
Abundant Poly(A) Binding Protein (Nab2) with nucleic acids. The methods
developed will be widely useful for molecular interaction studies. The projects
described here are the collaborative effort of the Berland (Physics Department,
Emory College) and Corbett (Biochemistry Department, Emory School of Medicine)
laboratories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will have a broad impact
through teaching and training opportunities that enable undergraduate and
graduate students to work at the interface between physics and biochemistry.
Importantly, these studies will set the stage for interdisciplinary learning
both in the laboratory and in the classroom. This work also affords
opportunities for interfacing with the community beyond Emory as both PIs
laboratories have a history of interactions with high schools in Atlanta through
hosting both students and teachers in the lab.