* 0817774
* Evolution and Functional Morphology of the Gills of High-Performance Fishes
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2011
* Jeffrey Graham, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 06/30/2011
* USD 270,695.00

Tunas, mackerels, marlins, swordfish, and sharks like the mako and great white
all share a common property, which is their ability and need to swim
continuously at fast speeds. This swimming requirement forces these species to
expend considerable metabolic energy, and because of this, they are frequently
described as "high-performance" fishes. This study investigates the functional
morphology of high performance gills, which must be able to supply sufficient
oxygen to power fish locomotion and also endure the structural rigor imposed by
the continuous "ramming" of water through them. This research project is focused
on determining what changes have occurred in the gills to both increase oxygen
uptake and provide the rigidity needed to withstand the high-pressure
ventilatory water flow associated with fast, continuous swimming. Collaboration
between the Graham laboratory at Scripps Institution of Oceanography and the
McHenry laboratory at the University of California, Irvine provides the
expertise needed to examine both gill microstructure and fluid mechanics. Light
and scanning electron microscopy will be used to construct computational fluid
dynamic models of gill water flow. These models will be compared to in vitro
studies of water flow through the gills of different species and in vivo gill
studies will be conducted with mako sharks swimming in a large water tunnel. The
gills of these different fish groups offer a compelling model to examine the
breadth and detail of evolutionary convergence for respiratory function. The
study will bring a diversity of students into contact with purposeful,
hypothesis-based research and will provide additional knowledge on what many
comparative physiologists regard as the most complex animal organ: the gill. The
results of this research will be presented to the public through theme-based
K-12 education programs in mathematics and science at the Birch Aquarium in San
Diego.