* 0817653
* Defining a novel photochemical pathway for the oxidation of manganese by microbes
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Colleen Hansel, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2009
* USD 110,000.00

Intellectual Merit: While the oxidation of Mn(II) has long been recognized as
microbially-mediated, the role of bacteria in this process has only been
attributed to direct enzymatic mechanisms. Recently we have discovered an
alternative Mn(II) oxidation pathway, which occurs via reaction with soluble,
photo-active factors produced by bacteria during heterotrophic growth. These
findings introduce a new redox currency in the cycling of Mn and illustrate that
the pathways responsible for Mn(II) oxidation are more diverse than originally
thought. Here we propose to interrogate this pathway using Roseobacter AzwK-3b
as a model bacterium. Due to the numerical abundance, ecological diversity, and
geochemical relevance (e.g. DMSP degradation) of Roseobacter species in surface
environments, AzwK-3b will serve as an environmentally relevant model organism.
Furthermore, AzwK-3b is genetically tractable and the genome is now available
allowing for complementary studies on the genes and gene products involved in
light enhanced Mn(II) oxidation. The proposed research will address three
objectives, which are to (1) identify and purify the photo-active factor, (2)
determine the intermediates and byproducts, and (3) define the rates and solid-
phase products of light enhanced Mn(II) oxidation. Obtaining these objectives
will elucidate the intricacies of the geochemical reaction progression and the
environmental impact of this coupled biotic-abiotic process. The rates and
products of this pathway will be compared to other abiotic and biotic oxidative
mechanisms to determine if chemical and/or mineralogical (bio)signatures exist
that may aid in delineating the relative importance of the various Mn(II)
oxidative mechanisms in the environment. We predict that this research will
introduce a novel, ubiquitous secondary metabolite involved in the cycling of Mn
and the formation of distinct, reactive oxide phases within surface
environments. Information gleaned from this research will have immediate,
transformative impacts on our understanding of the cycling of Mn and provide the
foundation for future explorations into the diverse and complex world of
microbially mediated redox cycling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
broader impacts of this research are environmental, educational, and
professional in nature. The oxidation of Mn(II) has sweeping environmental
ramifications, impacting the transport of contaminants, degradation of carbon,
cycling of nutrients, and function of anaerobic-based metabolisms. In
particular, Mn oxides are among the strongest sorbents and oxidants in the
environment and consequently impact the cycles of nearly all other elements.
Passive Mn(II) removal systems are currently being employed to remediate metal-
laden acidic mine drainage from coal mine sites throughout Appalachia. As we
continue our current efforts to explore the applied aspects of light enhanced
Mn(II) oxidation, the research proposed herein will provide the mechanistic
understanding of this pathway that will, ideally, lend insight into how to
optimize these remediation approaches for peak Mn(II) oxidation and
sequestration of associated contaminants. The proposed research will involve a
cooperative effort by the PI, a postdoctoral scientist, and two undergraduate
students. The undergraduate students will play an integral role in this research
and will spearhead a portion of the experimental tasks while under the guidance
of the PI and postdoctoral scientist. This research will fund 3 female
scientists, which includes the PI and a postdoctoral scientist and undergraduate
student currently in the PI?s laboratory. Underrepresented groups will also be
the focus for the other undergraduate student recruitment. The postdoc and
undergraduates will be encouraged to present their findings in at scientific
meetings and local seminar groups at Harvard. The results of this research will
be further disseminated to the scientific community through publications within
high profile, peer-reviewed scientific journals. Lastly, this proposal will
support the work of an early-career faculty member and results of this research
will be integrated into the undergraduate and graduate level courses currently
being developed by the PI.&lt;br/&gt;