* 0817823
* RNA Polymerase III Transcription Factor Complexes as Chromatin Boundary Elements
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* David Donze, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2014
* USD 580,220.00

Intellectual merit:&lt;br/&gt;Within the nuclei of eukaryotic cells, the genomic
DNA is associated with a diverse array of proteins to form chromatin. The type
and form of these proteins can affect the structure of chromatin by creating
"domains" that are permissive to transcription into RNA (euchromatin) or
refractory to such processes (heterochromatin). The research described here
focuses on one of the mechanisms through which chromosomal domains are
established and regulated. Previous work established that tRNA genes (tDNAs),
with their assembled RNA Polymerase III (Pol III) protein complexes, function as
barriers to the spread of repressive chromatin in yeast. These results indicated
that Pol III complexes are involved in demarcating the boundaries of chromosomal
domains. In this project, the idea that Pol III genes serve as general genomic
boundaries will be further tested and the molecular basis determined. Recent
data suggests that, in addition to preventing the spread of repressive
chromatin, Pol III complexes also act as insulators, in that they can prevent
activation of a promoter by an enhancer. This project will also test hypotheses
to explain the mechanism that allows Pol III complexes to function as boundary
elements. Specifically, effects on positioning of nucleosomes and on sub-nuclear
localization of the chromatin bound to Pol III will be examined. Finally, the
research will evaluate which proteins of the Pol III complex are necessary and
sufficient for such functions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts&lt;br/&gt;From a scientific perspective, the significance of this study
is to determine whether tDNAs have a general extra-transcriptional function as
insulators in yeast, which may have far-reaching implications in the regulation
of gene expression in other eukaryotes. In addition to direct scientific
advancement, the research will have a significant impact in education, allowing
the training of graduate students, and the nurturing of research interests of
promising undergraduates.