* 0817545
* Disseminating Scientific Teaching
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Jo Handelsman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Maura Borrego
* 08/31/2012
* USD 223,695.00

The Teaching Fellows Program at the University of Wisconsin, the model on which
this project is based, provides an opportunity for future faculty to gain
experience in teaching and to learn about learning during graduate school or
while in a postdoctoral position. Each fellow enrolls in a course, "Teaching
Biology", in which the instructors model the core practices of scientific
teaching: active engagement of diverse students, regular assessment of learning,
and redesign of classroom strategies based on data collected. The fellows
experiment with their own methods and philosophies to achieve their own style of
scientific teaching. The participants then engage in development and
implementation of instructional materials, working in teams to design
instructional materials and assessment instruments, improve the materials
through an iterative process of review and revision, and teach them in
undergraduate biology courses. After substantial evaluation and further review,
the materials are disseminated on the web and in journal articles. The past 74
participants (55 of whom were graduate students and postdoctoral students) have
developed a collection of innovative teaching materials on diverse topics in
biology, which have been subjected to repeated peer and student review. Thus
far, the materials have been used to teach 1,500 students in biology courses,
and 17 "teachable units" have been posted online at the Scientific Teaching
Digital Library (http://scientificteaching.wisc.edu/materials).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br
/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The current project is developing a cohort of
postdoctoral students to become enablers of institutional change during their
postdoctoral and faculty years and then determining the outcomes of that effort.
As they participate in the existing Teaching Fellows Program at the University
of Wisconsin, the postdoctoral students are being given specific information on
how to run similar courses and workshops. The impact of the program on the
postdoctoral students, the professors in whose laboratories they are conducting
research, the department in which they conduct their postdoctoral studies, and
the department they join as faculty is being evaluated. The study includes 12
postdoctoral students who have already completed the program as well as three
cohorts trained during the funding period, providing a sample of 30 postdoctoral
students. Information from the study and the evaluation instruments being used
are being shared with other research groups studying postdoctoral training
programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This model program can be used
broadly to provide postdoctoral students with the training in teaching that is
needed to truly change college teaching and is a novel approach to helping
departments change their approaches to undergraduate education.