* 0817467
* Collaborative Research:  Exploring Student Understanding of Physical Chemistry
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Marcy Towns, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Grabowski
* 08/31/2011
* USD 87,133.00

Chemistry (12) The development of student understanding of mathematical
equations in physical chemistry is being investigated using an emergent research
methodology from mathematics education research known as Toulmin analysis. This
approach uses Toulmin's argumentation scheme as a way of documenting and
analyzing activities that take place in an interactive classroom where
discussion takes place. The approach is being adapted from mathematics, where it
has been used in differential equations classrooms, to chemistry, where it is
being used to analyze interactions among students working in Process Oriented
Guided Inquiry Learning (POGIL) physical chemistry classrooms. The findings are
expected to help explain the ways that students translate mathematical equations
and symbols into descriptions of macroscopic and microscopic systems, and to add
to the body of knowledge about effective pedagogical practices in STEM.
Instruments from physics education research are being adapted for physical
chemistry and implemented within the Physical Chemistry Online and POGIL
communities to compare student understanding of mathematical equations across
levels of mathematical preparation, and across classrooms where different
pedagogies are used. This collaborative project includes interactions among
researchers in chemistry, physics, and mathematics education research, thus
connecting and enhancing their work and creating a community of scholars who can
act as resources for each other and for those seeking information. Intellectual
Merit: This project is adding to the body of STEM education research by
developing new and revised models of how undergraduate STEM students learn. It
also promises to adapt and develop new methods for documenting the collective
activity of students in classrooms, thus offering researchers new techniques for
revealing the ways that students reason in classrooms where pedagogical
techniques such as learning in groups or teams are used. The study of student
understanding of mathematical equations in POGIL physical chemistry adds to the
body of knowledge about effective practices in STEM education. Broader Impacts:
Findings from this project can be used to challenge current classroom practices
and are expected to lead to new ideas for creating educational materials and
teaching strategies that have the potential for directly impacting educational
practices in STEM. While focusing on student understanding of mathematical
equations used in physical chemistry, the project provides an opportunity to
build community and connections among researchers in chemistry, mathematics, and
physics education. The results of the proposed work will be presented at
regional and national ACS meetings, the BCCE, the GRC on Chemistry Education
Research and Practice, the GRC on Visualizations in Science Education, the
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics, and the American Association of
Physics Teachers.