* 0817190
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Ethics and Practical Justice: Analysis of an International Criminal Tribunal
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Shea C. Mcmanus, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2009
* USD 14,500.00

City University of New York graduate student, Shea McManus, supervised by Dr.
Talal Asad, will undertake social science research on local responses to the
recently established Special Tribunal for Lebanon. In May 2007, the United
Nations Security Council passed a resolution mandating an international court to
prosecute those accused in the assassination of former Lebanese Prime Minister
Rafiq Hariri. It will be the first such court to have a subject-matter
jurisdiction framed with reference to domestic law in a case that falls under
the jurisdiction of Lebanese national courts. The researcher will examine
systematically how this court is interpreted in Lebanon, particularly by
influential religious scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher will begin
by conducting archival research on documents produced by about religious
scholars, to delineate key religious concepts being invoked in reference to the
tribunals. She then will conduct ethnographic interviews with religious scholars
of different viewpoints and institutional affiliations to understand how these
concepts are being interpreted and applied. She will identify the specific
problems that religious scholars raise about the Tribunal; the ways they think
about these issues in relation to doctrine and notions of everyday life; and how
they link practices ranging from prayer and community service to political
activism in relation to their interpretations of the practical aims and
normative assumptions of the Tribunal. In the final phases of the proeject, she
will expand her interview sample to include a wider field of clerics to test for
validity of the research's initial findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
is important because it will expand social science theory about local cultures
and international institutions, and how that relationship comes actually comes
about at the local level. The research also will contribute important
information about religious differentiations in an area of the world that is
important to the United States. Finally, the research will contribute to the
education of a social scientist.