* 0817253
* Preparing to Teach Mathematics with Technology (PTMT): An Integrated Approach
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Hollylynne Lee, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 08/31/2012
* USD 500,416.00

Mathematical sciences (21) This project is developing a model course of study
that integrates teachers' knowledge of mathematics, technology, pedagogy and
student thinking. The central course materials consist of two suites of modules,
one on Data Analysis and Probability, and a second focusing on Geometry that can
function as key components within larger teacher preparation programs. The
modules provide opportunities for prospective middle and secondary mathematics
teachers to develop: 1) deeper conceptual understanding of school mathematics
topics, 2) proficiency in using technology tools, 3) effective pedagogical
techniques, and 4) abilities to analyze students' thinking when using technology
tools to solve mathematical tasks. The intellectual merit of this project lies
in its alignment with calls from leading professional bodies, e.g. the National
Council of Teachers of Mathematics and the Conference Board of Mathematical
Sciences, that advocate for not just the blind use of technology in learning
K-16 mathematics, but for an understanding of its appropriate and effective use
to promote conceptual learning. Enhancing such understanding at the pre-service
level is thus an important strategy. Because of their modular design, the
materials exert a broad impact across different settings, for example: i) in a
methods course focusing on the use of technology in the teaching of mathematics,
ii) as a unit within a mathematics course, or iii) as part of a professional
development for in-service teachers. Developing faculty expertise is also a key
project activity and further increases the project's broader impacts by
preparing faculty at a diverse set of institutions to implement the modules and
form a national network of expert technology-using mathematics teacher
educators.