* 0817697
* Conference: Frontiers of Sexual Plant Reproduction III to be held in Tucson, Arizona, October 17-19, 2008
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2009
* Ravishankar Palanivelu, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P.  Jack
* 07/31/2009
* USD 8,000.00

PI: Dr. Ravishankar Palanivelu&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
IOS-0817697&lt;br/&gt;Title of the proposal: Conference: Frontiers of Sexual
Plant Reproduction III to be held in Tucson, Arizona, October 17?19,
2008.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant reproduction is important for human
existence. Nearly 80% of staple food of humans comes from seeds of crop plants.
Plant reproduction is also important to meet other basic human needs. Besides
the proposed conference, very few affordable opportunities are available for
plant reproductive biology scientists in the USA to review and discuss the state
of the art in the plant sexual reproduction research. Funding is requested to
cover partial costs of organizing a research conference in the field of plant
reproductive biology, ?Frontiers in Sexual Plant Reproduction III? to be held in
Tucson, Arizona, on October 17-19, 2008. Previous meetings in this series were
highly successful, nucleated a vibrant community of researchers and highlighted
a great need to continue organize this meeting regularly. Therefore, a third
meeting in this series is being organized to sustain previously established
interactions among plant reproductive development researchers and to stimulate
new collaborations to propel progress in this important field. Portion of the
funds requested in this proposal will provide travel and registration support to
participants from underrepresented groups, women and younger scientists (such as
graduate students and post doctoral fellows) so that they can advance their
careers in plant biology. Another portion of the grant funds will be used to
encourage and recognize scientific excellence among the student participants; a
committee comprised of three faculties will identify top three
undergraduate/graduate student posters for cash awards for salient findings that
significantly advanced the field. By providing a forum to many of the renowned
experts in the field, from the US, Europe, Australia and Asia, this research
conference will have immediate impact on the nation and world's agriculture by
providing knowledge in our pursuit to (i) improve seed yield, (ii) regulate
inter species hybridizations, and (iii) generate novel plant hybrids.&lt;br/&gt;