* 0817489
* IMR: Development of The Multiscope: An Array Microscope for High Throughput Microliter Rheology
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Richard Superfine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2011
* USD 443,251.00

Technical Abstract: The mechanical properties of biomaterials are important in
many areas of biomedical engineering and biology. For mechanical response,
important examples include the rheological properties of polymeric solutions,
biofluids and engineered tissue scaffolds. Although it is increasingly clear
that the mechanical properties of tissue scaffolds affect gene expression and
cell differentiation, rheological measurements are so tedious that they are
&lt;br/&gt;the primary bottleneck in testing a library of small molecules or
monomers. The recent development of high throughput screening (HTS) technologies
and the development of small molecule, monomer and protein libraries are
revolutionizing polymer science and pharmaceutical research. Similarly,
revolutions in combinatorial materials science have changed the way in which new
materials with tuned properties are discovered.&lt;br/&gt;Unfortunately, there
is a striking lack of technologies available for mechanical measurements within
a HTS or combinatorial setting. We will &lt;br/&gt;develop a rheology high
throughput screening technology that will use microbead techniques, both as
passive diffusive tracers and as magnetic bead probes driven by applied magnetic
fields. We target the rheological characterization of microliter specimens at a
rate of 100 per hour in a traditional multiwell plate geometry. This combination
will permit the study of the time course of rheology in polymerizing samples, in
engineered tissue scaffolds and biofluids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Public Abstract:
The mechanical properties of materials are of great interest in developing new
technologies. Two examples include new polymers for flexible electronics that
may enable "smart" clothing, and opportunities for replaceable tissues where the
stiffness of the gel determines whether new cells will grow and thrive. The way
that science discovers new materials has undergone a radical change in the past
decade. Instead of mixing up one chemical batch at a time, we have developed
"libraries" of chemicals, large collections of molecules that can be pulled from
the shelf to create new mixtures. &lt;br/&gt;These collections can contain
hundreds of thousands of different molecules. This means that we need new ways
to rapidly try each new combination to see if it will work. The technology that
will be developed under this grant uses small beads that are pulled through the
material to measure if the material is thick like honey, or flows like
water.&lt;br/&gt;Further, it will determine if the material is "springy" and can
vibrate in a &lt;br/&gt;manner similar to jello. The project expects that the
new system will speed up materials discovery by about 100, and allow us to make
full use of the broad range of molecular combinations available to researchers.