* 0817911
* Collaborative Research:  Plasticity, Selection, and Divergence in Stream Fishes of the Hawaiian Islands (RUI)
* BIO,IOS
* 11/01/2008,10/31/2012
* Matthew Julius, St. Cloud State University
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 10/31/2012
* USD 138,246.00

Differences in adaptive traits often correlate with environmental variation, but
can arise from two different sources: differentiation of genes, or phenotypic
plasticity, the capacity of a single genotype to encode multiple phenotypes.
Distinguishing between these mechanisms is a central challenge in evolutionary
biology. Hawaiian stream fishes provide a superb system for directly measuring
the evolutionary mechanisms leading to changes in form and function in response
to environmental variation. The five fish species native to Hawaiian streams are
all amphidromous: larvae hatch upstream but are quickly swept to the ocean,
where they develop up to six months before returning to freshwater. For three
species, returns require climbs of vertical waterfalls tens of meters tall
before reaching adult habitats. However, adult habitats differ strongly between
the oldest (Kaua'i) and youngest (Hawai'i) islands. Hawaiian waterfalls are
close to shore, placing a premium on climbing ability to escape non-climbing
predators; in contrast, Kauaian falls are far inland, placing a premium on
predator evasion as fish migrate upstream. Biomechanical models predict these
contrasting demands will select for divergent body shapes. This project is a
collaboration among a biomechanist, a population geneticist, a morphologist, and
an aquatic ecologist to test the hypothesis that natural selection has promoted
adaptive divergence in stream gobies in response to differing environmental
challenges between Hawai'i and Kaua'i through a combination of genetic
differentiation and adaptive phenotypic plasticity. A series of complementary
studies on the climbing goby Sicyopterus stimpsoni and the non-climbing goby
Stenogobius hawaiiensis will be conducted. Goals are to: (1) evaluate
morphological divergence in juveniles and adults from several stream
subpopulations on Hawai'i and Kaua'i, and test for correlations with
environmental differences in streams; (2) evaluate the strength of selection
imposed on gobies by climbing and predation, and test for performance
differences between populations from Hawai'i and Kaua'i; (3) evaluate neutral
genetic divergence in juvenile and adult S. stimpsoni and S. hawaiiensis from
several streams on Hawai'i and Kaua'i, and test for differential patterns of
gene flow in these species; (4) conduct common garden predator exposure
experiments to evaluate levels of genetically based local adaptation and
environmentally induced phenotypic plasticity among island subpopulations. This
work will provide a model for research on the interactive mechanisms promoting
the evolution of organismal form and function in response to environment. This
project involves collaboration of research-focused (Clemson) and teaching-
centered (St. Cloud State) institutions, and will promote integrative training
in genetics, morphology, and functional biology for both undergraduate and
graduate students, including local interns with the Hawai'i Division of Aquatic
Resources (DAR). Cooperation with the DAR will inform water management decisions
so that detrimental impacts of human stream use can be limited in Hawai'i,
helping to protect these endemic freshwater fishes.