* 0817717
* Synaptic integration and firing patterns of the midbrain dopaminergic neuron
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Alexey Kuznetsov, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2011
* USD 199,999.00

This project involves computational and mathematical studies to elucidate signal
processing performed by the midbrain dopaminergic (DA) neuron. The central
dopamine system has implications in many behavioral and cognitive tasks. A high-
frequency response of the DA neuron is one of a few cellular events for which a
clear physiological meaning has been proposed, and an immediate behavioral
implication is the main determinant for great interest in properties of this
cell. In a two-compartmental model of the DA cell, the canard and singular
perturbation analysis will be applied to the bifurcation transition that
corresponds to the onset of high-frequency oscillations. Timescale separations
will be introduced to make the analysis possible. Then, the accuracy of proposed
asymptotic approximations will be evaluated by comparison with simulations. In a
morphological reconstruction, the investigators will reproduce distinctive
properties of the spike generation mechanism of DA cells: 1. Its dependence on
the subthreshold currents; 2. the contribution of active dendritic properties;
3. axonal initiation and presence of two components of a spike. Modeling will
combine data on identified currents. Functional criteria will be applied to
validate the model. Using the constructed model, synaptic integration properties
of the DA neuron will be identified. Attenuation properties for a single spike
and spike trains evoked at different dendritic locations will be measured in
simulations. The dendritic tree is expected to be compartmentalized in such a
way that synaptic inputs at certain locations elicit only somatic or only axonal
spiking due to a significant spatial separation of the axon origin from the soma
in DA neurons. Additionally, compartmentalization of the neuron may depend on
the stimulation frequency because distal dendrites and the axon have much higher
natural frequencies than the soma. Synchronization of spontaneously-evoked
dendritic spikes and classical coincidence detection of synaptic inputs will be
addressed in the model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The above research will integrate
experimental data on firing patterns and spike initiation of the DA cell to make
conclusions about functional properties of the neuron. The project will open new
possibilities to move the investigation of various behavioral functions
involving the DA cells from the abstract to the biophysical context. It will
layout the groundwork for further experiments. In its analytical part, the
research will advance dynamical explanations to nontrivial biological phenomena
and contribute to the extension of singular perturbation techniques to the
vicinity of a bifurcation boundary. In the long perspective, understanding of DA
cell functions will advance the development of new therapies to cure numerous
disorders in which the central dopamine system is impaired. This
interdisciplinary study will promote the usage of mathematical and modeling
methods in biosciences. The models will be submitted in a public domain database
to be used for educational and scientific purposes. The project will involve
graduate students and postdocs, both through mentoring and by seminar
activities. The project has a potential for attracting female students and
scholars from biology to mathematical sciences, were women are
underrepresented.&lt;br/&gt;