* 0817221
* DDIG: Fluid Boundaries: Property, Conservation, and the Global in Andros Island, the Bahamas
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2008,02/28/2010
* Bonnie McCay, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 02/28/2010
* USD 15,000.00

Graduate student Sarah Wise, supervised by Dr. Bonnie McCay, will examine how
people negotiate ownership of contested space in a region undergoing change from
a regionally-managed commons to an internationally-governed protected area. In
2006, The Nature Conservancy, in partnership with other conservation
organizations, proposed the West Side National Park (WSNP) on Andros Island, The
Bahamas, changing the scale of institutional management from local control to
national and international governance. Using language as an analytical lens,
this research will explore how residents understand, practice, and talk about
ownership of and access to sea resources. There are three central objectives: 1)
to examine the emergence of institutions, including behavioral and legal systems
of governance, 2) to document how people engage with and talk about the area
destined for protection in light of changing legal and social conditions, and 3)
to investigate how people use language to negotiate ideas of ownership. During
12 months of field research, the researcher will employ a mixed-methods
ethnographic approach to document existing and emerging marine tenure systems
through archival research, participant observation, interviews, and
participatory mapping. Focusing on scientists, Androsian residents,
conservationists, and government officials, the researcher will create a
sampling frame of 95 individuals. Semi-structured interviews will be used to
document resource use, access and ownership patterns, decision-making processes,
and the perceptions of the WSNP. This project will extend social science
scholarship on protected area conservation and contribute to ongoing debates
about the social effects of environmental decision-making on the very people
relying on these resources. Results of this research will be applicable to
coastal communities globally, and will facilitate dialogue and greater
understanding of the relationships between social and environmental systems
concerning important marine resources.