* 0817484
* IMR: Development of an Atmospheric Vapor Jet Deposition Apparatus for Organic Optoelectronic Materials Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,02/29/2012
* Kevin Pipe, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 02/29/2012
* USD 250,000.00

Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;Organic semiconductors comprise a scientifically
and technologically important class of materials, in-tensively researched for
applications in electronic and optoelectronic devices. This class of materials
of-fers tunable electronic/optical properties which exhibit remarkable physical
properties, and can be depos-ited as high quality thin films on a variety of
substrates, including low cost glass and plastic, potentially enabling cost-
effective, large-area electronics and energy conversion devices. In the course
of research involving organic semiconductors, exotic molecules are engineered
and synthesized, and subsequently incorporated into devices. Unfortunately,
exploratory synthesis yields are often low (resulting in &lt; 10-3 g
quantities), and costs of device fabrication are high (&gt; $105 for equipment).
Moreover, the materials utili-zation efficiency of currently employed thin-film
deposition techniques is often less than 0.01%, leading to a range of practical
limitations on the pace of experimental exploration and increasing potential
health hazards to the researchers. &lt;br/&gt;To address these problems, we will
develop a Guardflow-enhanced Organic Vapor Jet Printing (G-OVJP) deposition
system that allows compact and cost-effective deposition with much higher (50%+)
source material utilization. The vapor jet technique employs a carrier gas to
deliver source molecules onto a substrate, increasing materials utilization by
bringing the sample into close proximity of a collimated source. The specially
designed guard flow shields the stream of the source material from the surround-
ings, thereby allowing the deposition to take place in a highly localized inert
environment, potentially enabling device printing in atmosphere. &lt;br/&gt;The
potential impact of the proposed work includes greatly reducing the cost-of-
entry for organic op-toelectronics research, facilitating cross-disciplinary
collaborations, enabling access to materials and mor-phologies not available via
existing deposition techniques, and an accelerated pace of discovery in the
realm of scientifically and technologically important organic semiconductors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;A relatively novel
class of carefully engineered organic materials derived from pigments is
becoming increasingly important in science and technology. The accelerated pace
and volume of research directed towards molecular organic semiconductors is
motivated in large part by the ability to span a vast range of properties by
means of chemical synthesis, and by the potential ability to cost-effectively
fabricate futur-istic devices (e.g. ultra-thin bendable displays, efficient
lighting wallpaper, plastic solar cells, health-monitoring devices, and others).
&lt;br/&gt;Unfortunately, present research activities are severely limited by
the high costs of processing equip-ment, waste of exotic new materials due to
inherent inefficiencies of the laboratory-scale processing methods employed, and
the serial and slow nature of experimentation imposed by the current crop of
processing equipment and methods. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research apparatus -
Guardflow-enhanced Organic Vapor Jet Printer - will increase ma-terials
utilization efficiency by orders of magnitude, free up laboratory space, reduce
capital costs, im-prove safety, speed up laboratory-scale fabrication and
testing of novel devices, and enhance scientific collaborations across
traditional disciplinary boundaries. The benefits of this proposed work will
extend beyond the research community, to undergraduate and K-12 education, by
providing greatly simplified and more rewarding hands-on experiences in science
and technology at the cutting edge of research in organic semiconductors and
energy conversion devices.