* 0817789
* Avian Flu: Modeling, Analysis, and Simulations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Robert Holt, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 07/31/2012
* USD 309,817.00

The relatively benign human influenza virus strain that infects many of us year-
round, albeit with seasonal pulses in frequency, can sometimes evolve into a
potentially deadly strain that is capable of triggering a pandemic. The three
recent human flu pandemics of 1918, 1957 and 1968--respectively known as the
"Spanish flu", "Asian flu", and "Hong Kong flu"--caused huge devastation both in
terms of the loss of human lives and consequent economic impacts. For each of
these, genetic evidence suggests that a novel influenza strain evolved from the
genetic recombination ("shift") of an animal flu strain and a human flu strain
within a common host species that was co-infected by these two strains. This
newly evolved strain had catastrophic effects on humans because of the absence
of natural immunity by the host to this strain. The recent cases of human
infection and death from avian influenza virus in several parts of the world,
and the fact that humans and other animal species (such as swine) can act as a
shared host to both avian flu and human flu strains, has raised concern that we
may face a near-term emergence of another novel and highly virulent strain, thus
another potential pandemic. Mathematical models provide crucial tools for
understanding and possibly predicting and controlling the emergence and
subsequent spread of novel pathogen strains. In this project we develop and
analyze mathematical and simulation models to study real-world biological
scenarios, in which there is co-infection of human host by avian flu and human
flu strains. We will focus in particular on characterizing conditions for
invasion and persistence of emergent virulent strains within human populations.
This project will significantly advance our knowledge of the transmission
dynamics and evolution of avian influenza from bird to human populations in
particular, and of multi-species epidemic systems in general. It will provide a
series of usable, realistic models that are grounded on available data. These
models can serve as a solid background for future extensions incorporating and
testing the efficacy of various control measures (such as vaccination,
chemotherapy, and social distancing) for pandemic influenza, and suggest avenues
of empirical study that are particularly important to pursue for disease
prediction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of technical approaches, this project
unites the efforts of mathematicians and biologists in developing models based
on integrated partial differential equations (PDE), ordinary differential
equations (ODE), and stochastic individual-based simulations (IBS), to study the
evolutionary epidemiology and population biology of avian influenza (AI). The
research goal will be pursued along two main directions. 1) The "drift" and
"shift" mechanisms of genomic evolution of an influenza virus will be
simultaneously incorporated within a multi-strain PDE model that then will be
used to predict the epidemiological consequences in a human population of an
evolved influenza variant -- a novel avian influenza strain with both high
pathogenicity and high human-to-human transmission efficiency. ODE versions of
this model will be fitted to available World Health Organization (WHO) data of
the cumulative number of human cases of avian influenza infection. Mathematical
analysis of the best fitting ODE and PDE models will then be carried out, to
rigorously characterize conditions for spread and persistence. 2) Complementary
individual-based simulation (IBS) models of a human population will be developed
on a small-world type network that incorporate explicit social interaction
(contact) neighborhoods of each individual, and stochastic processes of birth,
death and infection events. The pattern of flu outbreaks in these IBS models
will be studied with respect to the underlying network structure, and related to
the predictions of the corresponding ODE models. This will help elucidate the
role of stochastic factors likely to be important in the early stages of strain
emergence.