* 0817507
* SGER: Epitaxial Electrodeposition for Large Area Single Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2011
* Eric Chason, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Ardell
* 05/31/2011
* USD 176,186.00

TECHNICAL: In many thin film applications, single crystals have much better
performance than polycrystalline material. The long-range order, preferred
orientation and lack of grain boundaries in single crystals significantly
enhance material properties for many applications such as photovoltaics, high
temperature superconductors and magnetic information storage. In spite of the
benefits, however, polycrystalline films are often used because single crystal
substrates (such as Si wafers) are prohibitively expensive, limited in area or
difficult to work with. To make single crystal substrates available to a wider
range of applications, PI plans to develop a method that will enable free-
standing single crystal substrates to be fabricated inexpensively over large
areas. The process is based on a sequence of electrodeposition and etching steps
in which a sacrificial layer is first electrodeposited epitaxially on a starting
single crystal template, followed by a thicker final layer. The sacrificial
layer is then selectively etched from between the substrate and final layer,
releasing the final layer and making the substrate available for re-deposition.
By forming the initial substrate into a loop that can pass through sequential
electrochemical cells, the process can be extended into a technique for
continuous formation of a seamless product layer. In preliminary work, PI has
shown that electrodeposition and etching can be used to make small samples of
free-standing single crystal Ni; the resulting films have crystalline quality
that is as good as the starting template. However, significant research is
necessary to understand and improve the individual etching and deposition
processes and to develop equivalent capabilities for other single component and
alloy material systems. In addition, scientific and technological challenges
must be overcome to integrate these steps into a continuous process. NON-
TECHNICAL: The broader impact of this work will be in its effect on numerous
technologies. As PI?s processing method develops, PI will work with
collaborators in industry and academics to explore the improvements that can be
gained by using our material. In addition, this program will educate graduate
and undergraduate students, both in the science of electrodeposition and
epitaxial growth and by exposing them to numerous technologies where this
material can have an impact.