* 0817651
* Catalytically Active De Novo Proteins From Designed Combinatorial Libraries
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2008,01/31/2012
* Michael Hecht, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 01/31/2012
* USD 508,257.00

Intellectual Merit of the Research Project: A major challenge in Biomolecular
Science is to construct novel macromolecules that fold into stable structures
and catalyze chemical reactions. Significant progress in protein design has
occurred in recent years; however, most of that work focuses on the design of
individual proteins one-at-a-time. In contrast, this research project aims to
design proteins on a large-scale: The key goals of the research are (i) to
design vast libraries of novel proteins that fold into stable structures, and
(ii) to isolate from these libraries a range of de novo proteins that are
functionally active both in biochemical assays and in their abilities to support
the growth of living organisms. These goals will be achieved by completing the
following four specific aims: &lt;br/&gt;1) A high quality library of de novo
alpha-helical proteins will be designed and constructed. In contrast to
libraries reported previously, this library will be large (~10^9), nearly free
of error sequences, and dominated by stably folded structures.&lt;br/&gt;2)
Catalytically active de novo proteins will be isolated from this library through
the use of high throughput chemical and biochemical screens for several
different enzymatic activities.&lt;br/&gt;3) De novo proteins that accomplish
catalysis via a user specified mechanism will be isolated by subjecting the
library to screens and selections based on mechanism-based
inhibitors.&lt;br/&gt;4) Novel proteins that provide biological functions
capable of supporting the growth of living cells will be isolated using powerful
genetic selections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts Resulting from the
Research Activity: &lt;br/&gt; Basic Science: Successful isolation of novel
proteins that are active as chemical reagents in the test tube, and as
biological components of cellular metabolism will represent a significant
milestone in Biomolecular Design and Synthetic Biology.&lt;br/&gt;
Biotechnology: As practiced today, biotechnology is based largely on the
production of proteins for pharmaceutical, agricultural, and industrial
applications. Although biotechnology is touted as a key driver for future
advances, the protein products in use today are based on relatively old
technologies involving the cloning and production of natural proteins. Although
in some cases, these natural proteins are modified to enhance their suitability
for particular applications, current protein products are nonetheless easily
recognized derivatives of natural sequences. The number of natural proteins that
provide the "feedstock" of current biotechnologies is dwarfed by the number and
diversity of possible proteins in sequence space. This research project will
explore the functional potential of large collections of proteins devised de
novo, and thereby lay foundations for future technologies in which novel
proteins are designed, selected, and produced for specific applications.
&lt;br/&gt; Education and outreach: Students working on this research will
enhance their experimental skills, and learn to develop their own independent
projects. They will also develop an ability to teach, train, and mentor younger
and less experienced members of the research group. Interactions with industrial
collaborators will expose students to a variety of research options and
employment opportunities. Results of the work will be disseminated in the
scientific literature, and in presentations (by students &amp; faculty) at
national and international conferences.&lt;br/&gt;As the Chemistry Department's
Director of Undergraduate Studies, the PI has a special interest in encouraging
undergraduate research; 4 to 6 undergraduates are typically involved in the
research (including co-authorship of publications.) The lab encourages the
participation of underrepresented populations in scientific research. Of the 7
graduate students currently in PI's lab, 5 are women, and 1 is African American.
The research group is also involved in community outreach education. The
laboratory has a history of inviting high school science teachers to work in the
lab during the summer. Moreover, for the past 4 summers, high school students
from the area have done research in the lab under the mentorship of one of the
graduate students. The Chemistry Department has an outreach program that visits
local schools to teach hands-on science, and the PI's students are encouraged to
participate in this program.