* 0817827
* R67, The Other Dihydrofolate Reductase
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Elizabeth Howell, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2012
* USD 511,334.00

Abstract Intellectual Merit: Dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) catalyzes the
reduction of dihydrofolate (DHF) to tetrahydrofolate (THF) using the cofactor,
NADPH. Because of the pivotal role of THF in one carbon metabolism, chromosomal
DHFRs are targeted by many drugs, including trimethoprim. Bacterial resistance
to trimethoprim occurs; one mechanism is production of a novel, R-plasmid
encoded (R67) DHFR, which is not homologous in sequence or structure with
chromosomal DHFRs. R67 DHFR is interesting as it is one of the smallest enzymes
known to self-assemble into an active homotetramer. This DHFR variant possesses
222 symmetry and a single active site pore, which binds both substrate and
cofactor utilizing a promiscuous surface. Binding and catalysis in R67 DHFR
operate under Catch 222 conditions due to the symmetry in the pore, which allows
each binding surface to interact with either DHF or NADPH. Also any catalytic
group that might help catalysis will appear four times due to the 222 symmetry,
also suggesting a non-optimal active site configuration. From these and other
considerations, R67 DHFR appears to be a good model of a primitive enzyme. A
study of how this enzyme works will be undertaken using steady state kinetics,
isothermal titration calorimetry, directed evolution and other techniques.

Water has recently been found to play a critical role in R67 DHFR function as
there is a net uptake of water upon DHF binding, as probed by osmotic stress
studies. Requiring water to serve as a co-substrate results in the enzyme being
sensitive to water activity. This hypothesis is confirmed in vivo by the
decreased abilities of mutant R67 clones to confer trimethoprim resistance in
the presence of added osmolytes. To probe the mechanism by which water uptake
occurs, the effect of neutral osmolytes on free ligand will be examined.
Alternatively, to determine if osmolytes operate on bound DHF due to a poor fit
between substrate and enzyme, several mutations will be used to decrease the
pore size. To study any contribution of water reorganization on the enthalpy
change associated with DHF binding, D2O will be used as the solvent and
isothermal titration calorimetry used to monitor the thermodynamics of the
interaction. Solvent isotope effects on primary NADPH kinetic isotope effects
will be monitored to determine whether protonation is concerted or precedes
hydride transfer. As hydrostatic pressure typically results in increased
hydration, the effect of hydrostatic pressure on R67 catalytic efficiency will
be monitored. A specific role for substrate assisted catalysis will be probed by
modification of the carboxyl groups in the substrate tail. Finally, using mutant
R67 DHFR genes as well as an in-frame tandem array of four R67 DHFR genes, a
directed evolution approach will be taken to select for mutants with increased
catalytic efficiency and/or binding specificity. The results gained will detail
catalytic strategies associated with a primitive enzyme as well as provide
information on how enzymes evolve.

Broader Impact: This research project will provide undergraduate, graduate and
postdoctoral researchers with the opportunity to gain a broad background in
modern biochemistry and chemistry. This will readily allow them to secure future
positions in biochemistry, chemistry, structural biology, drug design and other
related fields. More specifically, the PI will continue to judge at local
scientific venues, including the TN Jr. Science and Humanities symposium and the
Southern Appalachian Science and Engineering Fair; these venues promote science
among middle to high school students and feature oral or poster presentation of
research. At the undergraduate level, the PI will continue to involve students
in research and include them as coauthors on publications. The PI has involved
minorities in her research program as well as a hearing disabled graduate
student. The PI will maintain her reading of science texts for Recording for the
Blind and Dyslexic. This proven track record will be maintained in the future as
well. Further, UT Knoxville does a good job of minority student retention, with
an overall retention rate of 60%, which is well above the national average of
35%.