* 0817561
* Collaborative Research: CCLI: Educational Materials to Enhance Chemical Engineering Curricula with Applications in Biological Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Claire Komives, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Don Millard
* 06/30/2013
* USD 253,266.00

Engineering Chemical - (53)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chemical engineering education
(ChE) requires a paradigm shift to address the needs of a modern industry that
is utilizing biotechnological approaches to create new products. For example,
biocatalysis and bioprocessing are increasingly finding application in the
chemical industry, requiring a familiarity with such concepts of entry-level
chemical engineers. Simply adding biology courses to the portfolio of ChE
undergraduate instruction is a compartmentalized approach that does not address
this deficiency because it does not present content within an engineering
context. Integrating appropriate educational materials throughout the ChE core
curriculum would help students acquire and reinforce the skills necessary to
apply engineering principles to biological, biochemical, or other bio-based
(bioX) processes. Such a transformation is currently hindered by the lack of
texts and other educational materials for integrating bioX into the curriculum.
The goal of this project is to create, collect, disseminate, and evaluate such
materials for the entire ChE curriculum. Specifically, the project creates new
learning materials and teaching strategies, develops faculty expertise,
implements educational innovations and assesses student achievement. The results
of this project will serve as a paradigm for other modern, interdisciplinary
applications to be integrated into a variety of engineering fields. &lt;br/&gt;