* 0817903
* Coenzyme B and Acetamidosugar Biosynthesis in Methanogens
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2008,12/31/2009
* David Graham, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 12/31/2009
* USD 320,000.00

Methanogenic microorganisms produce most of the methane gas that is released
into Earth's atmosphere. This methane is a potential source of energy, but also
a greenhouse gas and an agricultural byproduct, so controlling methanogenesis is
a priority for waste processing and biofuel research. These microbes require
coenzyme B (CoB) to catalyze the final reaction that releases methane. Therefore
inhibiting CoB biosynthesis would specifically impair methanogens. This project
will use biochemistry, genomic analysis and genetics to identify the CoB
biosynthetic pathway used by the marine methanogen Methanococcus maripaludis.
Homoaconitase (HACN), a key metalloenzyme in the biosynthesis of the thioacyl
moiety of CoB, will be purified and characterized to test its stereochemistry
and substrate specificity (Aim 1). This is the first purified iron-sulfur hydro-
lyase that catalyzes both the dehydration and hydration reactions that make
homoisocitrate. Experiments will test whether this enzyme can use all three
gamma-carboxylate chain length analogs that are needed to make 2-oxosuberate.
HACNs also participate in an alternative lysine biosynthesis pathway that is a
target for anti-fungal drug development. To resolve the subsequent steps in CoB
biosynthesis radiolabeled cysteine, sulfide, glutamate and threonine will be
used to trace the M. maripaludis pathway (Aim 2). These studies will identify
substrates, intermediates and cofactors required to attach the thiol and
threonine groups. Results from these incorporation studies will help identify
novel enzymes in CoB biosynthesis and sulfur metabolism. A report of an extended
CoB structure containing a uridine diphosphate disaccharide headgroup suggests
that CoB formation may resemble peptidoglycan precursor biosynthesis. To
determine the significance of this disaccharide in CoB, deletion mutations will
be constructed in three M. maripaludis genes implicated in acetamido sugar
biosynthesis (Aim 3). Besides probing CoB biosynthesis, these mutants will be
valuable tools for future research on biofilm formation and glycosylation in
archaea. This project is a model for combining comparative genomic analysis with
experimental methods to determine a complex biochemical pathway with novel
reactions.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. This project will train undergraduate and
graduate students to design and execute experiments in metabolic biochemistry.
These students have diverse intellectual, ethnic and geographic backgrounds.
This work also engages high school students through the Welch Summer Scholars
and SEED programs. Advanced graduate and undergraduate researchers gain
practical teaching experience by assisting in training new graduate,
undergraduate and high school students. By combining interdisciplinary fields of
genomics, enzymology, genetics, analytical chemistry and synthetic chemistry,
this research will provide a broad based and collaborative learning experience.
Methods and reagents developed here will be used to develop freshman research
initiatives to introduce new and underrepresented college students to biological
research. Results from these experiments will be used to create new questions
for a problem-based Biochemistry lecture course that the PI regularly teaches to
140 undergraduate students.