* 0817157
* IMR: Development of an Electrostatic Levitation Facility for Materials Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Alan Goldman, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2011
* USD 289,841.00

Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;A team of scientists and students at Iowa State
University, Washington University and the University of Massachusetts, Amherst
will develop an Electrostatic Levitation (ESL) facility at Iowa State University
that will allow measurements of the thermophysical properties (density, surface
tension, viscosity and calorimetry) as well as magnetic susceptibility and
electrical resistance (using a novel tunnel diode resonator technique) at
temperatures up to 3000K. The absence of a container or gas flow around the
samples allows the liquids to be supercooled, a feature that has already enabled
new high-impact investigations of the relationship between the liquid and solid
phase structures in metals and alloys. A portable chamber, optimized for
synchrotron x-ray diffraction measurements, will be constructed at Washington
University in St. Louis. These two complementary facilities will allow studies
of the development of short and medium range order in equilibrium and metastable
liquids to be correlated with changes in their thermophysical, electrical and
magnetic properties. The Iowa State facility will provide new information on
liquid-liquid phase transitions, phase-transformation kinetics during
solidification and their effect on materials processing, evolving order in
systems undergoing structural and magnetic transitions, the detection and
characterization of metastable phases and the influence of magnetic fields on
the solidification process. The ability to determine, in-situÂ¬, both the
structure and properties of these metastable phases, their formation with
composition and temperature, and their role in the formation or inhibition of
stable phases at lower temperatures, will add tremendously to our understanding
of stable phase formation in complex systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;General
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Liquid and glasses are around us everyday, yet in many ways
they are only poorly understood. Neither their atomic structures, the phase
changes that occur within them, nor their electrical and magnetic properties are
well known. For example, in 1721 Fahrenheit discovered a tendency for water
cooled to below its freezing temperature (a supercooled liquid) to resist the
formation of the crystalline phase, ice. Supercooling is now known to be
possible in all liquids. Why it happens, however, and what changes occur in the
supercooled state of the liquid before it crystallizes, are questions of current
interest. Further, the glass transition, i.e. how a liquid turns into a glass,
has significant practical consequences that have been recognized for thousands
of years. It allows, for example, silicate glasses to be worked and blown into
beautiful and practical intricate shapes. Like supercooling, the glass
transition is ubiquitous, but what underlies it remains one of the outstanding
problems in condensed matter and materials physics. A team of scientists and
students at Iowa State University, Washington University and the University of
Massachusetts, Amherst will develop a novel facility at Iowa State University
that will enable measurements of thermophysical properties, such as the density,
surface tension, viscosity, as well as electrical and magnetic properties, of
liquids above and below their melting temperatures. To avoid contamination
during the measurements, the liquids will be levitated in an electric field
(electrostatic levitation, ESL) and heated in vacuum. Taken together with a
sister ESL chamber, designed for x-ray studies of liquids, to be constructed at
Washington University in St. Louis, they will be able to correlate measurements
of atomic structure and physical properties, which will add tremendously to our
understanding of these complex systems.