* 0817187
* Phase II Expansion Project: The Next Generation of Practice Exercises for Computer Science I
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2008,08/31/2015
* Amruth Kumar, Ramapo College of New Jersey
* Standard Grant
* Michael Erlinger
* 08/31/2015
* USD 400,929.00

Computer Science (31)

The project expands the use of Problets (www.problets.org) in Introductory
Computer Science (CS1). Problets is an intelligent tutoring system providing
simulative feedback and customizing the problems and feedback to the learning
needs of the student. This project expands Problets in three ways: 1)
Development: Problets are created for the advanced imperative and object-
oriented topics typically covered in CS1 in C++/Java/C#. Additionally,
infrastructure is developed to provide suspend-and-resume capability to
students, cross-topic customization, and facility for instructors to adapt the
suite of Problets to the specific approach they use to teach CS1. 2) Evaluation:
The effectiveness of the newly developed Problets is formatively evaluated, and
summatively evaluated through the effect of using the suite of Problets on the
cumulative performance of students in CS1. 3) Dissemination: Workshops at
regional and national conferences are offered, expanding the current community
of Problet users and researchers.

Intellectual Merit: This project: 1) applies the proven effectiveness of
simulative feedback to help students learn programming; 2) proposes the next
generation of practice systems for programming, whose goal is to maximize
learning while minimizing the time and effort; 3) develops a practice system
that covers all the imperative and object-oriented topics typically included in
CS1; and 4) studies the effect of regular problem-solving practice on the
cumulative performance of students in CS1.

Broader Impact: The suite of Problets developed in this project has the
potential to affect learning and teaching in CS1 in the schools that teach with
C++, Java and C#. The results of evaluation impact educational practices on
issues such as the most effective features of practice systems and the effect of
regular problem-solving practice on learning.