* 0817537
* Impact of Professional Development Programs on Future STEM Faculty: A Mixed-Methods Longitudinal Study
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2015
* Ann Austin, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/2015
* USD 1,905,913.00

One key to transforming undergraduate STEM education is better preparation of
doctoral students who will become STEM faculty for their essential role as
teachers and mentors. Over the past decade, significant time and resources have
been invested in the development of numerous teaching-related professional
development programs aimed at enhancing traditional doctoral training at
research universities. However, little is known about the effectiveness of these
programs. This research study is exploring a critical yet understudied juncture
of graduate and undergraduate education: the preparation of future faculty for
their pivotal role as teachers of undergraduates who will become the next
generation of scientists, engineers, mathematicians, and science and math
teachers. This Phase III Project is building on four years of research supported
by the NSF-funded Center for the Integration of Research, Teaching, and Learning
(CIRTL). It is a 5-year, multi-institutional study that is examining the short-
and long-term effects of future-faculty professional development (FFPD) on STEM
doctoral students and their early-career performance. The study is addressing
six research questions: (1) What are the general characteristics of FFPD
programs, and which characteristics are most strongly correlated with positive
and negative participant outcomes? (2) What characteristics distinguish FFPD
participants from non-participants, and what encourages and discourages
participation? (3) What do doctoral students gain from FFPD programs that helps
prepare them for diverse academic careers? (4) What influence does participation
in FFPD programs have on the kinds of careers that STEM PhDs choose? (5) Does
participation in FFPD have impact on indicators of early career performance? (6)
What degree of investment in FFPD must a doctoral student make, and for what
length of time, to receive modest but significant benefits? The study is using a
longitudinal mixed-methods design that is following two groups of STEM doctoral
students from three research universities over five years. One group of doctoral
students who have participated in FFPD programs will be interviewed a total of
three times: at the end of their doctoral program; soon after taking their first
academic job; and in the third year of their job. A second group comprised of a
large randomly-selected sample of STEM doctoral students including both FFPD
participants and non-participants will be surveyed in Years 1 and 5 of the
study.