* 0817541
* IMR: Development of Near-Field Nanophotonic Scanning Microscope for Biomaterials Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Xiaojing (John) Zhang, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2011
* USD 247,072.00

Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proposal is to
build a novel near-field scanning optical microscope (NSOM), integrating a
scanning MEMS probe with a single-layer nanocrystals based light emitting diode
(Nano-LED) fabricated on the probe tip, for molecular imaging and patterning of
biological materials. The expected light source size is 5~10 nm, an order of
magnitude reduction from that of a current advanced NSOM. The emission
wavelength of the probe covers the spectrum from near-UV to the visible range,
with imaging resolutions well beyond the diffraction limit. The ?Nano-Light
source on chip? technology will open many exciting opportunities in biomedical
and industrial applications including near-field microscopy of sub-cellular
structures, direct material patterning, ultra high-density data storage, and
compact light-on-chip biosensors and
biochips.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed near-field imaging instrument will be
developed using a new class of scanning probes with nanoscale light emitting
probe tip, where the emission is well confined in a single layer of
nanoparticles (diameter: 5~10nm). Downsizing the integrated light source on the
probe directly leads to improvement of the resolving power of the microscope.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main benefits of the new instrument can be summarized
as: (1) the silicon scanning probe is mass-producible; (2) no external light
source is required; and (3) high optical resolution substantially beyond
diffraction limit; The near-field scanning optical microscope has been used to
explore nano-scale structures such as inorganic nanoparticles, organic thin
films, and biomaterials. We expect that the novel probe based microscope with
molecular resolution will be beneficial for significantly advancing these
applications. In addition, direct integration of light source on probe is highly
desirable to further extend the applications of the instrument into a compact
assembly in biomedical applications such as biochips or portable devices for
point-of-care technologies.