* 0817596
* Collaborative Research: Phase 3  Design, Implementation and Dissemination of Multidisciplinary online Java Digital Signal Processing (J-DSP) Materials
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2015
* cihan tepedelenlioglu, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 07/31/2015
* USD 1,022,777.00

Engineering - Other (59)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project, a collaboration
involving Arizona State University (ASU) as the lead institution, Johns Hopkins
University (JHU), University of Washington-Bothell (UWB), Prairie View A&amp;M
University (PVAMU), and Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology (RHIT), is expanding
the use of an award winning software package (J-DSP) and instructional approach
into a broad set of new areas including digital signal processing, earth systems
and geology, renewable energy systems, arts and media, ion-channel systems, and
genomics. Online modules are being designed, deployed, and assessed by a
geographically-diverse multidisciplinary team. This educational technology
provides free and universally accessible web-based Java software with an
intuitive interface that enables instructors to create web-based lectures with
synchronized online simulations and animations and to monitor student progress
and preferences. It allows students, including distance learners, to conduct
online laboratories and collaborate across disciplines, to perform simulations
anytime anywhere, and to collaborate online with their colleagues at other
universities. The evaluation effort is using self, peer, and instructor
assessments to measure the quality of student learning by adapting a set of on-
line assessment instruments developed on a previous grant dealing with a set of
signal processing courses. The project team is working to disseminate the
instructional materials by postings on the project's website and on a
discipline-based site (CNX.ORG), by links with the NSDL, by faculty workshops,
by conference presentation and journal publications, and by high school and
industrial outreach. Broader impacts include an involvement of two MSIs, an
outreach effort focused on minorities, multifaceted dissemination involving
faculty workshops and web posting on several sites.