* 0817615
* Genetic and Molecular Dissection of Hyphal Anastomosis
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/2008,06/30/2012
* N. Louise Glass, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 06/30/2012
* USD 540,000.00

Intellectual Merit Filamentous fungi are the primary degraders of plant
cellulosic material in the environment. Different species of filamentous fungi
are associated with the roots of almost all plant species in a symbiotic
relationship that allows plants to gain micronutrients from soil. In addition,
other species are disease causing agents in plants, or cause important human
diseases. All of these filamentous fungi, both beneficial and pathogenic
species, grow by tip extension, branching and hyphal fusion to form a hyphal
network. The formation of the hyphal network is believed to be essential for
transfer of nutrients throughout ecosystems by root associated and saprophytic
fungi and for colony establishment and exploitation of resources in pathogenic
fungi. Although tip growth and branching have been extensively studied in
filamentous fungi, little is known about the mechanism of hyphal fusion or the
function of the hyphal network. Live cell imaging and genetic analysis of hyphal
fusion in the model filamentous fungus, Neurospora crassa have revealed that the
process of hyphal fusion is a complex and carefully regulated biological
process. A large number of components essential for hyphal fusion have been
identified in N. crassa, including components of signal transduction pathways,
polarization components, filamentous fungal specific proteins and transmembrane
proteins. Hyphal fusion mutants show developmental defects, in addition to
slower growth rates and/or lag phase to reach maximal growth rate. These
observations indicate that the formation of an interconnected network in
filamentous fungi is essential for both exploitation of an environmental niche
and for developmental processes. The objectives of this research are to dissect
the process of germling/hyphal fusion using a combination of live cell imaging,
genetic analysis and biochemical tools to elucidate the mechanisms of self-
signaling, polarization and membrane merger with the ultimate goal of
understanding the role of hyphal networks in ecosystems, symbiosis and
pathogenesis.

Broader Impact: Hyphal fusion in filamentous fungi is comparable to cell fusion
events between genetically identical cells in other organisms, such as cell-cell
fusion resulting in syncytia, such as myoblast fusion during muscle
differentiation, trophoblast fusion during placental development and between
osteoclasts during bone formation. Thus, studying cell-cell fusion in N. crassa
provides a useful model for understanding molecular mechanisms of cell fusion
events in more complex eukaryotic species. This project provides excellent
training projects for undergraduate, graduate students and post-doctoral
associates. A number of undergraduate California Opportunity Scholars have been
recruited to this project; these students come from disadvantaged backgrounds
and low performing schools in the Bay Area.