* 0817212
* RIG:  Consequences of Drought-Induced Vegetation Change for Water Cycling in Desert Chaparral
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Louis Santiago, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 08/31/2012
* USD 174,923.00

The goal of this project is to determine which plant species in southern
California are most susceptible to mortality by drought and how their potential
disappearance could affect how much water is ultimately available for use by
humans. The evaporation of water from plants to the atmosphere is an important
part of the natural water cycle. However, evaporation is dependent on weather
and can be affected by extreme weather events, such as drought, floods, or heat
waves. This project is aimed at understanding how possible changes in vegetation
caused by climate change could affect the amount of plant water evaporated from
desert chaparral ecosystems of southern California. To understand the
relationship between plants and water, a combination of physiological
measurements of water in plants and mathematical modeling to predict how much
water plants evaporate over long periods of time will be used. This will provide
information on how plants affect water-related processes, and which plant
species are likely to be affected by extreme droughts. The project also creates
opportunities for students, attempts to stimulate interest in unique local
ecosystems, and will engage students in the societal importance of water.
Southern Californians are well-aware of water-related services such as
freshwater supply, flood protection, and recreation. Thus, the project is
designed to generate considerable interest among local students and produce
future scientists and leaders of natural resource management out of an
ethnically and culturally diverse student body.