* 0817337
* Collaborative Proposal: Expanding Evolutionary Studies in American Higher Education
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Glenn Geher, SUNY College at New Paltz
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/2011
* USD 211,387.00

Interdisciplinary / Multidisciplinary (99). "Expanding Evolutionary Studies in
American Higher Education" is a collaborative project between SUNY at Binghamton
and SUNY College at New Paltz. It involves further implementation,
dissemination, and evaluation of a model for incorporating an evolutionary
perspective throughout the undergraduate curriculum. The model is being
developed at SUNY at Binghamton, and will be expanded to SUNY New Paltz and at
least 9 other institutions during the course of the project. Elements of the
curriculum include an introductory interdisciplinary course entitled "Evolution
for Everyone," an interdisciplinary certificate-granting program in evolutionary
studies that can be completed in conjunction with any major, an
interdisciplinary seminar program that brings in outside speakers who provide an
evolutionary perspective to a wide array of topics, and a program for involving
undergraduates in community-based research projects. The model for dissemination
includes a small-grants program for participating institutions, campus visits by
members of the project team, and efforts at community building for the
consortium members, including the development of an on-line journal devoted to
undergraduate education in evolutionary studies. Project evaluation will include
extensive evaluation of how individual campus initiatives influence student
learning and student attitudes, as well as an evaluation of the dissemination
model. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project lies in its
innovative approach to a difficult and important issue in science education (the
teaching of evolution) by embedding an evolutionary perspective throughout the
undergraduate curriculum, and by developing an interdisciplinary program that
allows students from all disciplines to gain a certificate in evolutionary
studies. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the proposal include the
dissemination of a successful model for an interdisciplinary program in
evolutionary studies to a variety of other institutions, including community
colleges. These programs are having a broad scope reaching well beyond the life
sciences to include the physical sciences, social sciences, humanities and the
arts, and are impacting a diverse array of students. The project is also helping
to break down disciplinary walls by encouraging participation from faculty from
a broad spectrum of academic disciplines.