* 0817558
* Collaborative Research: Tablet PC-Based Indexed Captioned Searchable Videos for STEM Coursework
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2013
* Olin Johnson, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Jane Prey
* 07/31/2013
* USD 459,115.00

Computer Science (31)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project improves
access to information in videos by adding indexing, captioning, and search
capability. The project goal is to automatically generate enhanced lecture
videos, with logical index points, text captions, and keyword search capability,
and evaluate their usefulness in light of students' learning outcomes and life
situations in undergraduate STEM coursework across multiple departments and
institutions. Deployment and evaluation of these Indexed, Captioned, and
Searchable Tablet PC videos (ICS videos) spans more than 30 distinct courses in
Computer Science, Biology &amp; Biochemistry, and Geosciences at multiple
campuses. In addition, automated captioning can dramatically increase the
usefulness of main-stream videos for deaf and hearing-impaired students. The
accessibility of ICS videos is investigated with a local school for deaf
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Key features of these ICS
videos are: 1) Index points: Recorded video lectures have a list of logical
index points, each in the form of a snapshot representing a video segment; 2)
Text captions: The entire audio stream, including the lecture and student
interaction, is presented as text in a separate panel; 3) Keyword search: Video
segments that contain search keywords in the audio are displayed, sorted by
keyword frequency; and 4) Evaluation: A rigorous evaluation is conducted in a
range of disciplines with thousands of students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The software is publicly available and support is provided to any
interested educational institution. The project proposes a new and powerful
model for online delivery of STEM coursework. ICS videos have the potential to
make even more dramatic changes to distance education and education for the deaf
by making mainstream lecture material accessible. &lt;br/&gt;