* 0817737
* Analysis of the Function of NPH3 and the Role of CUL3-based Ubiquitylation in Phototropic Signaling
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Emmanuel Liscum, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Sarah Wyatt
* 07/31/2012
* USD 480,000.00

Emmanuel Liscum &lt;br/&gt;IOS-0817737&lt;br/&gt;Analysis of the function of
NPH3 and the role of CUL3-based ubiquitylation in phototropic
signaling&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plants, unlike animals, are unable to run away
from adversity (e.g., herbivores and drought) or toward their next meal (e.g.,
sunlight and water). Instead plants have evolved strategies that involve organ
bending in order to respond to changes in their environment. Dramatic, rapid,
and reversible changes in morphology can result from differential growth -
unequal cellular elongation in one position of an organ relative to an opposing
position. One such response is phototropism, or organ bending in response to
directional blue light (BL). Based on preliminary results and recent paradigms
developed in fungal and animal systems the investigators hypothesize that NPH3,
a protein required for normal phototropism that interacts with the primary
phototropic receptor phototropin 1 (phot1), functions as a core component of a
CULLIN3-based E3 ubiquitin ligase. They further hypothesize that ubiquitination
of phot1 by this complex leads to relocalization of the receptor from the plasma
membrane to endomembranes in response to BL, and that this is necessary for the
furthered progression of phototropic signals. This project is aimed at
addressing this hypothesis by: 1) characterizing phot1 ubiquitylation in
response to BL, as well as the role of NPH3 and a CUL3-based E3-ubiquitin ligase
in this response; and 2) characterize the influence of ubiquitylation on phot1
localization and phototropic function. Results from these studies will not only
provide important insights into the mechanisms by which phototropic signaling
occurs, but will also contribute to the blossoming field of CULLIN3-based E3
ligase study, which to this point has been largely dominated by fungal and
animal models. This project will provide theoretical and practical training for
one technician (female), at least one PhD student (female), one undergraduate
student, and two high school students. Genetic resources from the project will
be utilized in the PREP (Partnership for Research and Education in Plants)
program that the PI participates in to provide hands-on research experience to
high school students in Columbia and Jefferson City, MO. Insights into the
regulation of plant growth and cellular signaling resulting from these studies,
which will published in publicly-accessible and high-profile scientific
journals, will hopefully be integrated into current crop improvement programs
aimed at increasing economic and ecological aspects of US
agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;