* 0817282
* Collaborative Research:   Research and curriculum development in thermal physics
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2008,06/30/2015
* David Meltzer, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 06/30/2015
* USD 337,214.00

Physics (13)&lt;br/&gt;This project is a continuation of an ongoing program of
coordinated research and research-based curriculum development in thermal
physics, primarily in the advanced-level undergraduate courses. Data are
gathered using one-on-one student interviews, written pre- and post-test
questions, and multiple-choice surveys. The research is then applied to the
development of curricular materials intended to improve student understanding in
a manner consistent with active-learning methods previously shown to be
effective in physics instruction. Prior support has resulted in the development
of several interview protocols, diagnostic questions, and survey questions.
Project staff have identified several specific conceptual difficulties in
thermal physics, and have developed some preliminary curricular materials that
have been pilot tested at the home institutions to address these difficulties.
This project is adding to the existing data corpus and extending existing work
and products to new topics in thermal physics. Existing materials and materials
being developed during this project are being evaluated for their effectiveness
at addressing student difficulties identified through research. Ancillary
materials that integrate our curricular materials more fully into courses and
provide instructors with background information and assessment questions are
being developed. A set of supporting materials, including pre- and post-tests,
homework exercises, and a brief instructors' guide with background on the
content and our research findings as well as suggestions for implementation, are
being prepared. Materials are applicable to courses taught from a classical
thermodynamics and/or a statistical mechanics perspective.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With its sharp focus on upper-division courses, this
project is expanding the applicability of standard physics education research
methods already widely used in introductory courses. Results from this aspect of
the project are of great interest to the physics education research community
and to instructors of advanced physics courses. The dissemination of both
research results and of curricular materials in publications, in presentations
at national and international meetings of physicists, physics educators and
education researchers, and via pilot testing at participating institutions is
contributing to the improvement of instruction in thermal physics nationally and
internationally. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are additional interdisciplinary
components to this work. One focus of both the research and the curricular
materials is the connections between the physics and associated mathematics. In
addition, results of the investigations in physics courses are being compared to
the results from analogous courses in chemistry, engineering, and geological
sciences. The aim is to compare the prevalence and persistence of specific
difficulties or beliefs among these populations and to explore the extent to
which the different discipline-specific approaches and instructional strategies
affect student learning of thermodynamics.