* 0817753
* 2008 Gordon Research Conference on SALT &amp; WATER STRESS IN PLANTS, September 7-12, 2008 Big Sky, MT
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2009
* John Cushman, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Stephen J Tonsor
* 05/31/2009
* USD 15,000.00

The requested funds will provide partial support for a Gordon Research
Conference on SALT &amp; WATER STRESS IN PLANTS that will be held on September
7-12, 2008 in Big Sky, MT to advance, integrate and disseminate cutting edge
research results on plant responses to salinity and water-deficit stress. The
conference will highlight novel approaches to study and understand the genetic
and biochemical mechanisms and morphological and physiological processes used by
various model and crop plant species to sense and trigger adaptive responses to
high salinity and water-deficits. The award will cover, in part, the costs for
registration and travel to promote and enable the attendance of 15-30 U.S.
scientists at early stages in their scientific careers. Research results will be
presented via oral and poster presentations and discussions will be on topic
areas that include the identification and characterization of genes, proteins,
processes, and/or networks and systems that contribute to environmental stress
tolerance. Specific discussion session topics to be covered will include natural
variation and evolutionary context, stress perception and signal transduction,
transcriptional responses and networks, protein expression, modification and
interaction, metabolic responses, ion and water homeostasis, oxidative stress,
co-ordination of the whole plant response, and crop improvement for a changing
global environment. The Conference is unique in that it will foster synergistic
interactions and long-term collaborations among researchers from all over the
world who conduct abiotic stress research at diverse scales of organization
using molecular, biochemical, physiological, cellular, and whole plant
approaches. The broader impacts of the Conference include the promotion of the
participation of young, talented early career stage scientists, particularly
from underrepresented groups. Increasing temperatures and greater variation in
climate and precipitation patterns due to global warming are expected to
negatively impact agricultural productivity. Society will benefit from basic and
applied research exchange and discussion of strategies to design more robust
crops of economic importance for the food, fuel, and fiber security of the U.S.