* 0817976
* Nitric Oxide and Autophagy Regulation in Arabidopsis
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2015
* Janet Braam, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 08/31/2015
* USD 809,791.00

Robust homeostastic mechanisms are key to cellular survival. Cells must maintain
stable and optimal intracellular conditions for proficient enzymatic and
metabolic processes. However, a highly dynamic and often stressful environment
inevitably leads to cellular disturbances. Increases in cytosolic free calcium
and reactive oxygen species are examples of intracellular changes that result
from many environmental stresses. Cells have evolved mechanisms to use these
changes as second messengers. Calcium and redox sensor proteins perceive these
signs of stress and convey information that activates not only cellular and
physiological adaptive responses but also counterbalancing mechanisms to regain
cellular homeostasis. The Arabidopsis CML24 protein may be not only a
calmodulin-related calcium sensor but also a redox sensor. CML24 undergoes
calcium-dependent conformational changes and also has the potential to form a
disulfide bond in response to oxidation. Plants with mutant CML24 have altered
nitric oxide accumulation and autophagy regulation. Thus, nitric oxide and
autophagy regulation may be functionally linked in plants and such links may be
critical for cellular homeostasis. The roles of calcium and redox in CML24
conformation, stability, protein interaction, and physiological function will be
determined through biochemical, biophysical, and molecular genetic approaches.
CML24's role in nitric oxide accumulation will be investigated through
determining, in part, whether CML24 functions in an NOA1-, nitrate reductase-,
and/or mitochondria-dependent nitric oxide synthesis pathway. Autophagy will be
monitored to reveal whether CML24, and its calcium-binding ability and disulfide
bond formation, are critical for regulation. Nitric oxide accumulation and
autophagy mutants, in addition to cml24 mutants, will be characterized to
determine potential linkages among nitric oxide, redox, and autophagy
regulation.

Broader Impacts This research will address fundamental and important questions
about cellular stress perception and response and may bring transformative
insight into the roles of calcium, redox, nitric oxide, and autophagy in
cellular homeostasis. Such processes are critical for plant survival and
productivity. Knowledge derived from these studies should aid practices aimed at
improving agricultural efficiency and preserving natural environments under
stress. Through the involvement of undergraduates, graduate students, and
postdocs, this research will enhance the infrastructure of research and
training. Students supported by this grant will be encouraged to participate in
conferences and teaching opportunities. Training of women and students of
underrepresented groups will be a high priority. Outreach activities, such as
lab tours, science fair judging, and NSF Advance activities, will continue.
Research results will be disseminated widely through publication, conference
presentations, and websites. Mutants and transgenic lines will be freely
accessible to the community. This work also involves collaboration at Rice
University, across the US, and internationally.