* 0817224
* FIRSTIV:Faculty Institutes for Reforming Science Teaching for Postdoctoral Research Scholars
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2015
* Terry Derting, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 12/31/2015
* USD 2,009,996.00

This multi-institution professional development project for postdoctoral
scholars is shaping their beliefs about and approaches to teaching undergraduate
biology, to ultimately result in improved student learning. The project focuses
on creating a national network of 200 postdoctoral scholars who are prepared and
mentored in scientific teaching before they assume faculty roles in academic
institutions. The professional development activities explicitly link the
principles of scientific research with those of scientific teaching. Established
Regional Field Station (RFS) leadership teams are implementing professional
development workshops, providing mentoring in teaching and long-term support for
postdoctoral scholars, and advancing their own teaching and scholarship in
education. The postdoctoral scholars are learning teaching strategies and
constructing an entire biology course based on scientific teaching. They are
adapting pre-existing materials and tools that are learner-centered, and tested
and validated by other faculty. It is anticipated that the postdoctoral scholars
will begin their new faculty positions formally prepared to teach with a course
in hand. The project is evaluating the effect of professional development on
postdoctoral understanding and implementation of the scientific approach to
teaching and active student-centered learning. The new courses are being
disseminated through the FIRST web site and the FIRST Assessment Database, which
is linked to websites of the National Postdoctoral Association, the National
STEM Digital Library and scientific societies. The effectiveness of these
professional development and teaching reform models is being disseminated
through publications and presentations based on analyses of the postdoctoral
scholars in their original and new institutional positions.