* 0817144
* Process-Oriented Guided Inqiury Learning (POGIL) and Research-Based Pedagogy Workshops for Chemistry Graduate Students
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Christopher Bauer, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 09/30/2011
* USD 141,658.00

Chemistry (12)&lt;br/&gt;This project creates and implements workshops for
chemistry graduate students and postdoctoral associates in which the
participants are introduced to Process-Oriented Guided Inquiry Learning (POGIL)
and the supporting research knowledge base. The workshops are developed and
conducted by the PI, who is a current member of the POGIL Project steering
committee and an experienced POGIL instructor and workshop facilitator. He is
assisted by an experienced member of the POGIL network, and by a graduate
student with experience in working with first-year college students. None of the
current POGIL projects target graduate students or postdoctoral associates.
While POGIL is used as an organizing pedagogic structure, the workshops also
discuss other curriculum models such as inquiry-based instruction in general,
Peer Led Team Learning, and the use of technology such as "clickers" and tablet
PCs. The workshops are hosted at three research-intensive chemistry departments
and include up to 35 participants, including interested faculty. Host
departments are ones that have not already provided similar opportunities for
their students. Workshop participants are learning POGIL by doing POGIL from the
moment the workshop starts. They explore the model, its rationale, and student
outcome data; they explore extant POGIL materials used in college chemistry
instruction; they investigate a rubric-based process for assessing the strength
of POGIL materials; and they consider implementation in different classroom
settings. Through the POGIL project network and website, maintained at Franklin
&amp; Marshall College, participants have a means for staying connected and for
increasing their involvement. The workshops are marketed to PhD students and
postdoctoral associates in chemistry, particularly those who intend to seek
academic positions. &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is that it
brings chemistry graduate students and postdoctoral associates to a
consideration of how the cognitive and social sciences can inform chemistry
pedagogy. This is a scholarly approach to instruction which encourages potential
future faculty to assume a similar approach in their own teaching. Information
is being obtained through evaluation regarding the knowledge and skills needed
by future faculty, barriers to their professional development, and their
perspectives on the opportunities for becoming active members of a curriculum
network at an early stage of their careers. &lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of
this project is that the workshops are available to any graduate student or
postdoctoral associate at the selected institutions. The workshops enrich the
knowledge and experiences of those students, and link them to the POGIL project
through its database. The workshops increase the number of future faculty who
are poised to engage in research-based college instruction, and ultimately
should promote stronger student learning outcomes. As new faculty members, these
participants will be a resource for their departmental colleagues regarding
inquiry-based learning. The evaluation is collecting information about whether
these workshops plant seeds for future investments in this kind of professional
development within the host departments.&lt;br/&gt;