* 0817170
* Molecular and Genetic Controls Regulating Bacterial Arsenite Oxidation
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Timothy McDermott, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/2012
* USD 340,408.00

Unacceptable health risks associated with elevated arsenic concentrations in
drinking water supplies in the United States and epidemic-level arsenic
poisoning in countries worldwide (e.g. Bangladesh) have elevated national and
global interest in environmental processes controlling the mobility and fate of
arsenic in soil and water. Microbial biochemical transformations of arsenic are
critically important to controlling its transport, bioavailability, and toxicity
in nature. Bacteria will oxidize arsenite [As(III)] or reduce arsenate [As(V)]
for either detoxification purposes or to generate cellular energy. However,
understanding of the biochemistry and genetics underlying these transformations
is overly simplistic, particularly in terms of how microorganisms sense or
oxidize As(III), and thus constrains an ability to understand arsenic behavior
in the environment. Current studies indicate that two-component signal
transduction and quorum sensing co-regulate the aox genes that encode key
regulatory and functional activities essential to As(III) oxidation. The focus
of this project is to understand how the expression of the aox genes is
controlled by these regulatory systems, with the specific aims being to: i)
identify sensor and signal transduction components of the two-component proteins
AoxS and AoxR; ii) determine how the As(III) signal is perceived; and iii)
identify the quorum sensing metabolite(s) involved. In terms of broader impact,
the results of this study should be applicable to the field of environmental
health and are projected to be of value for guiding remediation efforts aimed at
manipulating microbe-As interactions in certain agricultural, mine reclamation,
and municipal water treatment settings. The research will also impact human
resource development by providing training opportunities for a Ph.D. student and
undergraduate research interns, with the latter targeting Native American
students. Furthermore, knowledge generated from this study will be integrated
into the undergraduate and graduate courses taught by the PIs, as well as at
participant-appropriate levels in education-outreach activities that involve
grade school, high school, and scientific-lay adult audiences.