* 0817858
* Knots in Washington: Conferences on Knot Theory and its Ramifications 2008-2010
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2008,04/30/2011
* Hao Wu, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 04/30/2011
* USD 97,971.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0817858&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Jozef H. Przytycki, Yongwu Rong,&lt;br/&gt;Alexander N.
Shumakovitch, Hao Wu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A series of conferences devoted to
knot theory and its&lt;br/&gt;ramifications will be held in 2008-2010,
continuing the "Knots in&lt;br/&gt;Washington" conferences held every semester
in the greater&lt;br/&gt;Washington, D.C. area since fall 1995. Plenary talks
will&lt;br/&gt;survey the state of knowledge in areas such as Khovanov
homology,&lt;br/&gt;Heegard Floer homology, and categorification of
existing&lt;br/&gt;invariants such as skein modules. Contributed talks and
periods&lt;br/&gt;devoted to interaction among participants provide
opportunities&lt;br/&gt;for graduate students and recent PhDs to be a part of
"Knots in&lt;br/&gt;Washington," and the organizers encourage students and
junior&lt;br/&gt;researchers to attend these meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Low
dimensional topology studies shapes of three and four&lt;br/&gt;dimensional
spaces. These dimensions are of particular interest&lt;br/&gt;to us because they
are the dimensions of our space and our&lt;br/&gt;space-time. Knot theory is a
subfield of low dimensional&lt;br/&gt;topology, which studies the knottedness in
our space. One of the&lt;br/&gt;main goals of knot theory is to distinguish
knotted objects. This&lt;br/&gt;is often done by means of the so called "knot
invariants,"&lt;br/&gt;functions that replace geometric objects, such as knots,
with&lt;br/&gt;those that are easier to compare. Over the past two
decades,&lt;br/&gt;there have been a flourish of new invariants in low
dimensional&lt;br/&gt;topology, boosted by ideas from gauge theory, quantum
algebras,&lt;br/&gt;and mathematical physics. The purpose of the "Knots
in&lt;br/&gt;Washington Conferences" is to bring together the researchers
of&lt;br/&gt;the field, including established mathematicians as well
as&lt;br/&gt;graduate students and recent PhDs, to discuss the state of
the&lt;br/&gt;art of the subject. The conference web page is&lt;br/&gt;http://ho
me.gwu.edu/~przytyck/knots/index.html.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;