* 0817836
* Collaborative Research:  Understanding Relationships between First Lightning, In-cloud Microphysics and Satellite-Observed Cumulus Cloud-top Properties
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Eugene McCaul, Universities Space Research Association
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 08/31/2012
* USD 118,579.00

This research focuses on enhancing understanding of the inter-relationships
between the Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOES) and
Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) satellite observations,
total lightning information, and polarimetric radar fields related to the
mechanisms that initiate lightning within convective clouds (so-called first
lightning). A hypothesis to be tested is that one can estimate the onset,
intensity and character of lightning events (i.e. the relative amount of
lightning expected, in terms of flash rates over time) in convective clouds
across a region. Lightning within convective clouds is far from ubiquitous, and
therefore considerable uncertainty exists as to why certain storms are prolific
lightning producers, while others nearby may not be. The project goals are: (1)
Perform basic research to relate GOES satellite-observed (infrared) convective
cloud growth properties to the character (intra-cloud versus cloud-to-ground)
and intensity of lightning in these clouds, and to the relationship to in-cloud
dual-polarimetric Doppler radar-observed microphysical distributions; (2)
Enhance understanding of convective regimes by describing the general
characteristics of lightning and convective cloud development as observed by
satellite and dual-polarimetric Doppler radar in various environments; (3)
Extend current ability to nowcast (0-90 minutes) lightning events using GOES and
MODIS. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The research will lead to an
improved understanding of the interrelationships between lightning, cloud
microphysics, and of satellite observations of growing cumulus. This research
will take advantage of an exiting meteorological testbed that includes dual-
polarimetric radar, lightning mapping array, GOES, MODIS and Tropical Rainfall
Measuring Mission (TRMM) observations, and a mobile radar. Density of lightning
will be correlated in space and time to graupel, freezing altitudes and ice
distributions (all inferred from polarimetric radar), and compared to GOES
cloud-top cooling rates as an estimate of in-cloud vertical mass flux, cumulus
cloud growth, and cloud-top microphysics. Insights into cumulus cloud
electrification, recharge, and lightning types will be subsequently developed
from this research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: A current CI
forecasting technique developed by the Principal Investigators is already being
evaluated within the Federal Aviation Administration's Aviation Weather Research
Program and the National Weather Service. The mechanisms, therefore, are in
place for this research to immediately impact a broad operational community. In
addition, collaboration with other university scientists and graduate students
will further extend this research to the larger academic and educational
community.&lt;br/&gt;