* 0817295
* MOBILE - A MOBile Instructional Laboratory Environment for Hands-On Computer Science Education
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2013
* Paul Wagner, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 07/31/2013
* USD 404,305.00

Computer Science (31)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a
mobile/portable software system for delivering hands-on computer intensive
educational workshops, including the areas of computer security and information
assurance. This project builds on a prior NSF CCLI Phase 1 project to develop a
laptop-based computer security workshop for computer science instructors. The
three major goals of this project are to (1) further develop a mobile wireless
computer network management system that can be used in a variety of security
education workshops scenarios and can be quickly installed on participants'
laptop computers from a portable storage device (such as a USB drive) given a
minimal subset of memory, disk and software requirements, (2) package this
functionality with an easy-to-use interface that can be used by content
developers and presenters, and (3) demonstrate the value of this system to
educators by presenting a mobile hands-on computer security workshop to
educators and teaching them how to use this system for their own workshops and
classroom. The intellectual merit of this project is the contribution of an
easy-to-use software system that allows for custom configuration and real-time
management of a computer network of virtual computer systems for educational
training, workshops and laboratories. The broader impact of this project is that
it promotes better teaching, learning, and training by allowing more realistic
and dynamic scenarios involving hands-on computer activities using flexible
computer network environments. This system is made freely available to educators
for use in their own environments, allowing them to develop their own content
and further spread the value of this type of environment.