* 0817767
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Dissimilation in Phonological Response-Priming
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2010
* Keith Johnson, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2010
* USD 1,020.00

A given speech sound is not always pronounced the same way. This dissertation
research investigates what factors constrain variation in pronunciation.
Previous speech research has identified many sources of variation in speech
sounds: speaker age, gender, dialect, socio-economic background, physical
differences between speakers, stylistic differences, psychological and emotional
condition, etc. All these sources of variation could easily make speech differ
wildly from person to person, but normally the sounds people actually say are
relatively similar from utterance to utterance. One common source of variation
in the pronunciation of speech sounds is the phonetic nature of nearby sounds.
Preliminary experimental results for this dissertation have shown that in some
circumstances, there are tendencies for a produced sound to be less like a
previously planned sound. This suggests that there is a cognitive mechanism
restraining variation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With NSF support, Mr. Tilsen will
conduct additional experiments in order to further investigate this phenomenon.
The experiments will address important details, including whether the cognitive
mechanism responsible for restraining variation is specific to certain types of
speech sounds, and whether the mechanism is specific to certain languages or
universal. These experiments will contribute to our understanding of speech in a
number of ways. Clinicians will be better able to recognize and diagnose speech
pathologies; speech recognition and speaker identification technologies will
work more reliably. Suggestive similarities between this speech phenomenon and
related phenomena in other domains of behavior - such as hand and eye movement -
will encourage researchers to look for deep principles governing all types of
movement, including speech.