* 0817978
* RIG: Invasion Success, Genetic Diversity and Habitat Fragmentation in Populations of Introduced and Endemic Weevils in the Galapagos Archipelago
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Andrea Sequeira, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2011
* USD 150,000.00

Unlike other oceanic archipelagos, Gal치pagos still retains most of its original
species, but ecological degradation is proceeding rapidly. As in many other
places, biological diversity of Gal치pagos is threatened by introductions of
exotic species and reduction of continuous suitable habitat. Studying a group of
closely related introduced and endemic weevils, this research investigates
processes that can cause introduced populations to evolve rapidly, aiding their
establishment and impact on native species. Additionally, it seeks to uncover
the effects of reduced habitat connectivity on native species. Molecular tools
will be used to assess the invasive potential of introduced populations and to
measure potentially adaptive variation in both introduced and native
populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The development of meaningful conservation
measures requires scientific information, which often is scarce. This research
will apply modern molecular genetic techniques to provide information needed to
prioritize conservation management actions. With understanding of the root
causes of the threats, the unique biodiversity of Gal치pagos can be protected and
restored. Gal치pagos is a potential model region for biodiversity conservation,
and effective management actions could be transferred to other less well-defined
and well-studied ecosystems. Additionally, the project contributes to
strengthening the work force of the future through high-quality mentoring and
research-based training of many female and Hispanic undergraduates.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;