* 0817703
* Calcium Dynamics in Exocytosis and Synaptic Facilitation
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2013
* Victor Matveev, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 07/31/2013
* USD 305,566.00

This project will use a combination of analytical, computational and
experimental techniques to gain a deeper understanding of the synaptic release
of neurotransmitter, termed exocytosis. It will address such open questions as
the precise sequence of steps linking calcium ion entry into the cell to
exocytosis, the involvement of individual calcium channels in neurotransmitter
release, and the mechanisms of transient calcium-dependent facilitation of
synaptic response, presumably caused by the accumulation of calcium at the
exocytosis site. More specifically, this project will focus on the impact of
intrinsic and externally applied calcium binding substances termed calcium
buffers on exocytosis and its facilitation, using mathematical and computational
modeling of calcium diffusion inside the cell. The importance of calcium buffers
stems from the fact that they absorb more than 95% of calcium ions entering the
cell; further, the sensitivity of exocytosis and facilitation to applied buffers
provides one of the most widely used methods to probe the intrinsic calcium
sensitivity of these processes. The first specific goal of this project is to
reveal the effect of such buffers on the cooperativity of individual calcium
channels in triggering exocytosis of a single vesicle, and to re-examine the so-
called calcium current cooperativity measurements that probe the arrangement of
channels at the release site. The second specific goal is to examine the
proposed non-local property of the buffer saturation phenomenon, whereby the
transient whole-terminal depletion of free buffer by calcium influx through one
group of channels may cause subsequent opening of the same or another group of
channels to produce a greater calcium elevation. Further, the competition
between two calcium buffers in their regulation of intracellular calcium will be
explored. Finally, this project will examine the possible functional
consequences of synaptic facilitation for the dynamics of neural circuits.

Neurotransmitter release at chemical synapses (exocytosis) represents the most
common form of communication between two neurons in any biological neural
system, including the mammalian cortex, and the knowledge of its mechanisms is
indispensable for a full understanding of inter-neuronal interactions and neural
information processing. Further, the regulation of neurotransmitter release and
binding to receptors represents the main pharmacological treatment method in
many neurological and psychiatric pathologies. The importance of this project
stems from its combined use of advanced computational tools and experimental
physiological techniques in gaining deeper understanding of the neurotransmitter
release process, known to depend on the action of calcium ions inside the cell.
This project will focus on the precise sequence of exocytosis steps starting
with the entry of calcium through cell membrane calcium channels, their
subsequent accumulation and binding to intracellular calcium-binding substances,
and ending with the calcium-triggered release of neurotransmitter-filled
vesicles into the synapse. This investigation should also lead to a better
understanding of other vital physiological processes controlled by calcium ions,
from gene expression regulation to muscle cell contraction in the heart.
Further, this project will involve the use and further development of a publicly
accessible computational modeling tool called CalC ("Calcium Calculator"),
designed by the Principle Investigator for the modeling of three-dimensional
calcium ion diffusion inside the cell (http://www.calciumcalculator.org). This
will contribute to the infrastructure for computational modeling in the
biological sciences and will also serve as a useful training instrument in the
fields of cell neurophysiology and biophysics. All modeling results obtained in
the course of this project will be made publicly available through the on-line
model database, ensuring the most rapid and effective dissemination of the
obtained results. Finally, this project will create student training
opportunities in the highly interdisciplinary fields of mathematical biology,
biophysics and computational neuroscience, including the training of students
from under-represented ethnic groups, since this work will be conducted in an
institution with one of the most ethnically diverse student bodies in the
country (NJIT).