* 0817775
* Copper Metabolism in Marine Synechococcus
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2013
* Brian Palenik, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 09/30/2013
* USD 480,000.00

Trace metal sample handling and analysis have led to the discovery that tiny
(nanomolar) levels of metals such as iron are having profound influences on the
diversity, abundance, and carbon fixation of primary producers in the oceans.
One of these important primary producers, marine cyanobacteria, have similarly
been shown to be affected, positively and negatively, by copper (natural and
anthropogenic) levels and may also be influenced by cobalt and nickel levels. At
the same time, cyanobacteria and other phytoplankton are changing the
distributions of metals and their reactivity through uptake, which causes
measurable depletion of metals in surface waters, and through the extra-cellular
production of metal binding ligands. Because of the importance of copper in
aquatic environments, the PIs will characterize copper metabolism in marine
cyanobacteria using model Synechococcus strains from oligotrophic environments
and from coastal environments that have very different metal physiologies
revealed by the whole genome sequencing projects. They will characterize how the
strains respond to different copper levels using whole genome microarrays that
probe the global response of the cell and will combine these studies with state
of the art characterization of intracellular metal levels and other measures of
cellular physiology and photosynthetic capacity. Molecular genetics studies of
diverse copper associated genes will be undertaken to determine their function
in the cell. Preliminary results have found a potential candidate for an
intracellular copper binding protein that is conserved in all marine
cyanobacteria. At the same time, preliminary results have found that coastal
cyanobacteria have greater resistance to copper than open ocean species and this
might be due to a novel copper binding or efflux system. The PIs will illustrate
the importance of copper in aquatic environments by developing hands-on lab
components that will communicate some basic concepts around metal
nutrition/pollution in the marine environment to middle school students. This
will be undertaken in collaboration with Aquatic Adventures, who provide
educational programs that connect underserved youth to
science.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;This research will reveal some of
the major mechanisms by which marine cyanobacteria have adapted to metal levels
in coastal and oligotrophic environments. Thus these results will help us
understand the distribution and diversity of these organisms in relation to
global primary productivity. They should lead to more robust biomarkers for
metal stress and pollution in coastal environments. The PIs will expand on a
previous outreach activity like their museum exhibit on marine genomics at the
Birch Aquarium, La Jolla CA, by developing hands-on lab components that will
communicate some basic concepts around metal nutrition/pollution in the marine
environment to middle school students. This will be undertaken in collaboration
with Aquatic Adventures, who provide educational programs that connect
underserved youth to science, inspire environmental action, and increase
exposure to marine habitats. In addition an undergraduate and graduate student
in the interdisciplinary field of the metal physiology of microbes will be
trained.