* 0817333
* NSWP:  Data-based Forecasting of the Geomagnetic Field with High Resolution in Space
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2008,11/30/2011
* Mikhail Sitnov, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Rachel Walker-Kulzick
* 11/30/2011
* USD 300,000.00

The magnetic field is a fundamental parameter that governs the structure of the
magnetosphere and its storm-time dynamics. Achieving its timely, accurate, and
reliable forecasting is one of principal goals of the National Space Weather
Program. It is especially important for the inner magnetosphere, where magnetic
storms and radiation belt disturbances occur, and where the capabilities of the
present-day first-principle models are most limited. In particular, the dynamics
of the magnetic field is a key factor controlling the radial transport and
acceleration of the radiation belts.

A recently developed technique based on an extensible model for the field of
equatorial currents that uses large sets of spacecraft data has been shown to
dramatically improve the spatial resolution of the empirical picture of the
magnetospheric magnetic field. Since the data accumulation, necessary for high
resolution in space, may be too long and smear out important dynamical effects,
a new nonlinear data-binning technique has been devised, where the spatial
structure of each state of the magnetosphere is described by fitting the model
to a local subset of data. It includes both the actual data obtained for the
given state and data from other time intervals (e.g., similar phases of other
magnetic storms), neighboring the present state in the space of global
parameters, solar wind electric field, geomagnetic activity index Sym-H, and its
time derivative. Initial results for magnetic storm structure and dynamics made
with the model are consistent with in situ geosynchronous data, IMAGE spacecraft
observations and the picture of field-aligned currents inferred from the Iridium
constellation data, indicating that the technique offers a powerful new way to
extract important new information on the storm-time currents and magnetic field
from the past events.

The goal of the project is to transform the present high-resolution model into a
fully-fledged forecasting tool by using the interplanetary medium data as the
only model input. Missing information on the state of the magnetosphere,
available in the current model through the Sym-H index, will be provided in its
forecasting version through a predicted Sym-H and through a more detailed
description of the solar wind and IMF parameters and their time histories. The
project will be done in three steps. First, the predicted Sym-H or Dst indices,
already available from existing global forecasting models, will be used as a
proxy of the actual Sym-H index. Second, a new data-fitting procedure will be
elaborated, in which only solar wind and IMF data are used together with their
time histories. Third, the new tool will be validated and optimized using in
situ data and the already available high-resolution model based on the actual
Sym-H index for the full range of storms. The proposed study uses the largest
assembled database of in-situ space magnetic field data and concurrent
interplanetary medium data ever compiled for empirical modeling studies, based
on 11 years of GOES, IMP 8, Polar, Geotail, Cluster, ACE, and Wind spacecraft
observations. When available, data from the new THEMIS mission will also be
added to the data set. The final product of the study will be a set of space
weather forecasting codes specifying the magnetospheric magnetic field with the
resolution in space of a few Earth radii and the temporal resolution up to
substorm time scales. To provide fast predictions the new codes will be
parallelized and tested on local clusters and supercomputers.