* 0817382
* Developing an Economics Pedagogic Portal
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Cathryn Manduca, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/2013
* USD 497,953.00

This project is creating an "Economics Pedagogic Portal" in order to provide a
single web-based source for all resources related to undergraduate economics
instruction. This broad Portal is being designed primarily for instructors in
economics. It assists instructors in learning about effective teaching methods
operant both within and beyond their discipline. In addition, it provides tools
to facilitate instructors in switching to more effective teaching modalities and
assessing how these innovative methods are working in their classrooms. The
Portal seeks to increase teaching economists' knowledge of fundamental research
findings from the learning sciences and illustrate how those findings apply to
classroom teaching to improve student learning. Building on past NSF investments
in pedagogical innovation in STEM disciplines, the Portal is being designed to
highlight a variety of research-based teaching innovations in STEM fields that
can be readily adapted to economics instruction to improve student learning.
&lt;br/&gt;This development work is being done in collaboration with the Science
Education Resource Center (SERC) at Carleton College and is building on the SERC
"Pedagogic Services" framework that makes pedagogical modules developed by SERC
partners (often through NSF-funded grants) accessible via a pedagogic database.
SERC provides an experienced support staff and a collection of services
including: content hosting and web site design, common templates for
developing/submitting module resources, expert technical support, workshop space
and coordination, and extensive experience developing comprehensive "teaching
commons" web sites that bring together a variety of National Science Foundation-
funded projects.