* 0817102
* Lab-in-a-Box:  Development of Materials to Support Independent Experimentation on Concepts from Circuits and Electronics
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2014
* A.A. (Louis) Beex, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Don Millard
* 07/31/2014
* USD 499,913.00

Engineering - Electrical (55)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project builds on prior
NSF-funded work that developed an inexpensive laboratory kit (Lab-in-a-Box) to
address the need for concrete examples in the normally lecture-based beginning
course in electrical engineering. The approach provides a set of "hands-on"
exercises in which students design, build, and test various d.c. and a.c.
circuits using an inexpensive electronics kit, digital multi-meter, and a
software oscilloscope outside of the classroom-laboratory setting. The current
project is responding to the investigators' observation that, in using this
approach, even the best students are often uncertain of their abilities to
properly perform experimental work. Thus the project's primary goal is to
instill self-confidence and improve self-reliance in the students when, for the
first time in their engineering careers, they construct a circuit with physical
components rather than symbolic parts and determine voltage drops and currents
in the circuit by direct measurement rather than by calculations. To accomplish
this, the investigators are developing multimedia learning materials that
support the pedagogical objectives of the Lab-in-a-Box and can be readily
accessed by the students as they work independently. In addition, they are
expanding the approach into the electronics course at the four-year institution
and incorporating it into simialr courses at a near-by community college.
Evaluation efforts are using student and faculty surveys, special performance
tests, and focus groups to monitor the project's progress with guidance from a
nationally recognized external expert. Instructional materials and results are
being disseminated through journal publications and conference presentations and
through arrangements with a major publisher. The broader impacts include the
dissemination of the material and the strong connection with a community
college.