* 0817857
* Methodology for Rapid and Precise Measurement of NMR Parameters: Development and Application to Study Protein Structure and Folding
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2015
* Thomas Szyperski, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/2015
* USD 987,962.00

NMR spectroscopy is widely used in science and engineering, but acquisition of
multi-dimensional spectral information is hampered by the NMR sampling problem
resulting from the steep increase of minimal measurement times with
dimensionality. Furthermore, NMR-based studies of biological macromolecules are
impeded by chemical shift degeneracy, in part resulting from comparably low
accuracy of shift measurements. The focus of this project is on the development
of methodology for rapid NMR data acquisition and data acquisition schemes
enabling one to measure NMR parameters more accurately. Specifically, the
objective is to implement a new line of "simultaneously cycled" or "slice
selected" NMR experiments to (quasi) simultaneously execute radio-frequency
pulse phase of flip-angle cycling, and to implement schemes to acquire spectra
devoid of dispersive line components, which impede accurate measurement of
shifts. This new methodology will be applied to solve protein structures in the
framework of structural genomics consortia in order to assess impact on semi-
automated data analysis and protein folding.

This new NMR methodology will broadly impact on the speed and accuracy of NMR
data acquisition in the scientific community. The PI will set up a web portal to
ensure efficient dissemination of results. This project is well suited to
educate young researchers in NMR-based structural biology, in particular in
advanced methodology development and application of NMR to study protein
structure and folding. The research will be conducted considering the specific
demands for comprehensive interdisciplinary teaching of young scientists at the
Departments of Chemistry and Structural Biology at the State University at New
York at Buffalo. The PI will offer undergraduate and graduate level courses in
Physical Chemistry and on the use of NMR in life sciences, and he will continue
to support research training of undergraduate students in the laboratory, in
summer schools and in colleges. This project is jointly supported by Molecular
Biophysics in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the
Directorate for Biological Sciences and the Experimental Physical Chemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate.