* 0817259
* RIG: A Landscape Genetics Approach to Functional Connectivity of Native Small Mammal Populations in an Urban Habitat-matrix Mosaic
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Jason Munshi-South, CUNY Baruch College
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 07/31/2011
* USD 168,589.00

Urban areas were once thought of as harsh, biologically sparse environments with
little ecological value, but urban habitat fragments can support substantial
wildlife populations. The degree to which wildlife can move between these
fragments (often city parks) is strongly influenced by the intervening urban
environment. This study will examine native small mammals (white-footed mice,
short-tailed shrews, and meadow voles) in New York City (NYC) as models for the
impacts of urbanization on the population connectivity and genetic structure of
wildlife. Novel genetic tools (computationally-intensive analyses of short,
repeating DNA sequences with high mutation rates) will be used in combination
with geographic datasets to determine I) how many evolutionarily-unique small
mammal populations exist in NYC, II) how long they have been isolated (or
exchanging migrants), and III) what types of urban land use facilitate or hinder
the movement of small mammals and their genes between urban habitat
fragments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; By identifying the types and degree of
urbanization that small mammals can withstand, this study will contribute to the
sustainable management of urban landscapes. This project has been designed to
maximize the participation and training of undergraduates that previously had
few opportunities to conduct ecological research. The Principal Investigator's
home institution, Baruch College, is the most ethnically diverse institution of
higher education in the country. The student body reflects the diversity of NYC,
and over 50% of Baruch students are the first in their family to attend college.