* 0817486
* Graphical Representations to Assess System Performance (GRASP): Assessment for Engineering Education
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Sean Brophy, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/2013
* USD 500,000.00

Engineering - Other (59) Assessment/Research (91) System literacy skills are at
the foundation of students' abilities to comprehend how a particular system
works, to identify opportunities to refine or repair that system, and more
generally to adapt to novel situations. Current instructional practices, built
on the assumption that basic mathematical and scientific inquiry skills must be
obtained before learners can model complex problems, often delay the development
of these skills. In pilot studies, undergraduate engineering students have
demonstrated the potential for approaching complex engineering systems. However,
they typically lack the tools necessary to comprehend these systems and to
notice the relationships between components that explain how and why the system
performs the way it does. This conclusion follows from performance-based
assessments that require learners to generate abstract representations of
systems. Performance-based assessment has long been emphasized as a method for
measuring and developing both cognitive and meta-cognitive skills of learners.
Because the cost of implementing performance-based assessment is high, the goal
of this proposal is to construct an automated dynamic formative assessment
environment that develops and measures students' ability to represent, identify,
and explain solutions to complex problems. This system is called: "Graphical
Representations to Assess System Performance" (GRASP). The design of GRASP is
being shaped by ongoing research on evaluating students' conceptual
understanding of complex systems. In addition, the project is developing methods
for defining engineering problems into epistemic forms and rules. These forms
and rules provide a representational structure that can be used to reliably
evaluate students' work and provide meaningful feedback during practice session.

Intellectual merit: The assessment system and architecture being developed for
GRASP is an interface that allows users to generate graphics, receive rapid
automated feedback, and refine their solutions. This system can increase
students' ability to approach initial stages of solving a problem and provide
TAs and instructors the opportunity to evaluate the highly generative and
cognitively rich activities associated with more ill-structured problems.

Broader impact: GRASP is designed to expand the kinds of assessments for
learning that can be offered to learners of all ages and in any domain. The
graphical user interface provides a new approach to assessing students' ability
to explain their conceptual understanding of a system using both graphical and
language literacy. GRASP integrates easily with many commercially available
Learning Management Systems and thus will be attractive to a large audience of
users. Once GRASP is developed, it will be adapted to K-12 learning environments
through the INSPIRE Institute at Purdue University.