* 0817027
* Inventory and Evolution of Fishes from Streams of the Sierra Madre Occidental, Mexico
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Richard Mayden, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Robb Brumfield
* 08/31/2012
* USD 582,030.00

This research focuses on the economically important trout species and other
associated freshwater fishes of Mexico's Sierra Madre Occidental, an aquatic
ecosystem that is home to at least 20% of the world's trout species, including
the only trout species adapted to warmer temperatures. Preliminary work in this
region suggests a high level of endemism, several new species unknown to
science, and a high level of habitat destruction and species endangerment. The
research will provide a complete faunal inventory of the ecosystem, formal
descriptions of all newly described species, databasing of all new collections
and associated ecological data, and dissemination of results through a new web
system for research, training and education. Effective conservation and
educational programs will involve local communities, teachers, and fish culture
professionals, helping them to develop sustainable practices that do not destroy
habitats and aquatic communities. New training activities will include a broad
community of students (high school, college), as well as local citizens.
Directors and scientists of the Mexican Fish Culture system, hatchery managers,
and fish culture scientists will collaborate with U.S. scientists on this
project. The comprehensive E-Life system developed in conjunction with this
research will provide a worldwide educational platform for distributed learning
environments in biodiversity, conservation, and ecology.