* 0817442
* Mathematics Partnering with Computer Science to Improve Calculus Instruction and Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2014
* Marilyn Reba, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 07/31/2014
* USD 415,203.00

Interdisciplinary (99) Faculty in the mathematical sciences and computer science
are developing calculus classroom activities that exploit the digital-ink
feature of the Tablet PC to enable students to submit detailed problem solutions
at various points throughout a class that are then projected, discussed,
annotated, and saved. An open-source web-based software application,
Messagegrid, is being enhanced to include a recording capability and rubric-
based evaluation-algorithm. Normally, student work on application problems is
scattered haphazardly across a piece of paper where it is either impossible or
too time-consuming to discern the sequence of the student's thought and to
determine where the thought process goes astray. Examination of the sequence of
student inputs, the "ink" strokes on the Tablet PC, permits categorization of
different errors as they occur. The intellectual merit of this project is two-
fold: 1) supporting active learning where students receive immediate feedback in
a way that informs the rest of the class and maintains the flow of the teaching-
learning environment; and 2) collecting and processing large samples of student
work which is analyzed for emergent problem-solving strategies. Based on such
analysis class activities with carefully-chosen multi-step problems are
structured to pause the problem-solving process at junctures where the data show
students typically take incorrect paths. The project's broader impacts include
implementation of the Messagegrid application and evaluation of its use at Tri-
County Technical College, a local two year college, similar implementation in
other departments at Clemson, interactions with contributors to and users of the
project's website repository of problems, and engagement with participants in
summer faculty workshops. The impact of this project is also being evaluated
through the collection and analysis of: performance measures (e.g. scores on
common exams); student retention totals in the classes using this approach;
student behavior and satisfaction surveys; and faculty investment of time and
satisfaction surveys.