* 0817042
* Turtles of the World: Global Systematics for an Imperiled Clade
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2008,05/31/2012
* H. Bradley Shaffer, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 05/31/2012
* USD 577,294.00

Deeper understanding of the plant and animal diversity on earth is perhaps the
most important challenge faced by evolutionary biologists, ecologists, and
conservation planners in the twenty-first century. In this study, modern DNA-
based tools will be used to produce an evolutionary family tree of every species
of turtle and tortoise on earth. Turtles are an ancient group, with living
species that are well over 200 million years old, and many species that are
hovering on the brink of extinction. This family tree, or phylogeny, will
provide a detailed summary of the genetic distinctiveness of each of the
approximately 313 species of living turtles, and how those species have diverged
from each other over time. &lt;br/&gt; This project will provide the basic
evolutionary information needed to rank turtle species for conservation
prioritization. Given that over 50% of the world's turtle and tortoise species
are in danger of extinction, such a ranking scheme is of critical importance to
help guide conservation efforts. It will also help identify those features of
species, such as large body size, breeding habitat, or longevity that contribute
to their endangered status. By better understanding the relationship between
evolved characteristics and level of endangerment, these results will help
conservationists preserve turtle and tortoise species globally. Public education
and student training in systematics and conservation biology are integral
components of this research.