* 0817784
* RUI: RSK &amp; Rock Phosphorylation of NHE1 Regulates Cell Motility Events in CCL39 Fibroblasts
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Joseph Provost, Minnesota State University Moorhead
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 07/31/2012
* USD 417,775.00

The sodium hydrogen exchanger (NHE) is a membrane bound protein involved in
regulating many important cellular functions. How a cell moves is a complex
series of events synchronized by a variety of different proteins. NHE is one of
the proteins critical in directing cell movement as the exchanger acts to
polarize the cell and coordinates the cytoskeleton. How NHE controls cell
motility is only partially understood. This project will investigate the
phosphorylation of the intracellular tail of NHE by two protein kinases,
Ribosomal S-6 Kinase (RSK) and RhoA Kinase (ROCK). The hypothesis of this
project is that both RSK and ROCK function to regulate NHE's role in cell
movement. This project will first determine where ROCK binds and phosphorylates
NHE and then identify how each of these phosphorylation sites coordinates the
effects of NHE including cytoskeletal organization, directed cell motility, and
protein-protein interactions. NHE is one of several transport proteins thought
to be involved in controlling cell polarity, cytoskeletal organization and the
formation of signaling complexes in a wide variety of cell types. The results of
this project will contribute our understanding of an important growing model
explaining the cell biology of cytoskeletal regulation and motility.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: A significant portion of this project is
to provide realistic and meaningful research for undergraduates. This project is
designed to fully immerse students into a research experience and allow students
to benefit fully from the incorporation of research both within the curriculum
and outside the curriculum at the university. The investigators have a long
track record of commitment and excellence in training undergraduate researchers.
Alumni from their labs have gone onto graduate school at UCSD, MIT, Yale, U of
MN, Iowa U and many industrial positions. This project will involve
undergraduates in important aspects of biochemistry and cellular biology
research and together, this work will further the understanding of transport
proteins as these membrane proteins aid in regulating cell migration events. A
previously funded RUI Award provided research opportunities for 21
undergraduates and 8 high school students. Of these 29 students, 19 were women,
3 were Native Americans, and 2 were Hispanic. Funding this research project will
sustain the investigator?s ability to provide well-trained undergraduates to
enter graduate school, professional school, and the workforce. Specifically this
project will provide another 12 to 15 undergraduates and 2 to 3 high school
students research experiences outside the curriculum that will equate to 24 to
30 academic years of research experience. In addition, another 18 to 24 students
will gain one year of research experience each as part of a year-long, 10 credit
senior capstone course for the Biochemistry and Biotechnology Major. Finally, 9
students in the group will be provided the opportunity to participate in a full
time summer research experience.