* 0817993
* RUI: The Gene Stream II: From Sequence to Cell Function
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Eric Cole, Saint Olaf College
* Continuing Grant
* Suzanne Barbour
* 09/30/2012
* USD 499,794.00

Intellectual merit. &lt;br/&gt; Tetrahymena is an unusual organism that exists
in nature as a single cell. As a ciliate, the unicellular Tetrahymena possesses
not one, but two nuclei that are fundamentally different. The larger
macronucleus is actively expressed and responsible for driving the daily
activities of the cell. The smaller micronucleus is usually silent, and serves
as a genetic archive for the cell, storing two copies of every gene that will be
ultimately shared when the organism engages in nuclear exchange with a mating
partner. In this regard, ciliates such as Tetrahymena resemble multicellular
embryos, in which certain cells differentiate into the body (soma) of a
developing organism while other cells are set aside to become a part of the germ
line (future eggs or sperm). Remarkably, researchers have found that many of the
same proteins that help distinguish the germline of an animal from the soma may
play a similar role in distinguishing the germline micronucleus of a ciliate
from the somatic macronucleus. Therefore, information gained in understanding
the proteins of the germline and the soma of Tetrahymena will have broad scale
applications in understanding differentiation as it occurs in larger, more
complex multicellular systems. The project here is to explore the structure and
function of the conjusome, a small intracellular structure found in mating
Tetrahymena that resembles the P-granules in animal embryos that have been shown
to house proteins that bring about genome modifications leading to the
distinction between soma and germline. The investigators are also exploring a
unique cell-cell junction, the nuclear exchange junction, that allows mating
cells to trade nuclei with one another through a remarkable intercellular
window. Three disciplines are brought together in this study: proteomics (the
identification of genes from the protein constituents of an organelle),
molecular genetics (knocking out genes by targeted mutation, and tagging gene
products with fluorescent markers for microscopic observation in living cells),
and bio-informatics, learning about a gene from the published Tetrahymena genome
and through computer assisted searches of all the published
genomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt; The investigators'
research program at St. Olaf College is specifically designed as a training
vehicle for undergraduate researchers. The Gene Stream allows students to create
sustained research projects that cross disciplines, from chemistry to biology
and computer science, while maintaining a focused research goal, namely
discovering the roles played by specific genes within a living cell. This cross-
disciplinary program exposes undergraduates to the variety of experimental
approaches and laboratory tools that scientists employ in the increasingly
collaborative environment of modern research. The Gene Stream also provides our
undergraduates with opportunities to travel to other University laboratories for
specialized training as well as national and regional meetings where they
present their work and receive feedback from graduate students, postdocs and PIs
from graduate institutions. The investigators are extending their work with
students in the laboratory by creating a workshop that provides a summer forum
for college and university professors working in the field of Ciliate molecular
biology to share expertise while weaving together an inter-collegiate research
collaboration.