* 0817916
* Identifying Targets/Pathways of Chemical Probes for the Plant Endomembrane System
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2008,01/31/2011
* Natasha Raikhel, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 01/31/2011
* USD 239,993.00

The vacuole is prominent in plant cells and is required for viability. This
compartment is responsible for storing sugars, pigments, ions, proteins, and
volatile compounds necessary for the flavor and nutrition of fruits and
vegetables, and it maintains cellular homeostasis by regulating cytosolic pH.
Plant vacuoles breakdown and recycle cellular components, and are involved in
detoxification, as do yeast and mammalian lysosomes. However, plant vacuoles
perform additional functions in defense. The vacuole is part of the endomembrane
system, which includes the endoplasmic reticulum, the Golgi apparatus, the
trans-Golgi network, pre-vacuolar compartments, endosomes and the plasma
membrane. Transport between these compartments occurs via vesicle trafficking.
Beyond a role in cargo delivery, the plant endomembrane system is essential for
development and signal transduction. A large proportion of knockout mutations in
the Arabidopsis endomembrane system are either lethal or provide no visible
phenotype due to complete or partial redundancy. However, the use of diverse
chemicals to interrogate molecular processes provides a novel avenue for rapid
and effective dissection of mechanisms and gene networks in ways not feasible
with mutation-based approaches. Three novel compounds have been identified that
specifically disrupt the trafficking of membrane or soluble proteins to the
vacuole. Sortin1 affects the morphology of the vacuole and the delivery of the
vacuolar lumen proteins CPY and invertase. However, it does not affect the
delivery of tonoplast or other membrane proteins or the morphology of Golgi, ER
or endosomes. In contrast, Gravacin interferes with protein trafficking to the
tonoplast (and the trafficking of at least one plasma membrane protein) but does
not affect the delivery of lumen proteins. Another chemical, known as 050,
affects the localization of proteins that traffic through the ER and induces the
fusion of multiple compartments. This combination of pharmacological reagents is
a powerful resource to discover new components of the trafficking machinery
within these pathways. The challenge now is to: identify target(s) or/and
pathway(s) of each compound by genetic approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The
intellectual merit of this award is that novel components of the protein
trafficking machinery will be identified using our reagents. Furthermore, this
diverse set of chemical probes will permit scientists to understand the
relationships between protein trafficking pathways to the vacuole and other
pathways within the cell, a challenge for classical mutational approaches. More
broadly, the chemical genomics approach can be easily translated to any
eukaryotic system, as well as plants of economic importance and human disease
and nutrition. A truly interdisciplinary approach to understand the mechanisms
of endomembrane trafficking has produced a new cohort of scientists. During the
last several years, students and postdocs in the Raikhel laboratory have become
well-versed and experienced in cell and molecular biology, genetics, chemistry
and computational sciences, all necessary to ensure the success of the proposal
and to become competitive in the workforce. The broad impact of this award will
continue by producing, in addition to scientific discoveries, a new generation
of diverse scientists who can form complementary teams required for 21st century
research and education.&lt;br/&gt;