* 0817521
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Expanding and sustaining research capacity in engineering and technology education: Building on successful programs for faculty and graduate students
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Lorraine Fleming, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Don Millard
* 07/31/2012
* USD 163,349.00

Engineering - Other (59) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project, a collaboration
among Alverno College, Colorado School of Mines, Howard University, Madison Area
Technical College, and Purdue University, is developing engineering education
research capacity in the engineering and technician education communities. The
goals of the project are to design and deliver a new generation of effective,
flexible, inclusive, and sustainable programs to educate engineering and
engineering technology faculty and graduate students to conduct and use
educational research and to foster a virtual community of engineering and
engineering technology education researchers through the use of web-based
technology. The project involves three distinct but related faculty development
efforts. The first is a series of short courses to introduce faculty members and
graduate students to various research topics such as theoretical frameworks,
experiment design, and quantitative approaches. The second is a two-step, multi-
day workshop for curriculum developers to enable them to design and implement
learning centered curriculum. The third is a multi-day workshop for faculty
members who have moderate engineering education research experience to enable
them to review and extend their knowledge of relevant education theory and
research methods and to apply this knowledge to answering a significant research
question focused on how students learn engineering. These short course and
workshop materials are a being made available on the newly created engineering
education research hub (rreeHUB.org), which is being used in organized
activities to build a virtual community. The evaluation effort, with leadership
from an expert from Purdue's Discover Learning Center, is using pre-event, post-
event, and post-project surveys to assess familiarity with and knowledge of
content areas. Broader impacts include an extensive dissemination effort
involving a virtual community and systematic efforts to recruit a diverse group
of faculty and graduate students with targeted outreach to 2-year colleges and
minority serving institutions.