* 0817563
* U.S.-Pakistan Workshop 'Indo-Asia Continental Collision, Islamabad, Pakistan, January 2009'
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2008,12/31/2010
* Shuhab Khan, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 12/31/2010
* USD 43,467.00

0817563 &lt;br/&gt;Khan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a US-Pakistan
Workshop, "Indo-Asia Continental Collision", to be held in Islamabad, Pakistan,
in January 2009. The U.S. organizer is Dr. Shuhab Khan and the foreign
organizers are Dr. Khalid Mahmoud and Dr. Abdel S. Khan, both from the Center of
Excellence in Mineralogy, University of Balochistan in Quetta, Pakistan and D.
Zulfiqar Ahmed, Earth Sciences Department, Quaid-I-Azam University, Islamabad,
in Pakistan. The award supports U.S. scientists to attend the workshop to
coordinate research in Pakistan, the western margin of the Indo-Asia collision
zone, where they will develop ways to test India-Asia plate collision models.
Two days of discussion in Islamabad will be followed by several days in the
field in the Trans-Indus Ranges (Islamabad, Kohat, Kalabagh) and in the Quetta
area, dedicated to selection of detailed study sites and preliminary sampling
for specialized geochemical and isotopic studies. One outcome of the workshop
will be the development of collaborative proposals for submission to the
National Science Foundation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will bring
together geoscientists from the U.S., Pakistan and Europe and will explore how
to combine remote sensing and tomographic studies with geochemical, isotopic,
and geochronologic studies on ophiolites and arc volcanics. The group will
develop tests of the hypothesis that ophiolites in Pakistan represent remnants
of intra-oceanic forearc complexes, related to Indo-Asia collision. Scientists
will plan how to use remote sensing, InSAR, GPS and field techniques in studies
of the major strike slip faults in this region to assess intra-continental
deformation mechanisms resulting from the collision.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: A fundamental question facing 21st
century geoscientists is how continents evolve. The approach to this broad
tectonic question to be taken in the workshop is to integrate field, remote
sensing, geochemical and isotopic age studies in Pakistan. This part of the
western Himalayas is considered an example of the collision between continents
involving an intervening island-arc. One focus of the workshop's research
discussion will be on the timing, which is as yet poorly resolved, of ocean
opening and closing in the critical area of north and western Pakistan. The
workshop is an opportunity to define scientific objectives and launch a coherent
collaborative approach. Integrated remote sensing, geochemical and isotopic work
on ophiolites and arc rocks in Pakistan should provide significant constraints
on our understanding of the timing and nature of the Himalayan collision and
related deformational mechanisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The
workshop will include graduate students and several early career faculty
members, including females, from U.S. and Pakistan. Research programs to be
finalized at the workshop will build on current collaborative links in geology,
geophysics, geochemistry, and geoscience database development. The collaborative
research project will also enhance understanding between US, European and
Pakistani scientists.