* 0817107
* Structural Reorganization of Nuclear Proteins During Mitosis
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Jorgen Johansen, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 08/31/2012
* USD 600,000.00

Scientific Research: A mitotic spindle is present in all known eukaryotic cells
and its function is essential for chromosomal segregation and cell division to
occur. Although much work has been directed toward understanding mitotic spindle
apparatus structure and function, it is still unclear how chromosome separation
is achieved on a microtubule-based structure that is itself in constant flux.
The discovery that microtubules assemble and disassemble at both ends of the
spindle fiber and of the constant treadmilling of tubulin dimers toward the
poles makes it difficult to envision how forces are generated to actually move
the chromosomes on such a metastable structure that is not anchored in place.
For these reasons and based on theoretical considerations of the requirement for
force production at the spindle the concept of a spindle matrix has long been
proposed. In its simplest formulation a spindle matrix is hypothesized to
provide a stationary or elastic molecular substrate that provides a backbone or
strut for motor molecules to interact with during force generation and
microtubule sliding. Such a matrix could also have the added properties of
helping to organize and stabilize the microtubule spindle. Four nuclear proteins
in Drosophila exhibiting properties consistent with a spindle matrix have been
identified and will be cytologically and functionally analyzed to test the
spindle matrix hypothesis. State-of-the-art fluorescent imaging techniques will
be used to determine these proteins' dynamic properties, newly generated mutants
will be analyzed to gauge functional consequences of alteration or loss of these
proteins, and potential interactions with microtubules and/or an essential motor
protein will be probed to assess potential connections between the spindle
matrix, the microtubule spindle, and motor proteins essential for mitotic
spindle function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The broader impacts from
the project activities will accrue at several different levels. 1) Advancing
discovery with a potential to achieve paradigm-shifting results. The
demonstration of a spindle matrix will fundamentally alter the molecular
understanding of spindle function. Thus, this project has the potential to
change textbook descriptions of mitosis. 2) Incorporation of experimental aims
into training projects at the graduate, undergraduate, and high school levels.
The PI has mentored 25 graduate students, 34 undergraduates and 4 high school
students over the years with 8 undergraduates serving as coauthors on papers.
Among the undergraduates, 11 have entered graduate schools, 8 have pursued
veterinary or medical training (2 in M.D./Ph.D. programs), and 2 have chosen
scientific-related fields (forensics, lab technician). This level of mentoring
will be continued under the proposed project. 3) Recruitment of underrepresented
groups. During her career, the PI has trained 35 women, including 6 African-
Americans, and 1 African-American man. 4) Establishment of international
partnerships. As part of this project, a collaboration has been initiated with a
group in Portugal that has obtained funding from FLAD to send a student to the
PI's laboratory for training. 5) Development of research-based educational
materials. The PI has been active in incorporating research methodology into her
cell biology class in order to encourage problem-solving approaches. She has
developed a set of PowerPoint slides that are available to other Biol 314
instructors that is continually updated. 6) Participation in mentoring programs.
The PI has participated as a faculty mentor in a number of different programs,
including "Preparing Future Faculty" (advising graduate students on future
academic/research careers), "Project Assist" (a program that recruits minority
students to Iowa to work in a corporate research setting for academic credit),
the "Honors Mentor Program" (a freshman lab orientation program for one-semester
research projects for honors students), the BEST (Biology Education Success
Teams) program (a living/learning program for orientation of incoming biology
students), and Ames High School Partnerships for Biological Sciences program (to
mentor high school students on research projects.) The PI has also been very
active in making presentations to undergraduate clubs (such as Tribeta, the
honors biology club) and area undergraduate colleges on different topics,
including her research work or on career prospects in research-related fields.
These mentoring activities will be continued.