* 0817568
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Government Concessions to Irregular Politics, Violence, and Insurgency
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Bethany Lacina, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 06/30/2009
* USD 11,950.00

When do governments make concessions as a result of insurgent violence? When do
those concessions end the violence? This project examines these questions in
regard to language-groups' autonomy movements in India. Numerous minority
language groups have sought their own territorial entities within India and
several insurgencies have grown out of such movements. This study shows that
these cases defy the common assumption that concessions result when governments
cannot out-last insurgents in a war of attrition. Rather, the key strategic
dilemma for the government is to identify local political actors with sufficient
resources to keep peace once the government withdraws its military presence from
the conflict-prone area. Concessions occur when the government believes an
insurgent leader is more powerful than other local political strongmen. The
hypotheses will be evaluated through the use of quantitative data on all of
India's language groups. This dataset will be compiled over the next 18 months.
In addition, the project will draw on a 3-month field study of an ongoing
linguistic autonomy movement in Northeast India.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual importance: Cross-national study of internal conflict
has succeeded in identifying a number of factors that increase the risk of
violence against the state. These studies are particularly powerful for
explaining large rebellions that tend to end in military victory by one side.
Many internal conflicts, including those most important to the international
community, that are highly asymmetric, however, tend to end in negotiated
settlement. Yet, concessions to asymmetric violence have not been addressed in
the recent empirical civil war literature. This project also addresses the
limitations of the theoretical literature on insurgency. Analysis of small civil
wars is generally based on the presumption that these are wars of attrition.
Coercive responses to rebellion are often advocated on the grounds that they
demonstrate the resolve of the government. There are known analytical and
empirical problems with war of attrition theories, however, and this project
offers an alternative analysis of the politics of small civil war.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outcomes and broader impacts: This project will address
concerns of both policy analysts and academics. The study will also hire Indian
graduate students as research assistants, which will create new opportunities
for local students to increase their practical involvement in political science.
&lt;br/&gt;