* 0817748
* Ecological Aspects of Plant Selenium Hyperaccumulation: Below and Beyond
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Elizabeth Pilon-Smits, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 08/31/2013
* USD 444,682.00

IOS-0817748 PI: Elizabeth Pilon-Smits Ecological aspects of plant selenium
hyperaccumulation - below and beyond

The element selenium (Se) is essential for many organisms. Dietary Se can boost
the immune system and prevent cancer and bacterial and viral infections
including HIV. On the other hand, Se is toxic at higher levels and Se is a
serious environmental pollutant worldwide. Some plants native to the Western
U.S., commonly called ?locoweeds?, hyperaccumulate Se up to 1 percent of their
dry weight. The investigators propose that these plants hyperaccumulate Se as a
defense compound against herbivory and microbial infection, and are interested
in the effects of the accumulated Se on the ecological interactions of
hyperaccumulators. Over the past three years they have discovered that Se
accumulation protects plants from a variety of herbivores, due to both
deterrence and toxicity. At the same time, several Se-tolerant specialist
herbivores were found to feed on hyperaccumulators, and to accumulate fairly
high Se levels. Continued studies will investigate how the Se in
hyperaccumulators affects ecological interactions in their local ecosystem,
going "below and beyond" what has been discovered so far. More specifically,
effects of accumulated root Se on root-zone interactions of hyperaccumulator
plants with neighboring plants, root-associated invertebrates, and root-
associated microbes will be examined. Beyond the direct plant-herbivore or
plant-microbe interactions, the researchers will investigate the effects of Se
accumulation by specialist herbivores or microbes on the ecological interactions
of these specialists that may further mobilize Se into the food chain. The
findings from this project should have broad implications, and applications in
medicine and agriculture. The effects of hyperaccumulation of Se on herbivores
and other ecological partners are probably similar for other toxic metals and
metalloids. Understanding the movements of hyperaccumulated elements in the food
chain will be critical to the practices of phytoremediation (environmental
cleanup using plants) and of cultivating element-fortified foods with health-
benefiting properties. In addition, knowledge of how plant Se accumulation
affects growth and survival of pathogens or herbivores, and identification of
specialist Se-tolerant pathogens or herbivores may be used to both control plant
pests and Se-hyperaccumulating noxious weeds.

