* 0817659
* Explaining Collective Action under Extreme Circumstances
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2008,12/31/2010
* Rachel Einwohner, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 12/31/2010
* USD 123,260.00

SES-0817659 Rachel L. Einwohner Purdue University

This study asks: Why does resistance take place in some situations but not
others? What conditions facilitated the emergence of collective armed
resistance? While current theories of social movement emergence argue that
collective action occurs when groups of individuals have opportunity, resources,
and a sense of efficacy, this study will make a contribution by examining
resistance under conditions of extreme repression, limited resources, and great
despair. This research will study Jewish victims of the Holocaust who are
commonly portrayed as passive individuals. Yet well known cases of Jewish
resistance such as the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising demonstrate that in at least some
places, Jews did rise up against their oppressors. Jewish ghettos in Nazi-
occupied Europe therefore provide a useful setting for an empirical study of the
emergence of collective resistance under extreme circumstances. This project
will make a contribution to the extant literature by examining an understudied
context for collective action and use the results to develop new theoretical
models. The investigator will conduct in-depth qualitative analysis and compare
three strategically selected case studies: the Warsaw Ghetto (where collective
Jewish resistance occurred), the Vilna Ghetto (where collective resistance was
planned but not achieved), and the Lodz Ghetto (where collective resistance was
never attempted). Data will include both primary and secondary sources,
including transcripts from a random sample (N=120) of archived oral testimonies
from survivors of each ghetto (40 from each ghetto). These testimonies are
housed at the University of Southern California Shoah Foundation Institute. Oral
testimony data will be analyzed using the qualitative software package NVivo.

The study?s broader impacts are both educational and policy-related. First, the
project will help contribute to extant knowledge about collective action and
contentious politics in general. Although the results are intended primarily for
professional academic audiences, they may also be used in other educational
settings (e.g., Holocaust education in public schools). In addition, to the
extent that they are disseminated more widely (e.g., through the media), the
findings can also have an impact on the general public?s understanding of the
Holocaust, especially by helping to dispel the myth of Jewish passivity. Lastly,
the findings will have relevance to contemporary cases of resistance such as
armed insurgencies, prison revolts and urban riots.