* 0817941
* Examining Race and Ownership Status in Long-time Businesses and Organizations? Reactions to Gentrification
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Daniel Sullivan, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2011
* USD 104,160.00

PI: Daniel Monroe Sullivan, Ph.D., Department of Sociology, Portland State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Examining Race and Ownership Status in Long-time
Businesses and Organizations? Reactions to
Gentrification&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project will collect data from 80 interviews in two racially diverse,
gentrifying neighborhoods in Portland, Oregon to examine the linkages between
race and ownership in explaining gentrification outcomes. Gentrification, the
process of wealthier residents moving into a poorer neighborhood in sufficient
numbers to transform its social identity, is occurring in parts of many U.S.
cities. Often gentrification is characterized by whites moving into
predominantly black neighborhoods, resulting?at least for a time?in racially
diverse neighborhoods. The main goal of this project is to examine neighborhood
racial integration by analyzing how long-time businesses and organizations react
to gentrification in their neighborhood, in terms of whether they continue to
operate in their neighborhood (thus facilitating stable racial integration) and
whether newcomers become involved in their business/ organization, as workers or
customers (thus facilitating genuine social integration). The central hypothesis
is that, among long-time predominantly black businesses/ organizations, those
that own their own building are more likely to stay in the neighborhood and
socially integrate with newcomers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interviews will
complement a recent survey of 164 businesses/organizations that will be selected
from a list of survey respondents. All will have operated in their neighborhood
since before gentrification began and they will correspond to one of four
categories: black-owned, white-owned, black renters, and white renters.
Interviewer and interviewee will be matched based on race. This research will
make both scholarly and policy contributions. In terms of scholarly
contribution, it will examine whether long-time businesses/organizations?
reactions to newcomers are based more on cultural characteristics or on economic
interests. Researchers who emphasize the importance of culture argue that
differences in racial identity and socioeconomic status create divisions between
newcomers and long-time businesses/organizations, making it difficult to achieve
racial stability and social integration. However, researchers who emphasize the
importance of economics argue that businesses/organizations benefit financially
from gentrification and therefore, regardless of cultural differences, those
that own their building are more likely to stay in the neighborhood and be more
open to newcomers than those that rent. This study also has important policy
implications for it may be that ownership serves three important functions in
racially integrated, gentrifying neighborhoods: (1) securing affordable space
for long-time businesses/organizations, including predominantly black ones, (2)
maintaining stable neighborhood integration, and (3) increasing social
integration. The broader impacts of this study of integrated neighborhoods will
generate a greater understanding of pathways out of racial segregation,
including understanding whether ownership facilitates stable racial integration
and inter-racial social integration.