* 0817635
* PostDoctoral Research Fellowship
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2008,12/31/2010
* Noah Ashley, Ashley                  Noah           T
* Standard Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 12/31/2010
* USD 140,000.00

The Polar Postdoctoral Research will examine the molecular and neurobiological
mechanisms that regulate the persistence of a circadian rhythm in an arctic-
breeding songbird, the Lapland Longspur (Calcarius lapponicus). Circadian
rhythms are integral to the temporal organization of behavior and physiology of
most organisms, and are primarily synchronized by the light-dark cycle of day
and night. In polar regions, continuous light or darkness prevails for much of
the year, leading to abandonment of circadian rhythmicity in most polar animals.
An exception to this rule is arctic-breeding migratory songbirds-- they maintain
rhythmicity despite exposure to continuous daylight on their high-latitude
breeding grounds. The postdoctoral fellow will receive training in
neurobiological techniques to examine patterns of clock gene expression (pPer2)
in two circadian oscillators: the hypothalamus and pineal gland. The applicant
will (1) correlate clock gene expression with biological rhythms in free-living
longspurs, (2) evaluate if rhythms in activity and pPer2 expression are
endogenous, and (3) determine if such rhythms entrain to low-amplitude
zeitgebers of polar day. The intellectual merit of the proposed work lies in
understanding the molecular and neurobiological basis of circadian function in
polar animals. The project is the first study to examine time-keeping genes in
polar migrants. The broader impacts include funding the stipends for two Alaskan
Native high school students as summer field technicians. Research results will
have implications for the treatment of seasonal affective disorder in humans.
The applicant will receive research and career guidance from two sponsoring
scientists.