* 0817314
* Integrated dynamics of temporal and spatial controls in the cell division cycle of Caulobacter crescentus
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* John Tyson, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2012
* USD 132,000.00

In this project, the investigators will apply the methods of nonlinear dynamics
and bifurcation theory for developing a better understanding of the molecular
mechanism regulating temporal and spatial dynamics of the cell division cycle in
Caulobacter crescentus. The biochemical network controlling cell cycle
progression in Caulobacter consists of parallel and consecutive, highly
nonlinear processes, comprising positive and negative feedbacks. Many proteins
of this network dynamically localize at the poles of the cell in a cell cycle-
dependent manner, providing a spatial dimension to cell cycle regulation. In
this project the complexity of the control system will be approached from a
dynamical systems perspective, by means of mathematical modeling and computer
simulation. To this end, the investigators will construct an experimentally
verified, dynamical mathematical model that will describe the relevant molecular
events in space and time. The model will provide a rigorous account of current
intuitive ideas of bacterial cell cycle control, advance our understanding of
bacterial cell division, integrate available experimental data, reconcile
apparently conflicting data, identify data gaps, and suggest new experimental
designs. Principles of mathematical modeling, dynamical systems theory,
bifurcation theory, asymptotic analysis, and numerical computation will be used
and advanced by this work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The quantitative study of the
molecular mechanism controlling cell division in Caulobacter will contribute to
our understanding of cell cycle regulatory mechanisms and also of a fundamental
issue in developmental biology (how morphogenesis is coordinated with cell cycle
progression). Comparative analysis of the molecular regulation of the cell cycle
in bacteria and eukaryotes can be insightful for evolutionary biology. Recent
studies have shown that many of genes and mechanisms discovered in Caulobacter
are evolutionarily conserved among other members of the alpha-proteobacteria.
Thus, the mechanism of cell replication in Caulobacter and the mathematical
model that the investigators will develop may be extendable to the whole class
of alpha-proteobacteria. Several alpha-proteobacteria (including Sinorhizobium,
Agrobacterium, Rickettsia, and Brucella) have important roles in a wide range of
environmental, medical and biowarfare-defense applications. Therefore, this
fundamental research on Caulobacter growth, replication and differentiation may
have far-reaching implications. In particular, insights gained into temporal and
spatial control of gene expression and protein interactions could provide new
clues for rational design of antibacterial agents. On a larger scale, this study
will contribute to a conceptual understanding and mathematical description of
the dynamics of living systems and to extending the quantitative transformation
of molecular cell biology.