* 0817689
* Miranda Waivers and the Validation of Miranda Measures: An Investigation of Miranda Knowledge, Beliefs and Decisions
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Daniel Shuman, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Zatz
* 08/31/2012
* USD 463,293.00

The Supreme Court in its landmark decision of Miranda v. United States
established constitutional protections for suspects in custody. While mapping
out the basic components of Miranda warnings (e.g., right to silence), the Court
has consistently declined to specify the language of such warnings or waivers.
As a result, more than 800 different versions of Miranda have been identified
that vary markedly in length from 21 to 408 words and reading level from grade
2.8 and post-college. In an analysis of detainees with observations taken at
multiple time points following arrest, this project identifies psychological
vulnerabilities that impair Miranda comprehension and subsequent decision
making. Potential vulnerabilities include limited intelligence, learning
disabilities, and mental disorders. Beyond psychological vulnerabilities,
suspects may have impaired thinking patterns, called cognitive distortions,
which affect their abilities to rationally decide whether to give up their
rights to silence and counsel. This project examines how psychological
vulnerabilities and cognitive distortions may impair suspects' constitutional
protections. They are addressed for representative Miranda warnings written at
easy (less than grade 6), moderate (grade 8 to 10), and difficult (grade 12 or
higher) reading levels. They are also evaluated for the type of warning
presentation (oral versus written). A second objective is the development of
simplified Miranda warnings that can facilitate procedural justice by informing
custodial suspects with easily understood information. In doing so, the study
identifies prototypical components of Miranda warnings that are brief, clear,
and easily read. These simplified warnings are tested for their clarity and ease
of comprehension. Finally, the research is expected to contribute to the
development of reliable and valid Miranda measures for the standardized
assessment of Miranda vocabulary, comprehension of Miranda warnings, and
decision-making about Miranda waivers.