* 0817589
* Renewable Energy and Engaged Interdisciplinary Learning for Sustainability (REELS)
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2010
* Melanie Dupuis, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Herbert H. Richtol
* 07/31/2010
* USD 150,000.00

Two courses pertaining to renewable energies and sustainability engineering are
being developed and taught jointly by the School of Engineering and the
Departments of Politics and Sociology. One, Sustainability and Social Change, is
an interdisciplinary course that explores the politics of sustainability and the
process of technological innovation and the development of new renewable energy
sources. The course will be cross-listed between the Politics and Sociology
Departments. The second course to be affected is the current electrical
engineering Renewable Energy course for which a renewable energy sources
laboratory will be developed. A combination of laboratories, community projects,
and case studies are creating an environment that cultivates innovation and
inclusiveness, builds quantitative skills, and expands topical knowledge about
renewable energies,and social justice issues related to sustainable development.

Engineering students are learning broader social impacts and how to analyze
issues of equity and inclusion. Social science students are improving scientific
reasoning, applied engineering, and quantitative analysis skills. Students,
faculty and community partners explore strategies to link social technologies
with material innovations. The partnership connecting sociology with engineering
is attracting more women and underrepresented minorities to careers in science
and engineering.