* 0817980
* Meeting: SDB 67th Annual Meeting, July 26-30, 2008 at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Eric Wieschaus, Society For Developmental Biol
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 06/30/2009
* USD 12,000.00

The Society for Developmental Biology (SDB) was founded in 1939 and has
organized the major worldwide meeting in developmental biology for the past 69
years, missing only two during World War II. The meeting this year will be held
at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, July 26-30, 2008.

The SDB meetings have always attracted people interested in understanding how
plants and animals develop, and how development in different organism fits into
the context of evolution. Some basic questions that have fascinated both
scientists and non-specialists are: How does a fertilized egg produce all the
different cell types and organs found in the adult? What are the mechanisms that
trigger these processes and how are they regulated? Major technological advances
in the past decades have contributed to a better understanding of these
processes at the genetic, molecular and cellular levels. We now know that
mutations in genes controlling development account for many human birth defects
and play major roles in clinical conditions like cancer in adults. It is clear
that this knowledge from developmental biology contributes significantly to our
understanding of fundamental organismal functions, as well as insights relevant
to agriculture, medicine and national security policy.

Meeting participants will present their latest data, many unpublished,
contributing to advancement in the field. In addition to a line-up of
outstanding speakers made up of established investigators, the organizers will
choose junior scientists, including postdoctoral fellows and graduate students
for short talks, giving them an opportunity to showcase their work and become
known in the community. This meeting is also the venue for improving education
and mentoring at undergraduate, graduate and post-graduate levels, and for
interactions among an otherwise disparate community of scholars working on
different organisms using varied approaches and at all levels, from well-
established investigators to those just entering the field.

