* 0817208
* RIG: Evolution of Neural Codes: Insights from the Crocodilian Dome Pressure Receptors
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Daphne Soares, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* David Coppola
* 08/31/2012
* USD 174,999.00

How does one find a friend in a crowd? The way in which brains perform scene
analysis is still unknown and it turns out to be a difficult problem for
scientists to crack. There are many features of the environment that need to be
differentially encoded by the nervous system to lead to an appropriate behavior.
Crocodilian brains face the same problem as any other animal: localizing a
source of interest in a busy background. But for them, the task is perhaps
easier and understanding how they do it gives scientists a peak into the general
rules of computation that brains use to carry out scene analysis. Crocodilians
often hunt in complete darkness, waiting half-submerged for prey to disturb the
water interface. All crocodilians have evolved specialized sensory organs (DPRs)
that can detect small disruptions of the water. These are dome-like in shape and
are linked to a dedicated neural pathway. DPRs provide an array of sensors that
are tuned to a two-dimensional surface wave front. DPRs are therefore an
excellent model system to study stimulus source location and feature detection
because the scene is relatively simple and the stimulus easily reproducible.
This project investigates the psychophysical basis of DPR sensitivity and
general processing rules by examining the anatomical substrate that allows for
the transmission of information, and by using electrophysiology to determine the
codes used by the nervous system. The results will provide insights into
understanding the ways in which animals take the environment apart and put it
back together again in their brains. The study of a non-traditional animal
species can be advantageous when introducing science to the general public,
through general public talks and filming and consultation. The program of study
integrates these public outreach opportunities with the research. This project
provides educational opportunities to high school students, undergraduate and
graduate students as well as a postdoctoral fellow. The behavioral setup is
simple, and easy to operate. Thus, it is particularly attractive for relatively
inexperienced researchers such as undergraduates and high school students.