* 0817166
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: When And Why Negative Campaigning Affects Voter Turnout
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2009
* Yanna Krupnikov, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2009
* USD 11,780.00

Do negative campaign advertisements demobilize voters? The answer to this
question is crucial to understanding democracy. If negative campaign
advertisements discourage citizens from voting, then political legitimacy is in
question. This project shows when and why campaign negativity can discourage
individuals from voting. More specifically, the project demonstrates that
negative advertisements demobilize voters only under specific
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing work on this topic has produced
conflicting results. Some scholars claim that negative advertising demobilizes
the electorate, while other scholars argue either that negative advertising
actually increases turnout or does not have any particular effect on turnout.
This project contends that scholars have reached this empirical stalemate
because existing research ignores two critical ideas: some individuals decide
which candidate they prefer long before Election Day and negative information
has a different effect before and after a person decides how to vote. This study
combines these two ideas to argue that negative advertising demobilizes voters,
but only those who have decided which candidate they prefer. The project uses an
experiment to test this process directly and survey data to demonstrate this
pattern over seven elections. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On a broader level, this
study suggests that campaigns that turn negative late in the election season may
be more likely to lower voter turnout. In addition, my work provides a roadmap
for practitioners. "Going negative" is a topic debated among campaign staffers
because it is often unclear if and when negative ads aid candidates in their
quest for office. The research undertaken here helps deal with these
uncertainties by clarifying how negative campaigning affects voters and which
voters will be most susceptible to negativity.