* 0817121
* LTREB: Population and community ecology of desert winter annuals
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2013
* D. Lawrence Venable, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 07/31/2013
* USD 568,746.00

This project will record the population and community dynamics of desert winter
annual plants on permanent plots first monitored 26 years ago at the Desert
Laboratory near Tucson, AZ, USA. It will provide understanding of demographic
variation and its role in population and community ecology. Soil seed reserves
will be monitored to determine the fraction of seeds that germinate and the
fraction that persist in dormancy. Experiments will determine the role of
granivores in lowering the populations of desert annuals and determine when
seeds die during the year. Models will be constructed to determine the role of
soil seed banks in buffering populations and how species differences promote
coexistence and species diversity. Calibrating the 25 year data set with weather
data will permit the prediction of biotic response to climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Desert annual plants have played an important role
as model organisms in the development of understanding of how organisms adapt to
variable and unpredictable environments. They have also been used to exemplify
ideas about non-equilibrium community dynamics. This project will provide the
best available long-term data to test these ideas. This research will combine
research and education by involving students in mentoring and research,
emphasizing underrepresented groups.