* 0817094
* NSWP:  Multiscale Study of Magnetic Field-Line and Energetic Particle Dispersal in the Turbulent Solar Wind
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Brigitte Ragot, Helio Research
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Bellaire
* 09/30/2011
* USD 152,561.00

The Principal Investigator will develop a realistic description of the dynamics
of charged energetic particles in turbulent fields typical of the solar wind
between the Sun and 1AU, including all intermediate non-resonant scales. She
intends to model magnetic field-line (MFL) transport and dispersion on a very
broad range of size scales, as well as investigate the pitch-angle scattering
and dispersal of particles in those fields. Using data from the ACE and Wind
spacecraft, the PI plans a detailed analysis of solar flare particle-intensity
time profiles to search for direct observational clues about solar wind field-
line wandering and particle scattering, and to test innovative theoretical and
numerical models. She will simulate wandering MFLs and particle trajectories in
the turbulent SW in order to quantify the effects on drifts and pure particle
scattering across and along MFLs, particle transport, MFL cross-field
displacement, and MFL separation.

This multi-scale study of MFL and energetic particle dispersal in the turbulent
solar wind is crucial to the prediction of solar energetic particle (SEP)
intensities at Earth and therefore addresses the goals of the National Space
Weather Program. SEPs pose major threats to satellite operations,
communications, and astronauts in space. Beyond space physics and space weather
forecasting, the transport of particles in turbulent magnetic fields is
fundamental to research in astrophysics and plasma physics.