* 0817082
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Information, Communication and Political Learning
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2009
* John Ryan, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2009
* USD 6,232.00

Every decision an individual makes is based partly on the individual's
information about the alternatives. For political decisions, this information
comes primarily from two sources: the media and informal discussion with friends
and family. Obtaining information from the media is costly because individuals
may lack the motivation, the ability, or the opportunity to learn. Individuals
who are able to learn about politics participate more frequently and participate
more effectively. People who lack political information have two alternatives if
they hope to participate effectively in politics: pay the costs to become
informed or find a low cost means that will help them act as the informed do.
Many scholars argue that the latter is preferable and suggest that low cost
information is readily available in the form of political discussion. This
project is concerned primarily with two questions about how individuals use
political discussion to make decisions. First, to what extent do individuals
learn factual information from their discussion partners? Second, do uninformed
individuals with expert discussion partners vote the same way that informed
individuals vote? This project uses multiple methods to examine the factors that
promote and inhibit learning of political facts through social communication.
Analysis of survey data suggests partisan discussion partners bias evaluations
of objective conditions. Further, individuals with better informed discussion
partners do not vote as informed individuals vote. The survey data, however,
does not provide the researcher with the actual messages that discussion
partners are communicating. Because of this, it is not clear why political
discussion is not a more effective means of communicating political information.

To examine this question, this project uses an experiment to provide the
investigator with the data necessary to evaluate the communication conditions
that are optimal for learning facts and using those facts to make better
decisions. In the experiment, subjects learn the proposals of two computer-
generated candidates and then vote for the candidate whose proposals award them
more money. Subjects determine the payoff from proposals using private
information provided to them. On average, this information is accurate, but any
single piece of information may be inaccurate. They also receive information
from other subjects. The socially communicated information may come from sources
that are uninformed or biased in favor of one of the candidates. Many
researchers see social communication as a low cost means for the uninformed to
learn about politics. This project will either demonstrate that social
communication is a viable path to information for these groups or explain why
hurdles remain. This project will have broader impacts by showing political
organizers how to improve communications with the less informed as one means of
stimulating political participation. By having undergraduate students
participate in the experiments, this project would also teach students about
social scientific approaches to examining human behavior.