* 0817241
* Rhythmic oscillations in the entorhino-hippocampal system: biophysics and dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2013
* Horacio Rotstein, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 06/30/2013
* USD 297,791.00

Rhythmic oscillations at various well identified frequency bands have been
recorded in the brain using EEG (electroencephalogram) techniques during both
wakefulness and sleep, and have been linked to various important cognitive and
behavioral tasks. This project focuses on two of these rhythms, theta (4 - 12
Hz) and gamma (30 - 80 Hz), that have been observed in the hippocampus and the
entorhinal cortex (EC), and have been implicated in learning, memory, spatial
navigation and path integration (the ability to calculate a path on the basis of
self motion cues). Using biophysical (conductance-based) modeling, dynamical
systems techniques and computational simulations, the investigator explores how
these rhythms emerge at the single cell and network leves, and what are their
dynamic properties. The goal is to understand the basic dynamic and biophysical
principles governing the generation of these rhythms over a wide spectrum of
interacting levels of organization, ranging from the subcellular, through the
cellular to the network leves, and how all this contributes to the functional
role of these rhythmic oscillations. At the cellular level, the focus is on the
so called stellate cells (SCs) from layer II of the medial EC that display
mixed-mode oscillations (subthreshold oscillations interspersed with spikes) in
the theta frequency regime. Using reduction of dimensions techniques we uncover
a minimal biophysically plausible model that reproduces the observed mixed-mode
oscillatory patterns. This model is both nonlinear and multi-scale. The study of
its underlying dynamic structure, the so called canard structure, allows the
investigator to understand how the observed patterns emerge from the interaction
between a persistent sodium and a hyperpolarization-activated currents, as
experimentally observed. This knowledge will be used to understand two important
aspects of network activity: How SCs process structured information (sinusoidal,
noisy and synaptic inputs), in particular how the intrinsic and synaptic
currents interact to maintain the SC activity in the theta frequency regime, and
how all these properties cooperate to generate rhythmic activity at theta and
gamma frequencies in networks that include SCs along with interneurons,
pyramidal cells and other cell types. More specifically, the questions of how
and under what conditions the same network is able to generate theta and gamma
rhythmic activity will be investigated, as well as how the abrupt transitions
between both rhythms occur. Single SCs have the potential ability to spike in
the gamma frequency regime, but the associated time scale is hidden in single
isolated cells and it is uncover in the network level when the level of
inhibition is deficient.

This project addresses the general issue of how the brain is able to generate
rhythmic activity at various frequency bands as the result of the biophysical
properties of the networks that are substrate to these rhythms. A set of
problems that are motivated by experimental results and are key to the
understanding of the neural circuitries that are substrate to the observed
rhythmic oscillations in the EC are considered. The results of this research
provide valuable information about the biophysical mechanism of generation of
these rhythms, not only in the EC, but also in the hippocampus where cells and
networks with similar biophysical and dynamic properties can be found, and which
receives direct inputs from the EC. In addition, the results will provide
important insights into behavioral issues such as navigation where the theta
rhythms in both the hippocampus and the EC plays a relevant role. Finally, this
research will shed light into the role that the transition from theta to a
hyper-excitable (gamma) frequency regime plays in the generation of epileptic
seizures.