* 0817918
* Enhancement of Electrosensory Function via Social Interaction
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Eric Fortune, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 06/30/2012
* USD 428,408.00

How do brains control behavior? For most behaviors, animals use information
gathered by sensory receptors (like vision, touch, and receptors in muscles) to
control movement. When an animal or a person moves through its environment, its
movement generates widespread stimulation of sensory receptors, such as the flow
of visual images on the retina. These studies examine the relationships between
movement, sensing, and brain mechanisms to identify fundamental principles for
the control of behavior. The work includes a tightly integrated combination of
behavioral experiments, mathematical modeling, and neurophysiological
experiments that will be conducted in an ideally suited biological system,
weakly electric fishes. These fishes have the ability to produce and detect
electric fields, which permit experiments and analyses that are not possible in
other animals. The behavioral experiments will measure the natural movements and
social signals of these fish in the natural habitat of the Amazon basin and in
the laboratory. The results will be mathematically modeled to determine the
sensory images experienced by the fish in these settings. Reproductions of these
sensory experiences will then be presented to the fish in neurophysiological
experiments to examine the neural codes and mechanisms for sensory processing
and locomotor control. The ultimate goal of the project is to describe basic
principles for sensorimotor control that will be applicable to all animals, and
can be translated for use in robotic systems. Interestingly, the behavioral
studies in the Amazon basin will require the development and deployment of new
electronic systems that will be used for environmental monitoring of critical
aquatic habitats. Finally, these experiments will involve the training of
promising students in both Ecuador and at the Johns Hopkins University in
integrative biology and mathematical modeling.