* 0817302
* Support of BGSW5: the 5th Biennial Geochemical SIMS Workshop; June 13-15, 2008 at the UW Conference Center, University of Wisconsin - Madison
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2008,02/28/2009
* Noriko Kita, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 02/28/2009
* USD 18,731.00

0817302&lt;br/&gt;Valley&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will partially support
the 5th Biennial Geochemical SIMS Workshop (BGSW5) on June 13-15, 2008 at the UW
Conference Center, University of Wisconsin - Madison. As for the first 4 BGSWs
(Los Angeles, 1996; Woods Hole, 1998; Tempe, 2001; Los Angeles, 2005), the PI's
will bring together scientists and students from the nation's geological SIMS
laboratories, instrument manufacturers, and other interested personnel to
discuss the state of the art of SIMS microbeam analysis techniques and
scientific results. The 2.5 year gap since BGSW4; the recent technological
developments of SIMS instruments (IMS-1280, nanoSIMS, IMS-7f GEO); and the
installation of new labs (Hawaii, Caltech, Virginia Tech) makes this meeting
overdue. One result of these developments is enhanced precision of measurement
for isotope ratios and burgeoning interest in SIMS by the stable isotope
community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BGSW is of great importance to the national
geochemistry community since it represents the only regular meeting of
researchers from geochemically-oriented SIMS labs in the United States. These
facilities are vital for developing new geochemical SIMS applications and
providing access and expertise to scientists from across the country who require
SIMS capabilities in carrying out own research. As in past meetings, the PI's
will make a particular effort to allow students and recent PhD's to participate
in the BGSW meeting.