* 0817307
* Collaborative Research:   CCLI-Phase 2:  Colorado Momentum:  Oral Assessment in the Mathematical Sciences Classroom
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Gene Abrams, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Standard Grant
* Richard A. Alo
* 09/30/2011
* USD 45,040.00

Mathematics (21) This collaborative project addresses a problem that occurs in
many mathematics and mathematics-related courses at the university-level across
the US: high failure rates in important early college mathematics courses,
especially in Calculus I. The teaching strategy being used and tested is based
on the idea of using Enhanced Conceptual Development through Focused Oral
Discourse, or Orals. The current work is analyzing and extending earlier work
that has been focused on helping students identified as at risk of failing
calculus. Based on the earlier success of reducing failure rates using effective
teaching strategies, including Orals, the project team is now applying these
teaching strategies to diverse users in several new settings: to classes taught
in different STEM (science, technology engineering, and mathematics)
departments, at a different college, and at different educational levels.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are to: 1) Refine, implement,
and test Orals with diverse groups of learners and in diverse education
settings; 2) Provide training, coaching and evaluation for facilitators of Orals
including Instructors, Teaching Assistants and Undergraduate Learning
Assistants; 3) Provide extensive assessment artifacts of the implementations; 4)
Create a database and website of new learning materials (Orals questions for
diverse courses); and 5) Improve the retention and understanding of STEM
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The importance of discourse
in the mathematical sciences classroom has already been shown for K-12. A
potentially important impact of this proposal will be to contribute to the
national dialogue by conducting careful experiments that assess one method of
increasing discourse: Orals. In particular, the project team will conduct proof
of concept studies of Orals, in moving from small classrooms (the original
setting) to large lecture sections. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Many
STEM majors require successful completion of a calculus sequence; however, many
university students do not achieve their career goals because of their inability
to pass the introductory calculus courses. This project will address this
important national issue. The new work will not only be in a larger variety of
mathematics courses, but also in introductory Aerospace and Mechanical
Engineering courses, and at a local high school in a two-year algebra
course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;