* 0817035
* Historical Climate Change and Prediction of Endemism in the Central Corridor of the Brazilian Atlantic Rainforest
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Craig Moritz, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2012
* USD 586,016.00

Areas of especially high or unique species and genetic diversity, referred to as
?biodiversity hotspots?, are of particular concern for conservation, but are not
sufficiently well-known for effective conservation planning. This project will
both advance the field of phylogeography and contribute to conservation
planning, through development and testing of a novel integrative procedure for
predicting species and genetic diversity. Specifically, the research will
combine remote sensing, geographic information technology, environmental niche
modeling, molecular genetics, and field and museum information to generate
models of past distributions of habitats and species and will test the ability
of these models to predict contemporary patterns of biodiversity, including
locations of biodiversity hot-spots. The research will examine the amphibians
and reptiles of the central corridor of the Brazilian Atlantic forest to test
the hypothesis that this area functioned as a major refuge for forest species
during extreme climates of the late Quaternary, thereby producing areas of
unique local diversity and high overall regional diversity. The work entails
faunal surveys at 12 forest sites and detailed genetic analyses of 9 species.

This research will generate novel information about molecular and taxonomic
diversity. The Brazilian Atlantic forest region has high rates of deforestation
and a poorly described fauna, so the results not only will test a new method for
predicting sites of uniquely valuable species and genetic diversity, but also
will inform regional conservation planning. The project extends scientific
linkages with Brazilian universities through cross-country training of students
and postdocs, enhancement of biotic collections in Brazil and the US, and
collaborative field, lab, and analytical work. In-country workshops will engage
local conservation NGOs to maximize impact on regional conservation planning
efforts, while broader public outreach is achieved through a project-specific
website. The project is co-funded by Division of Environmental Biology and
Office of International Science and Engineering.

