* 0817432
* Collaborative Research: Recurring Patterns in Molecular Science: Reusable Learning Resources
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Laura Bartolo, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Herbert H. Richtol
* 08/31/2012
* USD 140,326.00

INTERDISCIPLINARY (99)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project creates, assesses, and
disseminates interdisciplinary instructional materials that, while designed for
use in chemistry, materials science, biology and physics courses, also help
students draw connections among disciplines. The scope is molecular science
including both the study of how molecular structure and motion lead to emergent
macroscopic properties, and the synthesis and engineering of structures with
desirable properties. The disciplines share both these goals of molecular
science and recurring patterns that appear in the explanatory frameworks and
tools. The materials will help make these recurring patterns explicit for
students. Four virtual labs (VLs) that combine simulation and visualization
tools with instructional support materials are being constructed. Each VL
provides instruction and practice regarding a recurring pattern of molecular
science. The project creates instructional materials that help students
construct a coherent set of knowledge and intellectual resources that can be
applied in situations that cross disciplines. Impact is enhanced by designing
materials for use in current disciplinary courses, since this provides a means
to broadly promote interdisciplinary education without requiring a substantial
restructuring of the educational system. Broad use is further promoted by the
following: the VLs are flexible learning resources that can be used in a variety
of learning contexts, they are being tested in a variety of institution types,
and they are being disseminated through existing successful digital libraries.