* 0817177
* How Does RNase III Regulate Antibiotic Production in Streptomyces Coelicolor?
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* George Jones, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 07/31/2012
* USD 585,414.00

Nearly 70% of all antibiotics used in clinical and veterinary medicine are
synthesized by members of the bacterial genus, Streptomyces. Ribonuclease III
(RNase III) is a double strand specific endoribonuclease distributed widely in
bacteria and eukaryotes. Mutations in the RNase III gene in Streptomyces
coelicolor reduce or abolish synthesis of all four antibiotics normally produced
by the organism. Thus, RNase III is a global regulator of antibiotic synthesis
in S. coelicolor. RNA immunoprecipitation followed by microarray analysis (a
RIP-Chip approach) will be used to examine the mechanism of RNase III regulation
of antibiotic production. Antibody to a mutant form of RNase III will be used to
precipitate complexes formed between the enzyme and its target RNAs. RNAs will
be extracted from the immunoprecipitates and used to synthesize complementary
DNAs (cDNAs). The cDNAs will be used in microarray studies to identify RNAs that
are enriched in the immunoprecipitates. RNAs that may be involved in the
regulation of gene expression, e.g. mRNAs for RNA polymerase sigma factors,
repressors, activators, etc. will be studied further. Cleavage assays will
verify that these mRNAs are substrates for RNase III. The corresponding genes
will be disrupted and the effects of disruption on antibiotic production
assessed. In this way, genes whose products are substrates for RNase III and
which regulate antibiotic production in S. coelicolor will be
identified.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many of the planned experiments will lend
themselves to performance by undergraduates and undergraduate researchers,
especially minority and women undergraduates, will be recruited to the project.
The research will also involve collaboration between the applicant lab and a lab
in the UK, furthering the NSF goal of fostering international research
collaborations. The project will also provide an excellent training opportunity
for the postdoctoral fellows associated with it. Results of the research will be
disseminated to the scientific community extending our understanding of the
mechanisms involved in the production of useful antibiotics.&lt;br/&gt;