* 0817969
* Dendritic Signal Integration Underlying Plasticity
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Dejan Zecevic, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 07/31/2012
* USD 700,002.00

The concomitant activity of neurons in the brain can either potentiate or
depress functional connections (synapses) between neurons in a persistent
manner. These changes have properties that have made them the premiere cellular
model to study regulation of memory mechanisms and learning. The overall aim of
this research is to characterize, in dendrites and, for the first time, in
dendritic spines of individual neurons, the non-linear and spatially
inhomogeneous interactions of membrane potential signals and calcium signals
that represent the first fundamental step in the induction of synaptic
plasticity. Experiments will be conducted with brain slices prepared from rat
hippocampus, a region with an essential role in learning and the establishment
of new memories. The dendrites and spines of individual neurons will be explored
with a novel imaging technique using a voltage sensitive dye, so that electrical
activity can be monitored simultaneously from the entire dendritic arbor.
Answers to some of the questions articulated in this project would further our
understanding of experience related changes in the strength of functional
connections in the brain, and are likely to lead to novel ideas about mechanisms
that underlie learning and memory formation. Thus, the results of this analysis
will bear on the basic neuroscience of higher nervous activity. The broader
impacts of this research will be realized primarily by contributing to better
understanding of the brain, thereby promoting the progress of fundamental
science. Better understanding of brain mechanisms has clear and widely
documented positive effects on developing the most advanced concepts used in
information processing and computational technologies which, in turn, have
enormous impact on almost all aspects of modern human activities. The impacts of
this research will also be realized through teaching and mentoring of graduate
and MD/PhD students and by providing opportunities for the participation of
underrepresented minorities in research.