* 0817173
* NSF Workshop on Human-Computer Interaction for 21st Century Discovery
* CSE,OAC
* 04/01/2008,12/31/2008
* Marilyn Lombardi, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 12/31/2008
* USD 50,000.00

Institution: Renaissance Computing Institute (RENCI), University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Marilyn
Lombardi&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Today's graphical user interfaces continue to rely
on WIMP (windows, icons, menus, pointing device) technology first developed in
the 1960's. High performance computational science is still commonly performed
in batch mode, since today's HPC architectures and software do not support real
time interaction between scientists and HPC applications. How can cutting edge
21st century interaction mechanisms enable high performance science and
discovery? How can new technology make science come alive for students and the
general public? Jointly sponsored by the NSF Office of Cyberinfrastructure (OCI)
and the Computing and Information Science and Engineering (CISE) directorate,
this two-day, invitation-only workshop will bring together a select group of
thought leaders from industry and the academy to develop a guiding vision and a
cross-cutting research agenda for human-centered interface and interaction
design over the next decade. The workshop represents a critical step in moving
beyond independent research projects toward coherent application of national
resources in the area of human-centered interface and interaction design.
Invitees drawn from computer science, engineering, robotics, artificial
intelligence, the cognitive sciences, perceptual psychology, neurobiology,
architecture, design, and the interactive arts will work together to address a
set of key questions: Where do we want to be by the year 2018? How do we plan on
getting there in a scalable and sustainable fashion? What are the major trends
in the field? Which forces are driving change? What impedes further progress?
What are the technical, social, psychological, and legal issues requiring
further study? What are our beliefs about human-computer interaction research
and its goals? What are the funding priorities over the coming decade and what
are the respective roles of the federal, non-profit, and commercial sectors in
shaping the group's vision of a human-centered future? Workshop results will be
captured in a workshop report and disseminated to the National Science
Foundation and the research community.