* 0817658
* Tissue-specific Identification of CaM Kinase II Binding Partners and Substrates
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Robert Tombes, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 07/31/2012
* USD 366,000.00

The formation of organisms from a fertilized egg depends on the coordinated
expression of genes, whose protein products interact with and influence each
other. One of these genes encodes a regulatory protein known as CaM kinase II.
This protein is 94% identical between humans and simple vertebrate organisms,
such as the zebrafish. In fact, defects in the development of the heart caused
by mutations in the zebrafish CaM kinase II gene, can be reversed by introducing
the human CaM kinase II protein. This protein normally influences proper heart
development by binding to and/or modifying other proteins. Previous studies from
this laboratory have used a biochemical technique (peptide mass spectrometry) to
identify such protein partners in cells in culture. Proteomic studies like these
are ultimately required to define downstream targets and thus functions of
regulatory proteins like CaM kinase II. &lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary
project will link molecular tools with proteomics in a whole animal model to
identify downstream proteins in specific tissues at any time during development.
In particular, such proteins will be identified at specific developmental stages
in the embryonic heart. It is anticipated that this project will shed light on
the unsolved puzzle of cardiac chamber formation and looping and will begin to
identify new binding partners and substrates of the CaM kinase II family. This
project will influence our understanding of the development of the
cardiovascular system and will develop a template approach for other
investigators interested in evaluating tissue-specific changes in the nature of
any protein complex during development. Graduate and undergraduate students will
be trained.