* 0818414
* Spatiotemporal Structure of Sensory Acquisition Behaviors: Experiments on the Rat Vibrissal System
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Mitra Hartmann, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* David Coppola
* 07/31/2012
* USD 540,854.00

When you explore an object using your hands, or you change your footsteps based
on the type of surface you are walking on, your sense of touch is seamlessly
combined with the movements you make. How does your brain accomplish this feat?
This is a large, open question that is difficult to answer using human studies
alone. This project will investigate this question by studying the rat whisker
(vibrissal) system. Rats move their whiskers back and forth to touch and explore
different objects, much as humans use their hands. The tactile information is
conveyed from the base of the whiskers through a series of processing stages in
the brain. This research project focuses on understanding the processing that
occurs in the second stage, in a brain structure called "spinal trigeminal
nucleus interpolaris" (SpVi). In the first part of the project, computer
simulations and robotic models will be used to test the plausibility of the
different types of processing that might occur in SpVi. In the second part of
the project, technology to measure the precise contact times and locations of a
rat's whiskers with different objects will be developed. Finally, in the third
part of the project, electrical signals from neurons in SpVi, will be recorded
and correlated with the animal's ongoing behavior as it touches different
objects. The results that emerge will allow the testing of three different
hypotheses for the processing that occurs in SpVi. Regardless of which
hypothesis(es) is/are found to be correct, the results will improve the
understanding of how the brain combines sensing and movement to allow animals to
perceive the world. This project will contribute to the interdisciplinary
training of two graduate students and to ongoing graduate-level course
development at Northwestern University. It will also provide meaningful research
opportunities in engineering for at least six undergraduates, with a specific
effort made to include women and underrepresented minorities.