* 0818478
* IRADS: Collaborative on the Analyses of Pathways from Childhood to Adulthood
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* Jacquelynne Eccles, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Namy
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,699,999.00

This collaboration aims to stimulate innovative, interdisciplinary analyses and
interpretations of existing longitudinal data sets bearing on pathways through
human development. Tracing the interacting effects of family, peer,
neighborhood, and school influences during childhood on life success and problem
behaviors in adulthood is a challenging task that is critical to understanding
human development and designing interventions to treat maladaptive behavior.
Individual longitudinal research projects that follow children over time usually
have focused on a limited number of childhood factors that might shape later
behavior. At the heart of this Collaborative is the recognition that each of the
disciplines in the social and behavioral sciences has made substantial
contributions to our collective understanding of human behavior and development.
The evolution of our science now requires a coordinated approach to further
elucidate the complexities of experience and development; thus, the current
Collaborative involves sociologists, economists, education specialists, and
psychologists. This Collaborative is broader in scope than previous efforts in
several ways: (1) it begins with a relatively large set of established, similar,
and committed longitudinal projects involving scholars from a range of
behavioral science disciplines; (2) it examines the full span of life-course
development, from childhood to adolescence to adulthood and across generations;
(3) it examines human development in the many contexts in which it occurs,
including families, the peer group, neighborhoods, schools, and communities; (4)
it utilizes the most advanced statistical analysis techniques; (5) findings will
have implications for understanding and creating effective interventions; and
(6) there will be widespread dissemination of both the substantive and
methodological knowledge. A sample of specific topics include: factors affecting
children's school readiness; effects on children of parents obtaining additional
educational experiences; the bidirectional effects of parenting strategies on
children's behavior over time; and adulthood outcomes (e.g., educational and
occupational success, substance use) of childhood and adolescent aggression. In
sum, after several decades of productive yet fragmented longitudinal research in
the field, this Collaborative intends to integrate and replicate findings from
existing longitudinal (community-level, national, and international) studies and
take many steps forward in our knowledge of developmental
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Collaborative fosters new methodological and
statistical approaches, particularly models that examine simultaneous, multiple
interacting ecological contexts, which will be disseminated through conferences,
published papers, and invited talks. The Collaborative involves experts from a
variety of disciplines in its meetings and activities, and encourages the
participation of underrepresented undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral
students, and faculty both from the University of Michigan and from the project
sites. Results will inform psychosocial interventions and social policy. To the
extent that researchers can more fully understand the influences and mechanisms
that contribute to success and lack of success in life, the more likely it is
that interventions can be created that will make a difference to individuals,
families, schools, and neighborhoods. It is a specific focus of this
Collaborative to examine social policies in different countries to understand
how the well-being of children and families may differ due to the policy
conditions in each country. Efforts will be made to disseminate the research
findings of the Collaborative beyond academic circles to policymakers,
researchers, and other important stakeholders in intervention and policy
development.