* 0818912
* Influences of Perceptual Fluency on Explicit Testing of Recognition Memory
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Ken Paller, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynne Bernstein
* 08/31/2011
* USD 430,000.00

The ability to accurately recognize information that was previously learned is
central to human success. This ability relies on a complex set of brain
mechanisms. Traditionally, human memory is subdivided into memory with awareness
of retrieval, or explicit memory, and memory without awareness of retrieval, or
implicit memory. Surprisingly, it is possible for a person to respond with high
accuracy on a memory test in the absence of explicit feelings of familiarity or
remembering. With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Ken Paller
and colleagues at Northwestern University will characterize the circumstances
under which implicit recognition is possible. Implicit recognition is found when
people have negligible confidence about their memory, whereas explicit memory
shows the reverse pattern. Implicit recognition is stronger for stimuli that are
learned under conditions that place severe limitations on information
processing, even though these conditions lead to very poor explicit memory. By
recording brain activity from electrodes placed on the scalp while people
perform memory tests, Dr. Paller will investigate which specific brain
potentials are associated with implicit memory and which are associated with
explicit memory. The results of this research will provide new information about
mechanisms of implicit and explicit memory and about how both types of mechanism
can drive accurate memory judgments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project
will provide training opportunities for undergraduate, graduate, and post-
doctoral trainees in cognitive neuroscience. Specific findings are expected to
be disseminated widely and will lead to numerous insights into how explicit and
implicit memory influences everyday behavior. Such knowledge will be important
for enhancing our understanding of learning and memory in the classroom, in a
court of law, in the acquisition of various cognitive skills, and in
interpersonal interactions. The work will also aid efforts to devise
rehabilitation strategies for people with memory difficulties due to aging or
neurological disorders.&lt;br/&gt;