* 0818931
* Estimating RDD Survey Bias Using ZIP Code Matching to Census Data
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2008,02/29/2012
* Paul Biemer, Research Triangle Institute
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 02/29/2012
* USD 143,835.00

Low and declining response rates in household surveys provide the potential for
nonresponse bias, but assessing the nonresponse bias is a challenging problem
when characteristics of nonrespondents are unknown. For example, for random-
digit-dial (RDD) surveys, information about nonrespondents may be limited to
just the telephone number. To address this issue, the census geocoding (CG)
method has sometimes been used. This method appends aggregate census information
for small geographic units (for example, census blocks, block groups, or tracts)
to nonresponding cases located in those units. These census data can then be
used to evaluate nonresponse bias or adjust for it. Little is known about the
effectiveness of the CG approach, but it is often used in nonresponse
evaluations, particularly for RDD surveys. While the CG method is an important
tool for recovering information from nonrespondents, it relies on the degree to
which its assumptions are met. This research project will investigate the
efficacy of the CG method using RDD and face-to-face survey data and will
develop guidelines for implementing it so as to maximize its effectiveness for
use in household surveys. One of the goals of the proposed project is to
investigate the minimum amount of information required to apply the CG approach
effectively. As an example, if only a telephone number is known, census
aggregate data closer to the telephone exchange-level must be used rather than
at the block-level. Finding a method that can be used effectively to evaluate
and correct for nonresponse bias in household surveys will be an important
contribution to survey research.

Much of social science relies on probability-based surveys, which in turn rely
on the ability to obtain survey measures from all sample members. Nonresponse
threatens probability-based inference. This project will advance the knowledge
about methods for evaluating and adjusting for nonresponse bias in surveys. The
project will not only evaluate the CG method for use in telephone surveys but
for virtually any survey where the CG method can be used. This includes any
survey where information on nonrespondents is limited to an address, ZIP code,
or telephone number and very little else. Many household surveys use address
frames where all that is known for a frame unit is the household family name,
the address and, in some cases, a telephone number. The CG approach can be
applied in these situations to evaluate the bias due to nonresponse. The
research is supported by the Methodology, Measurement, and Statistics Program
and a consortium of federal statistical agencies as part of a joint activity to
support research on survey and statistical methodology.

