* 0818387
* Lipoxygenases and Diversity in Oxylipin Biosynthesis
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Marcia Newcomer, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2012
* USD 400,000.00

Intellectual Merit: Oxylipins are signaling compounds that mediate an array of
defense mechanisms in animals, plants, fungi and cyanobacteria. They are derived
from polyunsaturated fatty acids and their synthesis is initiated by the action
of enzymes known as lipoxygenases. The product of the lipoxygenase catalyzed
reaction is further transformed to the active signaling molecule by the action
of additional enzymes. The reaction catalyzed by lipoxygenase is remarkably
precise: the enzyme is able to generate only one of a number of products
possible in a non-enzymatic reaction. The research is aimed at providing a
three-dimensional understanding of how different lipoxygenases can generate a
distinct product from the same starting compound. In addition, lipoxygenases are
often expressed as bi-functional proteins, i.e. the enzyme is fused to a second
catalytic domain which further transforms the lipoxygenase product. Thus the
chemical diversity of oxylipins in nature is further expanded. This research
will reveal the catalytic machinery that produces the remarkable diversity of
compounds produced by bi-functional lipoxygenases. Knowledge of the structural
basis of the highly novel chemistries performed by this unique class of enzymes
will provide the means to exploit mono and bi-functional lipoxygenases for the
synthesis of natural products, or derivatives thereof, to produce pesticides and
anti-fungals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The studies form an
essential part of a long term commitment to the integration of research and
education. While graduate students will primarily be responsible for execution
of the research, undergraduates will continue to make important contributions to
progress and students at all levels will gain broad exposure to both state-of-
the-art techniques and an integrative approach to understanding biological
processes at the molecular level. Understanding molecular mechanisms at a level
that allows one to exploit the tools of nature to improve the world in which
lives requires combining diverse approaches. While this need for an
interdisciplinary effort has fueled what may be termed "team" science, such a
training environment is not necessarily hospitable for young investigators as it
can easily foster highly specialized training if their movement between sub-
disciplines is not deemed cost effective. In the studies the PI and students
work side by side to combine methods in structural biology, biochemistry and
molecular biology to address aspects of structure/function relationships in key
enzymes in oxylipin biosynthesis.