* 0818276
* RIG: Broadening Participation of Deaf and Hard-of-Hearing Scientists Through Laboratory Studies of a Harmful Algal Species
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Caroline Solomon, Gallaudet University
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2011
* USD 189,947.00

Increases in both phosphorus (P) and nitrogen (N) loading to aquatic ecosystems
in the United States have been linked to habitat changes, decreases in
biodiversity, increases in hypoxia and harmful algal blooms which are all
symptoms of eutrophication. Until recently, freshwater ecosystems were not
considered to be impacted by increases in N loading because these waters are
considered to be P limited and because there is a prevalence of N2-fixing
cyanobacteria that supply N. However, increasing anthropogenic N loading is
causing changes in the expression of eutrophication, one of which may be an
increase in the proliferation of toxic cyanobacterial blooms. Yet, there have
been relatively few studies that have directly addressed the physiology of N
quantity and form on growth and toxicity of these organisms. The prevalence of
Microcystis aeruginosa, in particular, is increasing. Unlike many cynaobacteria,
it does not fix N, and thus may be uniquely poised to proliferate with high N
loading into freshwater ecosystems and to take advantage of the altered
biogeochemical availability of N. This project will use laboratory continuous
culture systems to study the growth and N physiology of Microcystis aeruginosa
by (1) comparing differences in rates of growth, N assimilation, and toxin
(microcystin) production when grown on inorganic N (NO3- and NH4+) or organic N
(urea) sources over an increasing gradient of N:P ratios, and (2) investigating
competitive ability for different N sources by examining kinetics of N uptake
and two N assimilation enzymes (NO3- reductase and urease).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is designed to engage and excite students who
are deaf or hard-of-hearing who have traditionally had few opportunities for
meaningful research experiences at the undergraduate level. The principal
investigator, a beginning deaf female scientist, and her deaf and hard-of-
hearing undergraduate students, will examine differences in rates of growth, N
assimilation, and toxin production in several strains of the cyanobacterial
species, Microcystis aeruginosa. Some experiments will be conducted at Horn
Point Laboratory, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Science, where
these students will have opportunities to interact with faculty and graduate
students working on other aspects of nutrient cycling and algal dynamics. An
integral part of the project will be an environmental science lecture series at
Gallaudet University, educating this under-represented group, the deaf and hard-
of-hearing, about environmental issues including nutrient pollution,
eutrophication and climate change. This study will provide deaf and hard-of-
hearing undergraduate students with a hands-on project that will serve to lead
to larger field studies focusing on the impact of increased N loading on the
frequency and magnitude of toxic cyanobacterial blooms. These opportunities
should provide them the foundation for graduate school in the environmental
sciences.