* 0818240
* CAA: Domestication and Agronomic Selection Influences on Maize Defense Against a Specialist Herbivore
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Julio Bernal, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2012
* USD 165,700.00

This project addresses the ecological and evolutionary bases for the acquisition
by corn, Zea mays ssp. Mays, of the herbivore, Dalbulus maidis (aka corn
leafhopper), as a specialist pest. Specifically, the project will examine how
domestication and agronomic selection for high yield and other traits of human
interest may have weakened corn's defenses against the corn leafhopper, through
comparative studies of corn's perennial ancestor Z. diploperennis, its annual
ancestor Z. mays ssp. parviglumis, a corn landrace, and modern (hybrid) corn.
The research will integrate laboratory and field research, taking advantage of
study sites in central Mexico where the ancestral species of domestic corn
occur. The research will elaborate the relationships between yield and herbivore
defenses in the complex of corn and its less domesticated relatives and will
explore the specific anatomical, morphological, and chemical defenses of each.

The project will contribute to our understanding of the susceptibility of
agricultural plants to pests and of the mechanisms by which herbivores become
pests of agricultural crops. An improved understanding of these processes will
contribute to developing pest management strategies with greater ecological and
evolutionary sustainability than those currently available. The project will
contribute to increasing traditionally under-represented groups in science
careers through training and mentoring of two MS students from minority groups.