* 0818725
* SGER: Adaptation of a chromatographic technique for accurate, rapid and affordable determination of soil amino acid concentration and their fingerprints
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2010
* Hormoz BassiriRad, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 05/31/2010
* USD 63,756.00

There is growing albeit circumstantial evidence that many native soils are
characterized by a relatively large concentration of soluble amino acids (AAs).
Additionally, numerous plant species from multitudes of ecosystems have been
shown to be able to absorb AAs. Despite such evidence, there is considerable
uncertainty about the relative importance of AAs to the annual N requirements of
native plants. The resolution to this uncertainty is slow in coming largely due
to the lack of user friendly and cost effective techniques that can be widely
used in assessing soil AAs and their fingerprints in native soils. In this
study, we propose to use a recently developed ion exchange column to assay AA
composition/fingerprints and to measure their response to climatic and edaphic
factors. Given the unequivocal fact that AAs differ significantly in their
biochemical properties, it follows that each AA requires a distinct membrane
bound carrier to facilitate its uptake and transport. Therefore, it is critical
to know not only total availability of soil AAs but also their composition. We
will use recent advances in High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) to
develop rapid, accurate and affordable measurements of soil AA
profiles.&lt;br/&gt; The proposed research should make what is currently a
specialized analytical chemistry technique easily available for wide spread use
in biogeochemistry research. Ultimately, we hope the results generated here will
remove technical obstacles that are currently slowing down our ability to
characterize and integrate soil AAs information into models of the terrestrial N
cycle.&lt;br/&gt;