* 0818983
* The Assembly of Synaptic Circuits in the Mammalian Retina
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Marla Feller, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* James Deshler
* 07/31/2012
* USD 330,000.00

Prior to birth, before there is communication with the outside world, the
nervous system is spontaneously generating highly patterned activity. Dr. Feller
studies this phenomenon in the developing retina. Before vision is possible,
neighboring retinal ganglion cells, the neurons of the retina that project to
the brain, spontaneously fire correlated bursts of action potentials that
propagate across the retina in the form of waves. This correlated activity,
termed retinal waves, is required for the proper refinement of retinal
projections to targets in the brain. There is a stage of retinal development
immediately preceding eye-opening during which retinal circuits gradually
transition from generating retinal waves to mediating light-evoked responses
that are the first stage of visual processing. During this transition, these two
functional circuits coexist for several days. Two questions regarding this
critical stage of development, when the retina itself may be highly plastic are
addressed. First, how are retinal waves generated? Sophisticated physiology and
imaging experiments will be conducted on acutely isolated mouse retina are used
to identify the circuit that underlies retinal waves. Second, how do retinal
waves and light-evoked responses interact to determine the firing pattern in the
retina? A specialized array of electrodes will be used to record simultaneously
from dozens of retinal ganglion cells to determine the interaction between the
circuits that mediate waves and light-evoked activity. These experiments will
help to better understand the role of spontaneous vs. sensory driven activity in
the assembly of neural circuits. In addition, the funds from this project will
support the training of two young scientists who are new to Neurobiology. The
first is a postdoctoral researcher, Anastasia Anishchenko, who received her Ph.
D. in theoretical physics. The second is graduate student, Aaron Hamby, who is
trained as a molecular biologist. In addition, the results of this research will
be used as material for an undergraduate course on developmental neurobiology
that emphasizes the construction of neural circuits.