* 0818271
* Mechanisms of Timing and Temporal Processing
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,01/31/2010
* Devin McAuley, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 01/31/2010
* USD 240,000.00

Neural mechanisms for assessing the temporal characteristics of events on a
hundreds-of-milliseconds to seconds time scale are fundamental to human
perception and performance. On this time scale, research supports at least two
distinct mechanisms: an interval-based ('stopwatch') mechanism that records,
stores and compares durations and a beat-based ('entrainment') mechanism that
assesses the relative timing of events with respect to an internally-generated
periodicity. One topic that has received relatively little research attention is
the issue of individual differences. This project considers the possibility that
individuals engage in beat-based and interval-based timing, but do so to
different degrees. The general project aim is to identify and characterize
factors mediating engagement of beat-based and interval-based timing mechanisms.
Three lines of research will combine a novel sequence-timing paradigm that
demonstrates robust individual differences, with a mathematical model that
indexes the degree to which performance reflects beat-based judgments. Critical
to the sequence-timing paradigm are stimulus sequences that yield opposite
perceptions about sequence rate ('speeding up' versus 'slowing down') depending
on whether individuals engage in beat-based or interval-based timing,
respectively. The first line examines stimulus characteristics mediating beat-
based timing. The second line assesses flexibility in timing mode, focusing on
attention and task factors. The third line addresses developmental and training
factors. A key contribution of the proposed modeling work is that it integrates
two contrasting theories of timing within a single framework. Using this
framework to clarify the degree to which individuals engage in beat-based timing
will improve current limited understanding of individual differences in timing
behavior and will help better characterize temporal processing deficits linked
to neurological disorders. This project also will contribute to and strengthen
the research and educational environment at the JP Scott Center for
Neuroscience, Mind and Behavior at Bowling Green State University by providing
unique opportunities for interdisciplinary training and collaborative research
activities for undergraduate and graduate students.