* 0818371
* Assembly and Function of the Cyanobacterial Photosystem II Complex
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Robert Burnap, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 08/31/2013
* USD 599,236.00

Intellectual Merit: Oxygenic photosynthesis is the major solar energy conversion
process in the biosphere consequently it is at the very foundation of life on
planet Earth. Photosystem II (PSII) may be considered to be the key enzyme of
this process since it uses light energy to split water (water oxidation)
liberating the tightly bound hydrogens from the oxygen of water and, at the same
time, renders these hydrogens in a form used for producing energy-rich organic
carbon compounds from inorganic carbon (carbon dioxide). This project
investigates the water-oxidation enzyme of PSII, the replacement of damaged PSII
proteins, and assembly of Mn and Ca into the active site.&lt;br/&gt;PSII is a
dynamic structure that is under a constant state of repair owing to the
incessant photodamage it incurs during its normal operation. The repair occurs
via a complex assembly pathway involving the removal of damaged D1 protein,
insertion and proteolytic processing of the nascent D1 protein precursor and the
assembly of the metal atoms of the manganese cluster (4Mn-Ca), which is the
heart of the water oxidation reaction. The D1 protein is the locus of most of
the above mentioned photodamage. A dedicated and conserved D1 damage detection
and replacement mechanism has evolved to repair the damage, but remains to be
understood. &lt;br/&gt;1. Mechanism of 4Mn-Ca assembly. The active site of
water-oxidation contains a cluster of four manganese and one calcium ions (4Mn-
Ca) most of which are bound by the labile D1 protein. The assembly of the 4Mn-Ca
requires light to drive the assembly into an active metal cluster. For reasons
that remain unclear, this assembly process occurs with very low quantum
efficiency. Previous NSF-supported analysis revealed new kinetic features of
this process. Hypotheses regarding the origin of these new kinetic features will
be evaluated using site-directed mutagenesis together with sensitive biochemical
and biophysical techniques that follow the assembly process. The metalloprotein
assembly process is being considered in a kinetic framework, that if valid,
would represent a new, stochastic concept of metal cluster
assembly.&lt;br/&gt;2. Detection of structural changes during the removal and
replacement of damaged D1 protein during the PSII repair cycle. The D1 protein
is buried deeply within the large PSII complex and, consequently, major
rearrangements of the PSII complex must occur during the replacement of damaged
D1 and the insertion and activation of a new copy of the protein. How is
internal damage within the PSII complex detected and what are the signals to
initiate repair? What is happening to the D1 protein during replacement? What
are the structural changes associated with the assembly of the metal cluster?
Two complementary approaches to experimentally address these questions are used:
targeted structure-reactivity approaches using mutant strains containing non-
native cysteines that will be reacted with thiol-reactive reagents to
quantitatively probe site-specific changes in surface exposure. This directed
approach will be complemented using powerful mass spectroscopic methods which
have the potential to discover assembly associated changes in exposure at other
locations in the protein.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Educational impacts include
student exposure to a multidisciplinary attack on an interesting biological
problem and training to utilize, operate, and understand advanced mass
spectrometers. An education collaboration with the Native Americans in
Biological Sciences (NABS) program is planned. The project incorporates a
teaching module tentatively entitled: "Light and Life". It will contain
exercises and materials for the "Biological Dilemma" (a multi-faceted real-world
issue) and for secondary school teachers to utilize in their home science
classes. These will borrow materials from the research project and be modeled on
the most successful activities of earlier programs, which involved close
collaboration with the high school teachers visiting the campus during the
summer academies.