* 0818353
* Novel Statistical Energy Function and Its Applications to Side-chain Modeling and Fold Recognition
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2013
* Jianpeng Ma, Baylor College of Medicine
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/2013
* USD 930,411.00

Computational methods to predict protein structure from sequence are becoming
increasingly important and powerful, particularly in light of structural and
functional annotation of genomic data. To improve the performance of
computational algorithms, this project has three specific aims: (1) Development
of an orientation-dependent statistical potential based on side-chain packing;
(2) Development of a fast and accurate method for generating side-chain rotamer
conformations; and (3) Development of structure profile for alignment and
template identification of remote targets. Currently, the development of
effective potential functions for side-chain modeling is still a challenging
problem in the field. The new statistical potential function and its
applications open a new path to improving the modeling of side-chains. Such a
capability is vitally important for high-accuracy refinement of predicted
structures, which is the most difficult step in structure prediction for the
last few decades.

As a faculty member for the last seven years at both Baylor College of Medicine
and Rice University, the PI bears enormous educational responsibility and shares
high enthusiasm for developing programs to expose underprivileged and minority
students to modern computational techniques and tools of structural biology.
Being in Houston, one of the largest populations of such students in the United
States and having the inter-institutional appointment at both Baylor and Rice
are two important factors that have dramatically enabled the PI to fulfill this
important duty. The results of this research will be integrated into the
extensive and on-going educational outreach activities at both Baylor and Rice
and the computer programs will be made publicly available.