* 0818740
* Regulation and Function of Membrane Lipid Hydrolysis in Lipid-Based Signaling of Plants
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2013
* Xuemin Wang, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Continuing Grant
* Sarah Wyatt
* 07/31/2013
* USD 438,000.00

Regulation and Function of Membrane Lipid Hydrolysis in Lipid-Mediated Signaling
in Plants&lt;br/&gt;Grant proposal number: IOS-0818740&lt;br/&gt;PI: Xuemin
Wang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cell
membranes are rich sources for producing bioactive compounds that affect plant
growth, development, and stress responses. This project investigates the
molecular mechanism by which one class membrane lipid-hydrolyzing enzyme
phospholipase D (PLD) and its product phosphatidic acid (PA) mediate plant
survival, growth, and biomass accumulation. The central hypothesis is that
specific PLDs and PAs mediate plant growth by interacting with proteins in
carbon metabolism and translation regulation. This project will characterize the
interaction of PLD/PA with one group of enzymes in carbon metabolism and another
in translation regulation. The PA/PLD-effector interactions will be
characterized using different approaches, including quantitative biophysical
analysis and open-ended profiling of proteins and lipids in the regulatory
complexes. The intellectual merits of the research are to discover direct
connections of membrane-based signaling with energy metabolism and growth
control and to identify novel regulatory processes in plants with potential to
improve plant production. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activity will have
broader impacts on science, education, and society. The proposed work has the
potential to transform current knowledge on the molecular and biochemical
mechanism by which cells integrate stress and growth cues for optimizing plant
production. It will provide opportunities to train students and researchers in
emerging, under-explored disciplines in plant biology. It will serve as a
platform to broaden participation of underrepresented groups in research. The
information will be disseminated to enhance science and education through
lectures and seminars, classroom teaching, scientific meetings, and
publications. The knowledge gained may be applicable to developing crop plants
with enhanced stress tolerance and productivity.&lt;br/&gt;