* 0818539
* Regulation of BMP signaling in the wing of Drosophila
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2013
* Seth Blair, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Anthea Letsou
* 07/31/2013
* USD 400,000.00

The ability of organisms to control signaling between cells is critical to the
formation of precisely defined cell types, and to thereby control the size and
patterns critical to the formation of tissues and organs during both embryonic
development and adult life. Failures in the regulation of that signaling are
known to underlie human birth defects and a variety of important health
problems, including the excessive cell growth that causes cancers. One of the
most important of the signals between cells is carried by a family of molecules
termed Bone Morphogenetic Proteins (BMPs); in fact, the BMP signals are critical
to the normal development of almost all animal species. However, the way in
which BMP signaling is regulated is still poorly understood. This project
involves a series of studies that will identify and characterize previously
unknown regulators of BMP signaling. It uses for these studies the fruit fly,
Drosophila melanogaster, since the genetic and molecular manipulations possible
in this organism are unmatched by any other experimental system. The studies
make use of a Drosophila tissue exquisitely sensitive to the loss of BMP
signaling; the loss of this tissue in mutant flies provides a powerful method of
identifying defects in novel members of the BMP signaling pathway. These studies
have already led to the isolation and characterization of three novel proteins,
now known to be shared by humans, that bind to and regulate BMP signals during
their passage from cell to cell.

The Broader Impacts of this project are several. It will used to advance
discovery by training both graduate and undergraduate students; undergraduates
are involved not only in senior-level independent study classes but also as part
of the University of Winsconsin's introductory biology course. Many of these
students have gone on to productive careers in the biosciences, as graduate
students, postdocs or faculty. The project also aids in the promotion of
underrepresented groups, and the majority of both graduate and undergraduates so
trained have been women. The PI is also heavily involved in introductory and
advanced undergraduate education, and presents the research findings to students
as part of their introduction to scientific methodology. The molecular reagents
and Drosophila strains developed in the lab are made available to other
researchers either directly or via the national stock centers, and the award is
used to support the PI's websites on techniques and genetic stocks. The PI has
also has used this work to broaden interactions between the biological and
mathematical communities through efforts to mathematically model the action of
specific molecules.