* 0818071
* Gene Regulatory Networks in Stem Cells for Root Vascular Tissues
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2008,01/31/2012
* Ji-Young Lee, Boyce Thompson Institute Plant Research
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Alexander McClure
* 01/31/2012
* USD 435,000.00

PI: Ji-Young Lee&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: IOS-0818071&lt;br/&gt;Title: Gene
regulatory networks in stem cells for root vascular
tissues&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The procambium/cambium is the stem cell population
that controls the cell division and differentiation of plant vascular tissues,
conduits of water and nutrients. The extent of vascular cell division and
differentiation from the procambium/cambium determines diverse growth forms of
vascular plants, such as trees, shrubs, and herbs. Considering these various
growth forms are essential for plants to grow and reproduce in dynamic
environmental conditions, a thorough understanding of genetic regulation
operating in the stem cell population for vascular tissue formation is very
important. Arabidopsis root is an ideal model system for studying gene
regulatory networks in the procambium/cambium because of its feasibility of
tracking cell types and extensive molecular information and tools. Newly
developed genome-wide cell type specific expression data and identification of
an important vascular stem cell regulatory pathway regulated by two
transcription factors, SHORT ROOT (SHR) and PHABULOSA (PHB), provide an
excellent starting point for investigating the stem cell regulatory networks in
root vascular tissue development. In this project, the downstream regulatory
pathways and procambium functions led by SHR and PHB will be identified by
employing systematic approaches that combine molecular genetics, genomics, and
systems biology. Investigation of the fundamental regulation for vascular tissue
production, the main source of future renewable energy, will have a broad impact
on other fields of science and industry, such as agriculture and bioenergy. The
proposed research will integrate training post-doc, graduate students, and
undergraduate students, together forming a team. The research topics will
educate the next generation of scientists who can address interdisciplinary
scientific problems with the most up-to-date knowledge and skills. Results of
the project, including the collection of the gene expression data, mutant lines,
and cell type specific GFP lines, will be disseminated via scientific
publications and a website (http://www.bti.cornell.edu/JiYoungLee.php).
&lt;br/&gt;