* 0818337
* Finding Work After War:   The Role of Military Experience in Civilian Hiring
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2008,09/30/2010
* Meredith Kleykamp, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 09/30/2010
* USD 120,668.00

SES-0818337&lt;br/&gt;Meredith Kleykamp &lt;br/&gt;University of
Kansas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will measure whether employers exhibit
discriminatory or preferential attitudes toward military veterans and whether
this affects veteran treatment in the hiring process. This study explores how
and why veteran outcomes differ by race/ethnicity and gender. The main goals of
the project are to: 1) identify how military veterans fare in hiring, document
the extent of differential hiring treatment of veterans and whether such
treatment varies by race and gender using an experimental design 2) explore the
mechanisms explaining employer treatment of veterans, how employers evaluate
military experience, and what meaning military experience holds in the civilian
hiring process using in-depth interviews with hiring agents and 3) adjudicate
competing sociological explanations for differential veteran/nonveteran
employment outcomes, of human capital development, selection, signaling or
screening, and cultural capital development on the basis of the audit and
interview data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research has broad reaching social impacts. First, it contributes to both the
academic and practical understanding of veteran hiring practices. Findings will
foster development of veteran-friendly transition and employment policies.
Evidence of discriminatory hiring practices or negative sentiments toward
military job seekers would suggest the need for better employer education on
laws protecting military members and better evaluation of compliance with such
laws. On the other hand, evidence of preferential treatment could clarify that
employment transition difficulties facing veterans lie elsewhere in the hiring
or job matching process. The project contributes to the recent University of
Kansas-Ft. Leavenworth initiative facilitating collaboration between the
University and the Army?s Command and General Staff College by providing
information that can be used to aid military policymaking.