* 0818222
* The Physiological and Ecological Constraints on Spontaneous Torpor Imposed by Diet PUFA Content.
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2013
* Craig Frank, Fordham University
* Continuing Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 07/31/2013
* USD 293,378.00

Hibernation is utilized by 75 species of mammals to survive seasonally cold
conditions. Hibernation has thus been strongly favored by natural selection in
many mammalian groups found worldwide. The ecological constraints that may have
restricted the evolution of hibernation in mammals are largely unknown. One
possible ecological constraint on mammalian torpor may be the concentration of
polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) in the diets of free-ranging mammals. This
project will be the first to examine the effects of natural variations in diet
PUFA contents on the over-winter survival of free-ranging hibernators, and,
determine the physiological/ecological basis for geographic variations in the
PUFA contents of the plants consumed by them. The effects of natural variations
in diet fatty acid composition on subsequent over-winter survival will be
determined in a field study involving golden-mantled ground squirrels in the
White Mountains of California. Laboratory feeding/hibernation experiments will
be conducted to determine the effects of body temperature on the degree of
tissue damage that occurs during hibernation. Field studies on the relationship
between elevation, ambient temperature, and plant PUFA content will also be
conducted. The project will provide new insights into the physiological ecology
of mammalian hibernation. The results of these studies will permit the
development of mathematical models to accurately predict the effects of climate
warming on populations of hibernating mammals. The participation of historically
underrepresented students will be enhanced by including paid summer internships
for undergraduates, senior undergraduate thesis projects, and graduate
assistantships awarded to students from underrepresented groups.