* 0818798
* Systematics and Biogeography of Scolecophidian Snakes
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Stephen Hedges, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 08/31/2012
* USD 337,500.00

Scolecophidians ("blind snakes") are burrowing snakes that feed primarily on
small, social insects such as ants, termites, and their larvae. They include the
smallest snakes and are distributed on all continents except Antarctica,
primarily in tropical and subtropical regions. Due to their fossorial lifestyle,
they are among the most poorly-known major groups of vertebrates. Studies have
suggested that scolecophidian species diversity is greatly underestimated
because the morphological differences separating species are fewer than usual
and harder to detect with conventional methods. This project investigates the
relationships of populations and species of scolecophidians using DNA sequences
and phylogenetic methods, in order to better understand hidden species diversity
within the group and how species became distributed throughout their
range.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project confers significant benefits for
biodiversity and conservation efforts by revealing a large component of hidden
diversity within tropical vertebrates. The small distributions of most species,
combined with their declining forest habitats, place them among the key
indicators of environmental health. A better understanding of species boundaries
and relationships also makes these organisms more accessible for study to other
biologists, such as ecologists, physiologists, and conservation biologists. The
project involves both field and laboratory training of graduate and
undergraduate students.