* 0818165
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Risk and Urban Governance
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,02/29/2012
* Austin Zeiderman, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 02/29/2012
* USD 10,845.00

Stanford University graduate student Austin G. Zeiderman, working under the
direction of Dr. James G. Ferguson, will undertake cultural anthropological
research on the role of risk within emergent forms of urban governance.
Alongside security, risk has recently surfaced as a political rationality and
technical framework with which to understand, order, and manage the complexity
and uncertainty of cities and urban life in the twenty-first century. To explore
this phenomenon, this study poses the following overarching research question:
Why, how, and to what effect are cities governing the problem of risk?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be carried out during 18 months of
fieldwork in Bogotá, Colombia. In the mid-1990s, the municipal government of
Bogotá began mapping the uneven distribution of environmental hazards across its
urban space. In 2003, a governmental agency initiated a resettlement program
aimed at relocating thousands of low-income populations living in areas defined
as zones of high risk. To understand how these new forms of risk management work
in practice, the researcher will investigate: 1) how the Bogotá program shapes
the conduct and outlook of the people at risk; 2) how program officials conceive
of their own work; 3) how the resettlement process affects the relation between
government and citizens; and, 4) how and why risk emerged historically as a
political problem. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research methods will combine
institutional ethnography, case studies, and historical genealogy. The
researcher will conduct his research in a relocation field office, in an at-risk
neighborhood, and among the relocatees who have been dispersed throughout the
city. He will do participant observation and conduct semi-structured in-depth
interviews with a stratified sample at each study site. He also will collect and
analyze official documents guiding the resettlement program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is important because the process to be
studied in Colombia is becoming increasingly common world wide, as urban
governments adopt the new imperative of protecting vulnerable populations from
potential threats such as global warming, disease epidemics, and national
security emergencies. This this research will contribute to a scientific
understanding of changing ways in which cities and societies are being governed
in times of heightened uncertainty. The project also contributes to the
education of a graduate student.