* 0818978
* RIG: Characterization of Serotonergic Pathways Involved in Behavioral Adaptation.
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Lucinda Carnell, Central Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 08/31/2012
* USD 175,000.00

Animals have the ability to sense, process and respond to signals important for
navigating their environment. These behavioral responses to external signals
rely on the nervous system?s ability to detect and integrate these signals. A
continued exposure to a stimulus over time results in the animal diminishing its
behavioral response, a phenomenon referred to as adaptation. Adaptation is
critical for an organism to detect and respond to a new, possibly threatening,
stimulus while in the presence of a continuous, existing stimulus. Modification
of neural connections called synapses is thought to form the basis for
adaptation, and other simple forms of learning. A central question regarding
this process is how the nervous system modifies its connections to produce this
diminished response. The goal of this project is to identify the gene products
(proteins) mediating adaptation. The project will utilize the nematode,
Caenorhabditis elegans (C. elegans), a well-characterized model organism for
identifying genes involved in behavior. A method for measuring adaptation of the
egg-laying behavior to long-term exposure to the neurotransmitter, serotonin,
has been developed and will be used to examine the synaptic connections required
for adaptation as well as to generate mutant worms defective in adaptation of
this egg-laying response. Isolation of mutant worms defective in adaptation will
provide a means to identified genes involved in this behavior. Because serotonin
is an important neural signal that mediates behavioral responses such as
feeding, mating behavior and aggression, this research may provide insight into
how other serotonin-dependent behaviors are altered by continual stimulation.
The project will have a broader impact on education through the applicant?s
participation in the NSF-sponsored STEP program, which serves to increase
participation and retention of students, including under-represented groups in
the sciences. In addition, the applicant utilizes research in C. elegans in
teaching molecular biology, genetics and neurobiology.