* 0818613
* The Plant Signal Landscape Recognized by Agrobacterium Tumefaciens
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2011
* Andrew Binns, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 07/31/2011
* USD 443,695.00

The goal of this project is to understand the distribution within plants of the
molecules that induce expression of the virulence genes of Agrobacterium
tumefaciens, which leads to transformation of susceptible plant tissues. The
biochemical system that controls this process (the VirA, VirG and ChvE proteins)
recognizes at least 3 different inducing signals that come from the plant:
phenols, sugars and low pH. In this project plant tissues will be exposed to
bacteria that contain a "reporter" gene controlled by the virulence inducing
system. When this gene is expressed it yields a particular color (e.g. from the
green fluorescence protein) significantly different than the plant tissues,
allowing the investigators to determine where in the plant the signals are
actually found. By altering the genetic properties of the VirA/VirG/ChvE system
the investigators will be able, for the first time, to track the presence of
individual classes of inducing molecules and relate this information to the
capacity of the tissues and cells to be transformed. These experiments test the
hypothesis that there are only a few regions in the plant in which all three
signals are found at levels sufficient for vir induction and that these signify
to the bacteria the presence of tissues capable of being transformed. Finally,
the investigators will use genetic methodologies to broaden the range of
chemical compounds that VirA recognizes as inducing signals and then determine
whether such foreign compounds can be detected in the plant via the
methodologies described above.

Broader impact: Understanding the relationship between the distribution of
inducing signals in the plant and the capacity of those same tissues to be
transformed will have implications for the use of Agrobacterium as a tool for
genetic modification of plants that are presently resistant to transformation.
This could have important consequences on agricultural biotechnology.
Furthermore, the directed evolution of variants of VirA with altered chemical
recognition properties has the potential to provide inexpensive, easy to use
analytical tools with the capacity to indicate the presence in the plant of a
variety of plant secondary metabolites with consequences for both nutrition and
toxin studies. The project will involve undergraduate students as active
participants in the research efforts, graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers as collaborators in undergraduate course instruction, and
partnerships with local public schools in which undergraduates develop and test
new life science modules in classrooms.