* 0818406
* Collaborative Research:  Gender, Race, and Identity Development in Black Youth
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Stephanie Rowley, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 08/31/2013
* USD 381,095.00

This collaborative project aims to study the effects of personal and group
identity variables on STEM educational outcomes. Longitudinal data will be
collected and analyzed on a number of self and other motivational variables to
understand how these personal and social factors are likely to determine the
educational trajectories and decisions of African-American youth. Little
research, though, has addressed developmental changes in stereotype awareness
and endorsement, or ramifications of stereotypes and discrimination for identity
development and achievement striving in Black adolescents. The proposed study
will model the relationship of two salient group memberships, race and gender,
with achievement outcomes for Black youth. Prior research has underscored the
need to attend to race and gender simultaneously, as well as the importance of
evaluating motivational and achievement outcomes within&lt;br/&gt;academic
domains (e.g., English and science).&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study is an
extension and expansion of a previous NSF-funded&lt;br/&gt;longitudinal study of
African American youth. The goal of this follow-up study is to concentrate more
explicitly on the simultaneous effects of race-related and gender-related
experiences and beliefs and on investigating how these experiences play out
across different course content domains (e.g., English, science, and
mathematics). Using survey and qualitative methods, the study will describe
normative development in self-concept, stereotypes, motivation, and parenting
from fifth through twelfth grade. Another important goal of the project is to
determine whether the advantages gained by girls in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics(STEM) areas are maintained as they prepare to move
through more advanced coursework and college applications, and what personal,
family, and school context factors predict STEM interest and success for both
genders. The proposed outcomes will aid in the understanding of how self-concept
and other self variables impacts motivation as a predictor for success in STEM
disciplines which may in turn broaden participation of under represented groups.