* 0818734
* Collaborative Research: Law, Normative Discrimination, and the Caretaker Penalty
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2009,01/31/2009
* Shelley Correll, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 01/31/2009
* USD 122,272.00

PI: Shelley Correll and Catherine Albiston

Title: Law, Normative Discrimination, and the Caretaker Penalty

SES-0818734; 0818659

Project Abstract

This research project will examine whether laws protecting leave takers can
change negative normative judgments about working mothers and leave takers.
Using experimental procedures to be conducted at Cornell University, the
investigators will compare subjects? evaluations of workers? files in situations
where the law prohibits discrimination and situations in which no law is in
place. The main hypothesis is that laws that protect leave takers from
discrimination will not only reduce discriminatory outcomes but also produce
more positive evaluations of these workers. The findings from this study will
make important contributions to understanding whether laws can change both
behavior and normative belief systems. Results could also provide scholars with
new knowledge and information to understand whether employers will penalize
workers when they defy stereotypes that women should be family caretakers and
men should be family breadwinners. Theoretically, the project will collect new
data to illuminate whether normative discrimination -- whereby employers
discriminate because they believe that mothers should stay at home with their
children and fathers should support the family ? is widespread or contingent.
This project offers several broader benefits. First, the social benefits to
workers and families of identifying effective legal reforms are potentially
enormous; one estimate is that caretaker bias costs mothers as much as $1
million over the course of their careers. Second, the project will give both
undergraduate and graduate students first-hand experience conducting empirical
research. From past experience, the investigators expect that up to half of
these students will be women and/or minorities, increasing the likelihood that
these students will pursue scientific careers. Finally, this project will not
only establish a new, interdisciplinary collaboration between UC Berkeley and
Cornell, but will also reach out to other innovative organizations focused on
work and family issues.