* 0818050
* Modeling microbial heterogeneity under antibiotic treatment
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Sergei Pilyugin, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 07/31/2012
* USD 238,266.00

The main goal of this research project is to extend the traditional mathematical
framework for modeling microbial kinetics to a systematic study of heterogeneous
bacterial populations. New applications from dynamical systems, ordinary and
partial differential equations, and stochastic processes will be developed to
formulate and study a new class of mathematical models focusing on physiological
aspects determining bacterial heterogeneity. The models will be scrutinized
using a combination of analytical and numerical methods, and compared to
experimental data in the literature. This project will not only advance the
general mathematical theory of microbial populations, but it will also produce a
number of theoretical conclusions and predictions presented in a way that would
be useful for biologists studying microbial heterogeneity in the laboratory
setting. This research project will serve as a training ground for future
interdisciplinary scientists. The principal investigator will develop a
research-based set of educational materials in dynamics of heterogeneous
bacterial populations.

The evolution and spread of pathogenic bacteria that are genetically resistant
to antibiotics plays a significant role in the failure of antibacterial
chemotherapy. However, for many acute and chronic bacterial infections neither
treatment failure nor the extensive time needed for antibiotics to be effective
can be attributed to inherited (genetic) drug resistance in the bacterial
populations. Genetically homogenous populations of bacteria are in fact
heterogeneous because they include subpopulations that for various physiological
and ecological reasons are refractory to antibiotics. Frequently, bacterial
populations are also heterogeneous with respect to their metabolism. This
research project will integrate the modeling, experimental and analytic
approaches into a comprehensive theory describing the physiologically
heterogeneous bacterial populations. The resulting theory will aid in optimizing
the efficiency of antibacterial drug treatment and develop a sound quantitative
basis for estimating optimal drug dosages. Another application of the new theory
will include the rational design and control of industrial bioreactors and
wastewater treatment plants.