* 0818672
* Regulation of Differentially Released Transmitter
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2012
* Amy Harkins, Saint Louis University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 06/30/2012
* USD 549,221.00

INTELLECTUAL MERIT: All organisms' ability to successfully live and function
within their own habitat depends on cell-to-cell communication that is necessary
for the most basic reflexes to the highest order thought processes. This
cellular communication by neurons occurs by specialized signals that rapidly
allow a chemical transmitter to be released from one neuronal cell and have an
effect on an adjacent neuronal cell. It is not understood how these signals can
be modulated to cause more or less chemical transmitter to be released, or to
release one type of chemical transmitter preferentially over another. Previous
work has established that two chemical transmitters, neuropeptide Y (NPY) and
catecholamines (CAs), that are packaged into the same small vesicles undergo
differential release. That is, NPY requires a longer stimulation duration and/or
a higher frequency of stimulation than required to release CAs from the same
vesicles. How this differential regulation of chemical transmitter release
occurs is not known. The aims of this research will test the hypothesis that
different members of a family of proteins, called synaptotagmins (syt), sense
and control calcium-dependent release of the chemical transmitters from the
vesicles. This project will utilize a combination of electrophysiology,
molecular biology and biochemistry techniques in a model secretory cell system
to study how these proteins may regulate release of NPY compared to the CAs. The
objectives of this study are 1) to determine what types of stimuli are required
for differential release, 2) to determine whether a Ca2+-dependent , or 3) a
Ca2+-independent syt protein regulates differential release of chemical
transmitter. Intellectually, this project will establish whether one protein
that functions to sense Ca2+ and trigger secretion of transmitter can also
preferentially determine the release of one particular transmitter over another.

BROADER IMPACT: These results will have broad application to understanding how
one type of vesicle can preferentially release transmitter from the same
population of vesicles, a basic mechanism that underlies neuronal communication.
Results from this project will provide the basis for future research directions
to understand how transmitter is regulated in release not only from secretory
cells and neurons, but also from brain tissues. Education initiatives will
involve students at all levels. The PI will continue to a) participate in an
outreach science program for middle school inner city girls, b) participate in a
highly competitive high school student research program (STARS), c) involve
undergraduate students in research from simple lab techniques to Honors research
theses, and d) train graduate students pursuing their PhDs to enter the academic
arena. Students at all levels will be introduced to the disciplines of
biophysics, molecular biology and chemistry as a combined approach to research.
Current efforts to recruit female and minority researchers will be continued and
expanded. All generated cell lines will be freely distributed to other
researchers. To disseminate findings from this project, students will continue
to present results at national conferences, and publish their work in peer-
reviewed journals. As an outreach program for high school and undergraduate
students, as well as a tool for all researchers to use, the students will
provide lay descriptions of their projects and their scientific protocols on the
laboratory's website. This research program will provide a platform for
integrating research with education for students, scientists, and the lay
community.