* 0818938
* Enhancing the Methodological Repertoire of Historical Research in the Social Sciences
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2008,09/30/2012
* Ira Katznelson, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 09/30/2012
* USD 125,804.00

This project focuses on the development and application of quantitative methods
for historical research in political science. The project is motivated by
criticisms expressed by prominent scholars in the discipline of history and in
the area of American Political Development within political science. One of
their core concerns is that the way quantitative methods are currently employed
by political scientists pays inadequate attention to issues of temporality,
periodicity, specificity, and context. The PIs argue that these concerns can be
addressed by using methods that allow for parameter variation across the
dimension of time, incorporating the richness and complexity of historical
analysis while maintaining the rigor necessary for testing causal claims. The
project initially focuses on historical research on the U.S. Congress,
demonstrating the feasibility and advantages of the methods that the PIs
advocate with applications from their own work, and then expands to cover
additional institutional and behavioral sites of inquiry.

This project pushes existing boundaries of research in history and political
science by tackling problems and issues that are central to the conduct of
historical work. Political scientists are turning more and more to the past to
broaden and deepen our understanding of political behavior and institutions,
using the additional cases and variation that history has to offer for model
building and testing. However, as prominent historians have rightly pointed out,
political scientists are not making the most of these opportunities because they
frequently treat history simply as data with the implicit assumption of an
equivalence among facts and particulars found in various periods and contexts.
The methodological approaches that the PIs present overcome these problems and
advance quantitative research on politics in a way that will broaden its appeal
to a wider range of scholars. Multilevel models?especially ones that employ
priors that incorporate temporal dynamics?enable parameters that indicate
relations among variables to vary, and thus can capture the kind of complexity
that characterizes the development and evolution of historical processes.

This project helps break down barriers between history and political science,
enriching work in both disciplines. The project advances an ongoing dialogue
about the challenges and pathways for progress in the conduct of historical
social science. While not developing new methods from scratch, the project makes
significant extensions to existing approaches by applying them in ways that are
innovative to political science. By exposing historically-oriented researchers
to these methods and making them more accessible, the project contributes new
additions to the standard methodological toolkit in political science. Although
historians are not likely to employ the methods that we advocate, they will be
more prone to respect the historical work done in political science and to
incorporate the findings of that work into their scholarship.