* 0818981
* RIG: Regulation and Targets of ExoS/ChvI, a Signaling Pathway Critical for Sinorhizobium-legume Symbiosis
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Esther Chen, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2013
* USD 149,956.00

About half of all biologically fixed nitrogen is produced by root-associated
bacteria (rhizobia) in symbioses with legume plants. These symbioses form the
basis for crop rotation and allow legumes to thrive without the application of
nitrogen fertilizer. Establishment of the symbiosis between Sinorhizobium
meliloti and its plant hosts requires the S. meliloti ExoS/ChvI genes, which
encode an evolutionarily conserved signaling pathway. Orthologs of the ExoS/ChvI
genes also play essential roles in host interactions of other alpha-
proteobacteria, such as the plant pathogen Agrobacterium tumefaciens. To
elucidate the roles of ExoS/ChvI signaling in both symbiotic and free-living S.
meliloti, new transcriptional target genes of ExoS/ChvI will be characterized,
and their contributions to ExoS/ChvI function will be analyzed using genetics,
genomics, and microscopy. Further, the regulation of ExoS/ChvI signaling will be
investigated by biochemical and structural analysis of a novel ExoS/ChvI
inhibitor. These studies will provide crucial insight into the molecular
mechanisms underlying a bacteria-plant symbiosis with agricultural and economic
importance. The project will be accomplished at a Hispanic-serving,
comprehensive university by undergraduate and master's students, including
future high school biology teachers. These students will gain experience in
molecular biology research while working collaboratively. The open-ended
learning experiences presented by the project will allow students to build
significantly on their classroom education and prepare them for careers in
science.