* 0818419
* Experimental and Theoretical Studies of Charge-Charge Interactions in Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* George Makhatadze, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,033,747.00

The objective of this project is to further understand the role of charge-charge
interactions in determining the thermodynamic and kinetic stability of proteins
and enzymes. The experimental work will be performed with several model proteins
and enzymes, each uniquely suited for the questions to be addressed. The folding
kinetics of rationally stabilized variants of cold shock proteins (CspB-Bs and
CspB-TB), ubiquitin (UBQ), the activation domain of human procarboxypeptidase A2
(ADA2h), the fibronectin type III domain of human tenascin (TnfIII), human
acylphosphatase (ACPh), and the N-terminal RNA-binding domain of human U1A
protein (U1A) will be compared with the corresponding wild type proteins. The
major question to be addressed is whether there is a predominant kinetic
mechanism of stabilization for proteins with optimized surface charge-charge
interactions. The role of the stability of individual domains for the function
of a model two-domain protein, the yeast 3-phosphoglycerate kinase (PGK), which
undergoes large conformational changes during the catalysis, will also be
studied. The major question that will be addressed is whether the rational
optimization of surface charge-charge interactions of individual domains can be
done without affecting the overall activity of PGK. Finally, the role of protein
stability in supporting the activity of enzymes at low temperature will be
investigated using comparative studies of a model enzyme, S-adenosylmethionine
decarboxylase (AdoMetDC) from psychrophilic, mesophilic and thermophilic
organisms. This research effort will use methods of rational protein engineering
and design to modulate stabilities of the psychrophilic, mesophilic and
thermophilic AdoMetDC proteins. Such multidisciplinary approaches will enable to
gain insights into the adaptation mechanisms that are related to protein
stability. To this end, a combination of various methods such as comparative
sequence analysis, computational modeling, protein design, a battery of
biophysical methods (differential scanning calorimetry, isothermal titration
calorimetry, circular dichroism spectroscopy, fluorescence spectroscopy, NMR
spectroscopy, analytical ultracentrifugation, dynamic light scattering, stopped-
flow) and biochemical methods to characterize the biophysical mechanisms and
structural determinants that lead to modulation of the stability of model
proteins and enzymes will be used.

This project will provide a systematic study of the mechanism of protein
stabilization by uniquely combining a variety of biochemical, biophysical and
computational tools. As such, it is expected that the knowledge accumulated from
these experiments will lay the foundation for future studies of these
fundamentally important issues with broad implications for many different areas
including the development of the next generation of biosensors, environmentally
friendly catalysts and robust biomaterials. The PI is actively involved in
graduate and undergraduate education and curriculum development. In addition,
students at all levels (high-school, undergraduate and graduate) will directly
participate in both the computational and experimental aspects of all research
efforts in the PIs laboratory.