* 0818350
* Anaerobic Gene Regulation in Bacillus Subtilis
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Michiko Nakano, Oregon Health & Science University
* Standard Grant
* Roy Welch
* 07/31/2012
* USD 443,050.00

Bacillus subtilis is able to respire with either oxygen (aerobic respiration) or
nitrate (anaerobic respiration). Both forms of respiration require the ResD-ResE
two-component signal transduction system. ResD, phosphorylated by ResE sensor
kinase, activates transcription of genes required for aerobic and anaerobic
respiration. This project will uncover the regulatory mechanisms by which B.
subtilis commits to undergo anaerobic respiration. Two regulatory proteins NsrR
and unphosphorylated ResD play critical roles in the decision-making process.
NsrR is a Fe-S transcription regulator that represses anaerobic respiration
genes but the repressor activity is eliminated in response to nitric oxide (NO)
produced during nitrate respiration. This research determines how NO modifies
the Fe-S cluster in NsrR and how this modification alters NsrR activity.
Unphosphorylated ResD activates anaerobic respiration genes in response to
oxygen limitation. Two hypotheses will be tested: One, that ResD itself
activates transcription or, two, that an accessory factor interacting with ResD
and/or the promoter DNA is responsible for transcriptional activation. To
investigate these possibilities, mutations that affect unphosphorylated ResD-
dependent activation will be isolated and characterized. The responses of
microorganisms to oxygen limitation and to NO greatly impact the activities
involved in the earth's nitrogen cycles and in pathogenesis. Both NsrR and two-
component signal transduction proteins are widely present in bacteria. The
research takes advantage of a powerful bacterial genetic system and leading-edge
metallobiochemistry to gain new insights into these ubiquitous regulators and
their associated mechanisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact of this
project is multidisciplinary research training in bioinorganic chemistry and
molecular genetics for a variety of groups. These diverse groups include not
only Ph.D. students but also non-thesis M.S. students who, after completing one-
year training in scientific research and education, continue their careers in
graduate school (Ph.D.), medical school, or as research technicians in both
academic and industrial laboratories. The project will also train undergraduates
supported by summer internship opportunities offered by the department and REU
supplement funds, high school students supported through Saturday Academy, and
high school teachers supported by Partners in Science Program of M.J. Murdock
Charitable Trust, in which the P.I. has participated.