* 0818372
* Historical Ecology in the Pre-Columbian Caribbean
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2014
* Peter Siegel, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2014
* USD 116,426.00

With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Peter Siegel and
colleagues Drs. Jason Curtis, Nicholas Dunning, John Jones, and Deborah Pearsall
are conducting an interdisciplinary study to address pre-Columbian human-
environmental relations in selected locations across the eastern Caribbean.
Goals of this research are to assess the effects of humans on landscapes and to
understand landscapes as cultural contexts in the Caribbean, a timely topic in
view of current concerns over the factors behind climate change. Assessing
human-environmental relations in an archipelago setting is crucial for issues of
island colonization, introduction of crops, interactions between resident and
colonizing peoples, and cultural change. Sediment cores will be extracted from
wetlands in proximity to known pre-Columbian archaeological sites to obtain data
from which ancient environments will be reconstructed, human impacts on those
environments will be assessed, and human-environmental interrelations will be
compared and contrasted through time. Archaeological site settings will be
examined on Grenada, Trinidad, Barbados, Marie-Galante, and Martinique. Results
of the current investigation will be combined with data collected in a previous
NSF-sponsored pilot study on Trinidad, Antigua, and St.
Croix.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Core samples will be analyzed for the types and
concentrations of pollen, phytoliths (plant silica bodies), and larger plant
parts for information on prehistoric vegetation cover in each area.
Concentrations of microscopic charcoal particles will be examined to document
the scale and intensity of burning that may have resulted from vegetation
clearing for agriculture by past peoples. Soil conditions in proximity to each
archaeological site will be assessed for information on prehistoric landscape
use. Integrating plant, charcoal, and soils information will provide a
comprehensive picture of the kinds and range of plant species present in the
past and how past cultures used, modified, and reacted to their environmental
settings through time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to wetland sediment
coring for pollen, phytoliths, and charcoal we will assess the effectiveness of
hydrogen-isotope analysis by coring in Lake Antoine located in the northeastern
part of Grenada. Recent studies in geochemistry have found that hydrogen-isotope
analysis of organic matter provides reliable paleoclimate information. If we
prove the method to be successful in Lake Antoine then there is great potential
for collecting paleoclimatic data from other lakes and ponds in the West Indies.
Carbonate water bodies for the more traditional oxygen-isotope method are rare
in the Caribbean. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Results of the study will be compared
to other similar investigations in the Caribbean, South America, and Central
America to broaden understanding of the consequences of human activities on the
environment and the conditions under which agriculture is adopted. Intellectual
merits of the project relate to the origins, evolution, and dispersal of
agriculture; expanding or colonizing populations as agents of landscape change;
and the antiquity of food production and the conditions under which it
developed. People occupying the Caribbean region were linked to Central and
South America during prehistory. Addressing Caribbean historical ecology will
provide a context to understand interactions between resident and colonizing
populations and changes in human-environmental relations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this interdisciplinary project will be
relevant for researchers studying past environments, origins and spread of
agriculture, and island-colonization processes. Students working with the team
will benefit from hands-on experience in the field or lab or both.
Archaeologists local to each of the island nations have expressed an interest in
this project. In most cases, students on each of the islands will participate or
visit the research team in the field, thereby obtaining first-hand exposure to
fieldwork in conducting paleoenvironmental research.&lt;br/&gt;