* 0818464
* Roles of Non-coding RNA, roX, in Global Chromatin Organization
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Yongkyu Park, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey-RBHS-New Jersey Med
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2013
* USD 480,000.00

Intellectual merit: &lt;br/&gt;Recent analyses of the genomes of various higher
eukaryotic animals such as mice and humans have shown that an unexpectedly large
fraction of transcripts do not encode proteins but rather specify functional
RNAs. A growing body of evidence suggests that these non-coding transcripts are
involved in a variety of regulatory mechanisms including chromatin organization,
and that disruption of these processes can have drastic consequences for the
organism. This project focuses on the role of the roX RNAs in dosage
compensation in fruit flies, where males have a single X chromosome and females
have two X chromosomes, similar to the XX and XY complement present in humans
and other mammals. In flies, dosage compensation entails up-regulating the
expression of hundreds of unrelated genes present on the X chromosome in order
to equalize the quantities of the gene products between the sexes. Thus, it is
an excellent model system to understand several aspects of eukaryotic gene
regulation by non-coding RNA. The central player in dosage compensation is the
MSL (Male Specific Lethal) complex, which includes the non-coding roX1 and roX2
RNAs and acts exclusively on the male X chromosome. A key development in the
field was the discovery that the action of the MSL complex on the X chromosme is
mediated by histone modification (specifically, acetylation of lysine 16 in
histone H4). The goal of the present research is to characterize the molecular
mechanism through which the conserved functional domains of the roX RNAs
regulate the enzymatic activity of the MSL complex on the male X chromosome to
achieve two-fold up-regulation of X-linked genes. By revealing the relationship
between the structure and function of the roX RNAs, the project will define new
aspects of RNA-protein interactions and their relevance in the context of
chromatin remodeling complexes. Importantly, X-chromosome inactivation in
mammals is also dependent on a complex that includes a non-coding RNA known as
Xist. Although the Xist complex induces gene silencing on the X chromosome, in
contrast to the up-regulation promoted by the MSL complex in fruit flies, a
shared feature is the initiation of chromatin remodeling accompanied by
spreading in cis from a non-coding RNA binding site. Beyond the involvement of
epigenetic changes induced by global histone modification, the roles of non-
coding RNAs in these processes are not well understood. Thus, the information
obtained from studies of roX RNA will lead to enhanced understanding of
X-chromosome inactivation in mammals and has the potential to advance general
understanding of non-coding RNA-dependent gene regulation in
eukaryotes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: &lt;br/&gt;Participants in a
minority summer student research program for high school and undergraduate
students will be included in the research activities in order to teach them
principles and techniques of basic science. To disseminate information about RNA
analysis tools including RNA structure prediction, alignmentsand searches, an
internet-based facility for public users (http://bioinformatics.njit.edu/rna)
will be continuously updated with non-coding RNA (roX) data generated through
the project. To ensure open scientific communication, all data, protocols,
constructs and transgenic flies developed through the project will be shared
with other laboratories and institutions. Members of the research team will
participate in multi- and interdisciplinary conferences and present research
results obtained from the project. A long-term goal is for the contributions of
the research to the field of chromatin organization to be integrated into basic
education resources such as textbooks for graduate and undergraduate students.