* 0818479
* The Role of Systems Level Properties in the Tansport Function of the Xylem Network.
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* K. Shackel, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2011
* USD 412,712.00

In plants, both water and pathogens move through the same transport tissue
(xylem) that consists of hollow, pipe-like cells (conduits). Because water flow
along this complex network of conduits occurs under tension, bubbles can be
produced that eliminate water transport. The xylem conduits are of fixed length
and are to some extent interconnected, but the extent of the interconnectedness
has not been evaluated. The fixed length and interconnections may be important
for limiting bubble expansion or pathogen transport. The investigators will use
High Resolution Computed Tomography (a kind of CAT scan) to reveal the three
dimensional structure and connections of the xylem conduits, and from these data
resolve how the network design may facilitate water transport and limit pathogen
movement. The investigators will use grapevine (Vitis species) and the xylem-
limited bacterial pathogen Xylella fastidiosa as a model system to examine the
influence of xylem structure on the ability of pathogens and embolisms to move
through the network. Reconstructions of the vessel network will be used to
mathematically model the 3D arrangement of the hydraulic network and its
transport properties. Graphical user interfaces will greatly simplify both the
analysis of imaging data and the use of network simulation software. The user
interface will be web-based to make it readily accessible to students, teachers,
or plant scientists anywhere in the world for use in developing their own three-
dimensional xylem structural models, or analyzing characteristics of xylem
networks particular to their interests. Model predictions of system hydraulics
and pathogen movement will be compared with experimental data on grapevines. The
results will significantly enhance our understanding of how system level
properties of the xylem network influence plant water use in the face of biotic
and abiotic stresses, and may reveal novel design features related to disease
resistance. The project brings together a novel combination of physics and plant
biology to apply the advanced technology of CAT scans, used for example to
evaluate blood flow in brains, to the perplexing problems of drought and disease
effects on plant and crop growth. This approach may be transformational in
producing detailed three-dimensional pictures that have been increasingly
exploited in medicine but not in plant biology, and in training scientists in
the application of CAT scan technology to plants.