* 0818116
* Effects of predation by a phonotactic parasitoid on male and female reproductive behavior in a field cricket
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2013
* William Wagner, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 07/31/2013
* USD 523,414.00

PI Wagner&lt;br/&gt;Proposal IOS # 0818116&lt;br/&gt;Effects of predation by a
phonotactic parasitoid on male and female&lt;br/&gt;reproductive behavior in a
field cricket&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Females often prefer to mate with males that
produce extravagant signals. Signals that increase a male's probability of
attracting a female, however, can also increase the probability of attracting
predators. Relatively little is know about the effect of predation on the
evolution of male and female mating behavior. In the variable field cricket,
Gryllus lineaticeps, females prefer male songs that contain faster and longer
chirps. These song types, however, are also more likely to attract phonotactic
parasitoid flies (Ormia ochracea). The flies deposit larvae on singing males,
the larvae burrow into the cricket and feed for ten days, then the larvae emerge
from the cricket and pupate, killing the cricket. Because the flies prefer the
same song types as female crickets, preferred males have a higher risk of fly
predation. In addition, females experience a greater risk of fly predation when
they are near preferred males, and they likely experience a greater risk of fly
predation when they mate with multiple males. This project will examine the
effect of fly predation on the evolution of male and female reproductive
behavior. Specifically, it will compare seven cricket populations attacked by
the flies and seven cricket populations that are not attacked by the flies.
Behavioral measures in the two populations will include male singing behavior,
female responses to male song, female repeated and multiple mating, male-
provided direct benefits, and the reliability of male signals of benefit
quality. All crickets tested will be reared in the common environment of the
laboratory, which will ensure that any detected differences between parasitized
and non-parasitized populations are genetically based. This study will provide
unique information on the factors that affect the evolution of male and female
reproductive behavior. Broader impacts: Field work will be conducted at several
protected reserves and biological field stations. The project will provide
research training for at least four undergraduate students per year.