* 0818583
* Studying Media Effects with a New Approach and Improved Data
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Jason Barabas, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2011
* USD 295,374.00

Political knowledge is a valuable resource for citizens in democracies. People
with higher levels of knowledge participate more often in the political process.
They also are more tolerant and more likely to hold opinions that are consistent
with their interests. But if political knowledge is so important, how do
individuals learn about politics? There is good reason to suspect that the mass
media inform citizens, yet the scholarly evidence points in different
directions. That is because many research designs fail to rule out common
inferential threats, and the majority of studies purporting to examine media
effects do not include measures of actual media content.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unlike the typical experiment, which compares different
groups of people, this project compares the same person's responses to survey
questions under conditions of high and low media coverage. The project compiles
and analyzes data from hundreds of nationally representative cross-sectional
surveys that ask respondents multiple questions about a single political event
(for example, a battery of questions about a bill pending in Congress or several
items about a government report on Social Security) and from coding the content
of news stories. The surveys have multiple observations for the same respondent
at a single moment in time. Importantly, the coverage devoted to different
aspects of the same news event also varies. Regardless of factors, like income
or education, that explain variation in knowledge across individuals, any given
individual differences in knowledge can be attributed to changes in the amount
of media coverage. These "within-survey/within-subjects" comparisons hold
constant all individual-level characteristics. Hypotheses concerning the effect
of media coverage upon political knowledge can be tested by comparing media
coverage of various aspects of these events to people's information of these
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scholars are becoming interested in how individual-
level characteristics interact with features of the media environment, so the
demand for data sources that include information about individuals as well as
their media environments will only increase in the years to come. This proposal
resurrects hundreds of cross-sectional opinion surveys and pairs them with
original media content data. This proposal anticipates that this resource will
be of interest to scholars in a variety of fields (e.g., political science,
communications, sociology, journalism, and economics). The final product will be
disseminated in easy-to-use CD-ROMs so that teachers can use the data in
undergraduate and graduate level classes (e.g., for assignments, papers, and
class presentations).