* 0818324
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Mongolian-Kazakh Returnees: Repatriation, Citizenship, and National Belonging In Kazakhstan
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Anna Genina, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2009
* USD 6,000.00

Graduate student, Anna Genina, working under the direction of Dr. Alaina Lemon,
will undertake research on the growing new phenomenon of return migration. The
study will be carried out in Kazakhstan, where the government of Kazakhstan
officially encourages repatriation. However, the return of Kazakhs from Mongolia
to their historic homeland has had unexpected consequences, because state
policies have not always connected well with local priorities. This situation
has provoked radical new discussions of what constitutes ethnicity, belonging,
and citizenship, making it an excellent opportunity for a micro-scale
examination of return migration and its social and political effects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In Kazakhstan, conceptions and practices of citizenship
are illuminated through analysis of discursive constructions of kinship and
hospitality, which are regarded as essential parts of Kazakh nomadic heritage.
Therefore, the researcher will use the methods of both cultural and linguistic
anthropology to explore conceptions of kinship and hospitality and their
relation to ideas and practices of citizenship and national belonging. She will
do participant observation, living with a local family and accomanying other
returnees on visits back to Mongolia. She will conduct interviews with new
returnees, other local residents, and officials; collect migration and life
histories; and monitor and analyze media accounts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research is important because return migration is found throughout the world.
Social science can help to explain the relationship between locally situated
identifications and practices and how those connect or fail to connect with the
symbolic and practical emplacement of people within larger frameworks, such as
citizenship, nationhood, and state. The research also will contribute to the
education of a graduate student.