* 0818073
* Long-term Record of Hurricane Landfalls in Southwest Louisiana: A New Approach to Paleotempestology.
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2011
* Harry Williams, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 07/31/2011
* USD 69,503.00

This project will identify and date hurricane storm surge deposits in far
southwest Louisiana's Chenier Plain. In the study area, approximately twenty
beach ridges, or cheniers, separated by marshland, record about 5 km of
progradation of this coastal plain over the last 2100 years. The aim of the
project is to examine these deposits to establish a record of hurricane
landfalls during this time interval. This will greatly extend the long-term
record of hurricanes beyond the ca. 150-year historical record. Long-term
hurricane records are required to improve hurricane risk assessment and to
explore linkages between millennial-scale climatic variability and hurricane
frequency. A series of trench and core transects will be used to examine
stratigraphy, sedimentology and microfossil content of coastal plain sediments.
These will be used to identify storm surge sand layers by comparison to
sediments deposited in the study area by Hurricane Rita in 2005. A chronology of
identified storm surge deposits will be established by radiocarbon dating of
organic material collected from soils immediately underlying storm surge layers.
The study will contribute a new approach to the emerging field of
paleotempestology, because research in this field has focused mainly on coastal
lakes and back-barrier tidal marshes and has not yet included the use of chenier
plains in reconstructing hurricane history.

The devastating impacts of hurricanes Katrina and Rita in 2005 underscore the
need for more long-term hurricane records to improve hurricane risk assessment
and to explore linkages between long-term climatic variability and hurricane
frequency. This project will identify and date hurricane storm surge deposits in
far southwest Louisiana's Chenier Plain. The aim of the project is to derive a
2100-year record of hurricane strikes that will greatly extend our knowledge of
hurricane frequency beyond the current historical record. This is a topic of
significance to the people who live along the Gulf Coast. In order to make the
benefits of the project accessible, a display and educational module on
hurricanes for the UNiversity of North Texas Eagle Exhibit Hall and Elm Fork
Education Center will be developed. In addition, the study results will be used
to develop an instructional module for the University of North Texas' program
for future middle and high school math and science teachers.