* 0818188
* Collaborative Research:  Molecular Mechanism of Hemoglobin-Heme Capture by the Hemophore (HasAp) Secreted by P. aeruginosa
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Pierre Moenne-Loccoz, Oregon Health & Science University
* Continuing Grant
* Michele McGuirl
* 08/31/2012
* USD 293,853.00

Intellectual Merit: Heme is the most abundant source of circulating iron in
mammals. It is therefore not surprising that many pathogenic bacteria, including
the opportunistic Pseudomonas aeruginosa, avidly pursue its capture and
internalization in order to overcome the very low free-iron concentrations
encountered in their mammalian hosts. To capture heme, several pathogenic
bacteria, including P. aeruginosa, deploy a heme acquisition system (Has), which
consists of a protein secreted to the extracellular space (HasAp) and an outer
membrane receptor (HasR). HasAp is also termed a hemophore because it
efficiently captures hemoglobin-heme and delivers it to the receptor for
subsequent internalization. The project aims to achieve fundamental molecular
level understanding of the protein-protein interactions that allow HasAp to
"steal" heme from human hemoglobin. In particular, the investigators seek to
gain structural, dynamic and mechanistic insights into the factors that
determine the transfer of heme from human hemoglobin to HasAp. This long-range
goal will be reached by pursuing three main objectives: 1) Elucidate the three
dimensional structure of apo-HasAp, 2) Identify the binding interface of the
encounter complex that forms when HasAp binds to hemoglobin, prior to heme
transfer, and decipher the role played by the gross reorganization of HasAp
structural elements in the molecular recognition and binding to hemoglobin, and
3) Characterize the changes in coordination and spin state experienced by the
heme-iron in the early stages of heme transfer from hemoglobin to HasAp. The
Moënne-Loccoz and Rivera laboratories have joined forces to meet the
interdisciplinary demands of the proposed activities. The Rivera lab will
conduct the NMR spectroscopic studies aimed at solving the structure of HasAp
devoid of heme, map the interface of the complex and study the dynamical
properties of HasAp in the encounter complex. The Moënne-Loccoz lab will carry
out the rapid-mix-quench experiments coupled to UV-vis, EPR and resonance Raman
necessary to delineate the fate of the hemoglobin-heme as it is captured by
HasAp. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: In addition to providing molecular
insight into the manner by which P. aeruginosa captures heme from hemoglobin to
overcome the low iron concentrations in a mammalian host, the fundamental
knowledge derived from these investigations may pave the way for the future
design of inhibitors to the interactions between hemoglobin and HasAp. The
multidisciplinary nature of the project will provide opportunities for students
at all academic levels. Video-conference calls and yearly visits from the
Moënne-Loccoz and Rivera labs will expose the students to the intellectually
diverse atmosphere that is necessary to nurture multidisciplinary research. The
ethnically rich environment present in both groups will prepare students for the
multifaceted work environment they are likely to encounter after graduation. The
collaborative spirit of this project will illustrate the benefits of a broad-
based approach for (1) solving complex problems, (2) effectively interpreting
results obtained in one laboratory within a global context; and thus (3)
maximizing the impact on this research on the greater scientific community and
the general public.