* 0818662
* Water, Politics, and the Built Environment: Human Eco-dynamics and the Origin of the Tarascan State, Lake Pátzcuaro, Michoacán, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2009,02/29/2012
* Christopher Fisher, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/29/2012
* USD 214,116.00

One of the great challenges for the 21st century will be creating solutions to
linked social and environmental change. Archaeology is uniquely poised to make a
significant contribution to this debate by helping to explain trajectories of
socio-ecosystem evolution over long time scales. With National Science
Foundation support Dr. Christopher Fisher, Dr. Helen Pollard, and an
international team of colleagues will conduct two seasons of multi-disciplinary
research in West Central Mexico to explore relationships between climatic
fluctuation, landscape change, and the formation of the Prehistoric Tarascan
(Purépecha) Empire. At the time of European contact the Lake Pátzcuaro Basin
(LPB) was the geopolitical core of the Tarascan Empire and has long been
recognized as a Mesoamerican core region. Prior to European conquest the LPB
contained a large population, centralized settlement system, social
stratification, and a highly engineered environment.

Current explanations for Tarascan state development (~A.D. 1350) highlight a
"perfect storm" of increasing social complexity and competition, climatically
induced lake transgression, and associated changes in the agrarian potential of
the region, but the timing, extant, and interrelationships between these
variables remains unclear. Three interrelated propositions critical to a refined
understanding of human ecodynamics and the Tarascan State guide the project.
First, was there a Basin-wide lake transgression around the time of Tarascan
State formation? Next, what was the nature of socio-political organization in
the region? Finally, what was the condition of the Postclassic landscape? The
timing, extent, and associations between these changes remains unknown and to
capitalize on recent research, extend the utility of extent models, and move
archaeology in the region forward new research is needed.

This study will initiate an innovative program of multidisciplinary research by
archaeologists, geologists, and geographers from the United States and Mexico,
including full coverage settlement pattern survey, landscape survey, and
environmental excavation within an important portion of the LPB, to expand the
utility of current models and better understand the development of the Late
Postclassic (A.D. 1350-1520) Tarascan State/Empire. This research will make a
direct contribution to explanations for the development of the archaic Tarascan
state and its expansion into an empire, Central Mexican prehistory, and serve as
an important anthropological example of coupled human/natural systems over long
time frames. Most importantly this work will more fully explore the timing,
extent, and associations between these three critical factors to construct
better models and analogs for the LPB as a whole, and for the region in general.
Ultimately this knowledge can aid local conservation efforts by correlating
results with local and global climatic indices, models of land degradation, and
the feasibility of applying local ecological knowledge to modern problems.
Students from Mexico, the United States, and Europe will participate in this
research for their MA and Ph.D. research.