* 0818354
* ETBC: Hidden Iron Oxide Redox Processes During Biogeochemical Iron Cycling: Controls on Nanoscale Transformations and the Fate of Contaminants
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Jeffrey Catalano, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2012
* USD 340,505.00

Intellectual Merit: Biogeochemical iron cycling involves primarily the
alternation of iron between Fe(II) and Fe(III) oxidation states. This iron redox
cycling is connected to the biogeochemical cycles of carbon, oxygen, phosphorus,
and sulfur, and plays an important role controlling the fate of contaminants
such as arsenic, uranium, and trichloroethylene. Aqueous Fe(II) and Fe(III)
oxide minerals often coexist during biogeochemical iron cycling, and secondary
abiotic reactions between these species may transform poorly crystalline iron
oxides into more crystalline phases, fractionate iron isotopes, affect
contaminant fate and speciation, and possibly acts as a negative feedback on
microbial iron reduction. As these secondary processes have important
geochemical and environmental implications, we need to obtain a mechanistic
understanding of the fundamental reactions that occur between aqueous Fe(II) and
Fe(III) oxides. Recent studies have observed electron transfer and atom exchange
between aqueous Fe(II) and crystalline Fe(III) oxides. Preliminary measurements
reveal that the reaction of Fe(II) with hematite (&#945;-Fe2O3) varies with
crystallographic orientation, with the (001) surface experiencing growth and
other surfaces dissolution. Similar effects were seen at pH 3 and 7. As these
reactions appear to be independent of Fe(II) adsorption and do not affect the
bulk mineralogy or fluid composition, they are effectively ?hidden? redox
processes. We hypothesize that Fe(II) serves a catalytic role, with iron atoms
transferring to (001) surfaces through solution as Fe(II), and electrons
transferring away from this surface through the hematite structure. The
objectives of this proposal are to: (1) characterize the nature of the dynamic
hematite surface redox processes operating in the presence of Fe(II), including
how they vary with solution conditions and time and whether they are continuous
of self-limiting; (2) determine how this coupled growth and dissolution is
affected by the presence of the common inorganic species aluminum, phosphate,
and silicate, all known hematite growth modifiers; (3) determine how these
processes affect the speciation of structurally compatible [Ni(II)] and
incompatible [As(V)] contaminants; and (4) investigate whether these processes
can be activated during reductive dissolution by sulfide, an important process
in marine sediments. These studies are expected to demonstrate a new complex
abiotic interfacial redox process that occurs when biogeochemical iron cycling
creates systems with coexisting Fe(II) and Fe(III) species. These studies may
also provide new insight into iron biomineralization and nanoparticle synthesis.
Finally, similar processes may occur for many elements that coexist in different
oxidation states having different solubilities, such as S, Mn, or U; the
expected results may thus serve as a guide for exploring complex redox processes
in other geochemical systems. Broader Impacts: This project will facilitate the
training of two new graduate researchers in the field of biogeochemistry. It
will also allow a number of undergraduate researchers (2-3 per year) to be
educated in the practice of science, training them in the formulation of
research questions and the use of the tools and methods needed to answer
scientific questions. Each graduate researcher will be given the opportunity to
mentor an undergraduate student as part of their preparation as future
educators. Results of this research will be incorporated into a graduate course
taught by the PI. This research also may have societal impacts, as the studies
of contaminant fate during these surface redox reactions may provide the basis
for future development of new remediation strategies or methods to recharge
water filtration systems.