* 0818651
* RIG: Characterization of acd6-1 SUPPRESSOR 3 (SUP3), a Negative Regulator of Arabidopsis Defense
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Hua Lu, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 07/31/2012
* USD 175,000.00

Plant diseases caused by pathogens are among the greatest deterrents in
agriculture worldwide. A network of plant genes perceives and transduces defense
signals in response to pathogen infection. However, it remains challenging to
identify genes regulating defense and to understand their mechanisms of action.
The Arabidopsis mutant acd6-1 is a tiny plant whose size is in reverse
proportion to the level of defense. Taking advantage of this unique feature of
acd6-1, the investigators developed a facile genetic screen to isolate acd6-1
suppressors (sups) that may have mutations in novel defense genes. Among the
genes identified is SUP3, encoding an uncharacterized putative sodium-dependent
phosphate transporter widely conserved in plants and animals. The project will
focus on investigating the function of SUP3, using genetic and molecular
biology-related tools. The expected results will elucidate how SUP3 regulates
plant disease resistance and mediates defense signal transduction. Such
information will add to the knowledge on the regulatory network of plant defense
and provide a potential target to improve disease resistance traits in crop
plants. The project will also contribute to broaden the participation of under-
represented groups in Biological Sciences. Minority undergraduate and graduate
students will be trained in Plant Biology by being directly involved in the
proposed research activities. In addition, K-12 science teachers from low
performing public schools in the Baltimore area that have high enrollments of
minority students will be invited to work in the principal investigator's
laboratory in the summer. Such experience will not only enhance the teachers'
knowledge of Biological Sciences but also help them to develop more effective
science curricula for their students.