* 0818412
* Collaborative Research: Role of Neurofilament Transport in the Growth of Axonal Caliber
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Peter Jung, Ohio University
* Continuing Grant
* James Deshler
* 08/31/2012
* USD 133,497.00

Nerve cells communicate by conducting electrical signals along slender
cytoplasmic extensions known as axons. Animals have evolved two basic mechanisms
for increasing axonal conduction velocity. One is to increase axonal diameter
and the other is to insulate axons by a process called myelination, which is a
tight spiral wrapping of the axons that is formed by myelinating cells. In
vertebrates the growth of axon diameter is caused principally by the
accumulation of space-filling cytoskeletal polymers called neurofilaments inside
the axons, and this is regulated locally by chemical signals from the
myelinating cells. It is known that neurofilaments are transported along axons
and that they alternate between rapid movements and prolonged pauses. The
proportion of the time that the neurofilaments spend pausing is likely to be a
principal determinant of their residence time in axons. This is a collaborative
experimental and modeling project involving a biologist at Ohio State University
and a physicist at Ohio University. The central hypothesis to be tested is that
myelinating cells control axonal caliber by regulating neurofilament pausing. A
computational model will be developed that relates the moving and pausing
behavior of neurofilaments to their distribution along axons. The model will be
based on detailed kinetic parameters of neurofilament movement derived
experimentally in cultured neurons and will be verified experimentally by
fluorescence microscopy of neurofilament movement in myelinated axons in tissue
culture. The proposed research will generate a rigorous and quantitative
framework that relates the size and shape of axons, which is a key influence on
their electrical properties, to the moving and pausing behavior of their
internal constituents. The research will involve graduate and undergraduate
students in both the physical and biological sciences, providing an integrated
and cross-disciplinary training experience at the interface between
computational and experimental biology.