* 0818355
* Genes and Behavior 2008  Gordon Research Conference; Barga Italy
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2008,02/28/2009
* David Clayton, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Cedric L. Williams
* 02/28/2009
* USD 38,400.00

Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on Genes and Behavior, 2008

Recent advances in genomics and molecular biology are making it possible for the
first time to study the relationship between genes and behavior. To catalyze
progress in this area, the Third Gordon Research Conference on Genes and
Behavior is being organized (24-29 February 2008, at Barga, Italy). Funds
received from NSF will be used to engage the active participation of a strong
cohort of U.S. graduate and postdoctoral students in this conference by helping
defray their travel and meeting costs. The Conference will focus on topics at
the interface of animal behavior, neurobiology, genetics, molecular biology,
ecology and evolutionary biology with an emphasis on the integration of
molecular genetics, biotechnology and the behavioral sciences. Many of the
speakers are current or past recipients of awards from the NSF Modulation
program. All of the invited speakers and discussion leaders are highly regarded
experts in their fields, and they were selected by the Conference Chair in
consultation with a conference program committee and an ad-hoc committee of
advisors. The Conference will provide a forum for the latest research linking
genes to behavior, and should help identify gaps in knowledge and new strategies
for promoting the integration of genomics and behavioral biology. Although
graduate students and postdocs are the lifeblood of progress in science, they
typically do not have access on their own to the funds required to attend a
conference like this.