* 0818831
* Developmental Evolution of Facultative Parasitism: Mechanisms Underlying Body Plan Remodeling in the Sea Anemone Edwardsiella
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* John Finnerty, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 08/31/2011
* USD 200,000.00

Parasites outnumber free-living species, perhaps 4 to 1, and they play
important roles in natural ecosystems. Parasites may directly harm humans or
those species that humans depend on, or they may indirectly help humanity by
controlling the abundance of pest species.

Based on the abundance and diversity of parasites, it is clear that parasites
evolved from free-living ancestors on many occasions in the past. However, the
remarkable transition from free-living species to parasitic species is very
poorly understood, mainly because most of the evolutionary transitions to
parasitism that have been characterized occurred tens or hundreds of millions of
years ago.

This research addresses the origin of parasitism by utilizing a new model
species that is in the early stages of becoming a parasite. As an adult, the
lined sea anemone, Edwardsiella lineata looks and acts like a typical free-
living sea anemone. However, its larva can invade the body of the comb jelly
Mnemiopsis, where it develops into a small worm and makes its living by stealing
partially digested food from the host's gut. Interestingly, in the absence of a
suitable host, the anemone's larva can develop directly into an adult. This
flexibility permits a direct comparison between the developmental pathway that
leads from a larva to a parasitic worm and the developmental pathway that leads
from a larva to a free-living sea anemone. Molecular and genomic techniques will
be used to study the genes that control development, asking how the functions of
these genes are altered during parasite development.

Aside from the fundamental scientific questions addressed by this research,
there will be notable Broader Impacts. Given that the host species Mnemiopsis is
a voracious predator on commercially important fishes, and Edwardsiella has the
potential to control Mnemiopsis populations, greater knowledge of the parasite's
development will inform its possible use as a biological control agent.
Furthermore, this host-parasite system is easy to study in the classroom
setting, and, as an outgrowth of the research, laboratory exercises will be
developed that will allow high school and college biology instructors located
along the New England coast to easily and inexpensively incorporate living
demonstrations of parasitism into their lesson plans.