* 0818667
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Science and Politics of Obesity in India
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Catherine Lutz, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2009
* USD 9,650.00

Graduate student Solomon Harris, under the direction of Dr. Catherine A. Lutz,
will undertake research on the social contexts, causes, and consequences of a
reported epidemic of obesity developing in India. The primary objective is to
better understand how concerns about epidemics relate both to science and to
broad social transformations, particularly when the disease in question is
chronic and is framed as a matter of "lifestyle."

The research will be carried out in Mumbai. The researcher will use ethnographic
methods of participant observation, interviews, and critical discourse analysis
to delineate the range of issues surrounding obesity and its health
consequences. These debates range from concerns about middle-class
overconsumption to theories of South Asian genetic predispositions to weight
gain. In doing so, the research also will seek out broader social themes that
may underlie these debates, such as: how those who are overfed gain visibility
over those who are undernourished; how medical ideas about "lifestyle" shade
those concerned with hygiene; and how anxieties about scarcity give way to those
about excess. Ultimately, the project will create a social map of a national
public health dilemma.

The research is important because obesity is a spreading world public health
problem. This project will contribute to understanding how sociocultural
dimensions interact with medical ones. The research also supports the education
of a social scientist.