* 0818603
* Characterization of the Replication Protein A (RPA)-70 Gene Family in Arabidopsis
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2008,04/30/2012
* Kevin Culligan, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 04/30/2012
* USD 451,000.00

Intellectual Merit: Replication Protein A (RPA), a eukaryotic single-stranded
DNA-binding protein composed of three subunits (RPA70, 32 and 14), is required
for almost every aspect of DNA maintenance, including DNA replication, repair,
recombination, and cell-cycle checkpoint activation. Although much is known
biochemically about RPA regulation in response to DNA damage, only limited
genetic information is available about how RPA influences the complex molecular
pathways of the DNA-damage response, since null mutations in RPA are generally
not tolerated in animals and yeasts. To better understand the role of RPA in the
DNA-damage response to double-strand breaks (DNA damage), the PI will
genetically analyze mutants of a unique gene family of the large (RPA70) subunit
of RPA in the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana. The PI hypothesizes that this
gene family of 5 members represents an evolutionary division of RPA activity
resulting from differences in how RPA is regulated in plants. "Knockout" T-DNA
insertion mutations (null mutations) in each member of this gene family are
tolerated, as are null mutations in two key regulators of the DNA-damage
response, the protein kinases ATR and ATM. Therefore, the experiments outlined
in this project provide a unique opportunity for a more straightforward genetic
approach to understand RPA function in eukaryotic cells. The specific aims build
upon preliminary data suggesting that individual RPA70 genes encode factors that
participate in the DNA-damage response to double-strand breaks, perhaps by
activating or regulating ATR and ATM. These specific aims include genetic
characterization of RPA70 mutants to establish the roles of the individual
proteins in regulating ATR and ATM, an analysis of RPA-dependent regulation of
cell-cycle checkpoints and histone H2AX phosphorylation, and profiling of RPA70
expression in response to DNA damage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Both
graduate and undergraduate students will play an active role in this research
project. At the University of New Hampshire there are several research
opportunities for undergraduates, including the INCO590 course that promotes
underclassmen to participate in laboratory research. Over the course of the
project, the PI will recruit multiple INCO590 participants to conduct aspects of
the experiments. In addition, the PI will work with a UNH program called
CONNECT, to provide a knowledge base of scientific opportunities on campus and
to recruit minority underclassmen interested in science to participate in
INCO590. Their research experience and training will help ensure a future
generation of culturally diverse biological scientists for both public and
private sectors.