* 0818185
* Assessing Shifts in the Reproductive Output, Behavior and Physiology of Harvested Wildlife
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Justin Brashares, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 07/31/2012
* USD 398,838.00

Justin S. Brashares, IOS-0818185 Assessing shifts in the reproductive output,
behavior and physiology of harvested wildlife

The unsustainable harvest of wildlife threatens biodiversity and human
livelihoods worldwide and calls for wildlife-use policies that safeguard animals
from extinction. For resource use policies to prevent over-harvest they must
account for the biological characteristics of harvested species, particularly
the rate at which a population replenishes itself. Traditional wildlife
management theory assumes that as harvest removes individuals from a given
population, competition for resources is reduced and rates of reproduction and
survival increase. In contrast to this idea, recent studies focusing on
predator-prey systems suggest that predators not only impact prey populations by
directly removing individuals, but also by changing the behavior of animals that
escape predation. However, few studies have examined if predation by humans on
wildlife has similarly profound effects on prey species. This study will
evaluate how hunting (legal and illegal) affects the behavior and reproduction
of three species of antelope in an East African savanna ecosystem. Three
distinctly different species were chosen for the study, the dik-dik (5-7 kg),
the impala (60-80 kg) and the African buffalo (700-900 kg), because they
represent a natural range of ecology and behavior. The research will be
conducted in an area of central Tanzania where economies are closely tied to
wildlife use and, thus, achieving sustainable harvests is considered a local and
regional priority. Findings of the study will reveal if increased harvesting
promotes higher reproductive output, as assumed by conventional harvest theory,
or if harvest activities compromise reproductive health, leading to unexpected
population declines. By incorporating information on reproductive health into
sustainable harvest decision-making, this study aims to improve efforts to
manage wildlife populations in Africa while developing tools that will benefit
harvesting efforts around the world. The study also will provide field and
laboratory training to U.S. and Tanzanian undergraduates, graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers. This award is co-funded by NSF's Office of
International Science and Engineering.