* 0818680
* Towards a Structure Based Mechanism for the Function of the Carboxysome, the Prototype Bacterial Organelle
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Gordon Cannon, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Michele McGuirl
* 07/31/2012
* USD 564,622.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;Carboxysomes are polyhedral protein
microcompartments found in many autotrophic bacteria. They are composed of a
thin protein shell and are filled with 1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase
(RubisCO). This research seeks answers to the question of the advantage these
bacteria derive from packaging their carbon dioxide fixing enzyme (RubisCO) into
carboxysomes. The PIs previously showed that a unique carbonic anhydrase (CA),
which is tightly associated with the carboxysome shell, enhances RubisCO's
catalytic efficiency by mediating what appears to be a directional transfer of
abundant cytoplasmic bicarbonate to the carboxysome interior as carbon dioxide.
The ability of the shell to impede diffusion of bicarbonate and carbon dioxide
traps the gas in the interior, where it is fixed by RubisCO. Structural and
molecular biological approaches will be combined with genetic and biochemical
experiments to further elucidate structural and functional features of the
microcompartment that will yield a deeper understanding of its role in microbial
carbon metabolism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;Given the
large contribution of carboxysome-containing organisms towards carbon dioxide
fixation and the impact of their metabolism on the global carbon cycle, broader
implications of the work planned will be the elucidation of one of the most
basic and central biochemical processes that controls the carbon cycle and
influence weather and climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate and undergraduate
students participating in the project will gain experience in biochemical and
molecular biological research approaches. Through ongoing collaborations with
scientists at this and other institutions, these students will gain an
appreciation of interdisciplinary scientific approaches. The PIs will continue
their practice of actively recruiting members of underrepresented groups (e.g.
ethnic minorities and women) to participate in the project as undergraduate and
graduate student researchers.