* 0818743
* Rotational Dynamics of the Photsynthetic ATP Synthase
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2011
* Mark Richter, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 06/30/2011
* USD 458,914.00

The photosynthetic ATP synthase of higher plants is a tiny molecular rotary
motor with several unique properties that separate it from its mitochondrial and
bacterial counterparts and offer unique inroads to examine the mechanism of
energy coupling. One such property is the presence of a special regulatory
domain within the gamma subunit which, via the reversible oxidation/reduction of
an intrinsic dithiol, governs an interaction with the inhibitory epsilon
subunit. This interaction provides a molecular switch mechanism that tightly
controls the catalytic activity of the enzyme, preventing futile hydrolysis of
ATP in the absence of a membrane potential. The objective of this project is to
identify the productive binding interactions between the gamma and epsilon
subunits, and between these two subunits and the other F1 subunits, that are
involved in the molecular switch mechanism. Specific aims are: 1) To determine
the inter-subunit conformational interplay that results in CF1 activation and
proton coupling using dithiol cross-linking and dynamic single molecule
fluorescence approaches; and 2) To determine the three-dimensional structures of
the epsilon, delta and gamma subunits using solution NMR and x-ray
crystallographic approaches. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the
project stems from the fact that the ATP synthase plays a central role in energy
capture and inter-conversion in living systems. The results from this work is
likely to provide an understanding of natural processes that have evolved to
gate the motor, in identifying the mechanism of elastic coupling between the FO
and F1 segments, and in designing gated nanodevices for future industrial
applications. This project will have a number of broader impacts including
training of undergraduate and graduate students and postdoctoral associates in
emerging areas of nanotechnology including advanced molecular engineering and
analysis methods. The research will dovetail with a newly established, NSF-
funded, multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary undergraduate training program
in nanoscience and will be integrated with ongoing diversity and outreach
programs on the university campus and within the state of Kansas.