* 0818126
* Collaborative Research: Multiscale Modeling of Solid Tumor Growth
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* John Lowengrub, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2011
* USD 319,449.00

The goal of this project, which lies at the interface between mathematics and
biology, is to develop mathematical models of tumor growth that connect intra-
tumor molecular and cellular properties with critical tumor behaviors, such as
invasiveness, and experimentally observable properties such as morphology. The
research group will (1) perform novel analytical and computational studies of
important constituent processes, (2) incorporate experimental data into these
studies, and (3) develop and apply state-of-the-art numerical algorithms to
large-scale computations over multiple time and space scales. By integrating
experimental data with sophisticated, multi-scale mathematical and computational
models, the potential for breakthroughs that will significantly further the
understanding of tumor biology are great, thereby addressing a pressing national
and global need.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solid tumors are complex micro-structured
materials, where the three-dimensional tissue architecture (morphology) and
dynamics are coupled in complex, nonlinear ways to cellular characteristics and
to molecular composition and structure of the growth environment. This close
connection between the tumor morphology and the underlying cellular/molecular
dynamics has fundamental scientific importance in that the cellular dynamics
that give rise to various tumor morphologies also control its ability to invade
the host tissue. This allows observable properties of the tumor, such as its
morphology, to be used to both understand the underlying cellular physiology and
predict the tumors invasion potential. In particular, the conjecture that
diverse morphologic patterns of invasion observed during tumor growth are the
quantitatively predictable result of molecular inhomogeneity (of both
composition and structure) in the tumors growth environment will be tested.
Because tumor cells use similar or identical migration and proliferation
mechanisms as normal cells, and because of the multi-scale nature of these
processes, the mathematical modeling, analysis and simulation that will be
conducted in this project will also have application in understanding normal
functional processes during development, wound-healing, stem cell
differentiation and tissue regeneration. This project will also establish a new
collaboration among five institutions and broadens the participation of women
and minorities in research as trainees in the investigators? groups, thereby
addressing national needs. It will provide interdisciplinary training with
theoreticians and experimentalists at the interface between mathematics and
tumor cell biology. Finally, a month-long summer COSMOS (California State Summer
School for Mathematics and Science) course at UC Irvine will be developed for
high school students on these topics. This course enhances the participation of
gifted high school students in research, and helps to recruit new math and
science undergraduates, which addresses another national need.