* 0818381
* Measuring Ethnic and Regional Group Differences
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2008,02/28/2011
* John Huber, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 02/28/2011
* USD 228,846.00

Ethnically heterogeneous societies are widely held to be more difficult to
govern than homogeneous ones. Theoretical arguments often attribute the problems
to the fact that ethnic divisions result in divergent group preferences.
However, the core measure in empirical research on the problems with
heterogeneous societies is ethno-linguistic fractionalization (ELF), which
contains no information about the likelihood of particular groups holding
divergent preferences. Since the ELF measure assumes that substantive
differences between all groups are the same, its use requires the implicit
assumption that the potential for group-based conflict within a society is
simply a function of how likely an individual is to interact with someone from a
different group. Yet we know that individuals from different ethnic groups often
have similar preferences.

For a large number of issues that arise in politics, group economic differences
will be at the core of inter-group disputes. Income differences across groups
can lead to different needs with respect to public goods, feelings of alienation
or discrimination, different attitudes toward redistribution, and different
"class" identities. The central objective of this research project is therefore
to draw on household income and budget surveys to create a new cross-national
dataset that measures economic differences across groups. The data will be
useful for exploring how ethnic, linguistic, and regional economic differences
are related to outcomes that have been central to the literature on ethnic
heterogeneity. These include economic growth, public goods provision,
redistribution and conflict. By incorporating information about economic
differences into measures of ethnic cleavages, it will be possible to explore
more carefully the mechanisms that have been proposed to link ethnicity with
poor outcomes. The data will also open a range of new research opportunities.

The primary benefit of the study will be to enhance the infrastructure for
research and education by creating and disseminating a cross-national data set
that measures inter-group economic differences. The data set, which will be made
up of 80-100 countries, will include a wide range of measures of inter-group
economic differences. It will also include standard ethnic fractionalization and
polarization scores.