* 0818839
* Collaborative Research: Time-Sharing Experiments for the Social Sciences (TESS): Proposal for Renewed Support
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2013
* John Dennis, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2013
* USD 2,266,563.00

In 2001, Time-sharing Experiments for the Social Sciences (TESS) was established
with the support of the National Science Foundation. TESS is an infrastructure
project that capitalizes on economies of scale to enable scholars from across
the social sciences, on a competitive basis, to conduct ground-breaking research
on issues of broad theoretical and practical importance.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Since its inception, TESS has enabled an unprecedented number of
researchers to collect original, high quality nationally-representative
experimental data. On a continuous basis, TESS solicits proposals to test
methodological and substantive hypotheses from across the social sciences,
submits them to a rigorous peer review process, and then implements the most
innovative and promising experiments on its Internet-based data collection
platform. This platform draws on national probability samples of respondents and
offers the capability for implementing complex experimental designs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key to TESS is multiple studies, from different
disciplines, sharing a common observational platform, all exploiting the
inferential power of experimental designs and nationally representative samples.
By distributing the costs of sampling, data collection, and data management over
a large number of studies, TESS dramatically reduces the average cost of each
study and makes experimentation on general-population samples available to
researchers for whom the obstacles to such work would be otherwise prohibitive.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a scientific investment, therefore, TESS offers broad,
immediate, and long-lasting benefits. At the same time, many of its costs are
remarkably low. Viewed as a whole, TESS breaks new ground by following the best
scientific practice of the past ? it harnesses cutting edge technology and uses
it to create and disseminate new discoveries about critical social and
behavioral phenomena. Indeed, while TESS has innovated in many ways, its basic
strategy is to follow a path that has served science well in the past ? make the
best technology available to our best scientific minds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of TESS are substantial. Most obviously, TESS enhances the
infrastructure for research and education, providing a common platform for the
conduct and analysis of general population experiments. In so doing, TESS
advances discovery and understanding by capitalizing on economies of scale to
make general population experiments feasible to a diverse array of talented,
innovative social scientists, most of whom would otherwise be unable to conduct
such research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TESS also promotes teaching, training, and
learning at the undergraduate and graduate levels in a number of ways. For
example, graduate students from across the social sciences are encouraged to
submit TESS proposals, and expert reviewers provide detailed feedback. Graduate
students (and even a handful of undergraduates) have been PIs or co-PIs on a
number of successful TESS proposals, and have benefited from the experience of
running their own population-based experiment. In addition, graduate students
and undergraduates have benefited from the incorporation of TESS data into
courses on research methods and statistics across the country, providing young
scholars with manageable experimental data sets on which to develop their
analytic skills. And graduate and undergraduate students will serve as Research
Assistants, gaining hands-on experience in all aspects of TESS .
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TESS also broadens the participation of underrepresented
groups, both as investigators and research participants. At the heart of TESS?
mission is the democratization of access to high quality, original experimental
data, putting the power of population-based experiments in the hands of
researchers from all racial and ethnic backgrounds, from all types of academic
institutions, and from all stages of career. And because the TESS data
collection platform involves a representative sample, the results of TESS
projects reflect the broad diversity of our nation. Further, the data collection
platform enables investigators to oversample respondents from otherwise
underrepresented groups, and a number of TESS projects have done so for the
express purpose of better understanding psychological, behavioral, or economic
processes within these groups.&lt;br/&gt;