* 0818722
* Differential Item Functioning (DIF) Testing with Estimation of the Latent Densities
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2008,01/31/2011
* Carol Woods, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 01/31/2011
* USD 67,012.00

One important application of item response theory (IRT) is for identification of
differential item functioning (DIF). DIF occurs when an item has different
measurement properties for one group of people than another (e.g., men versus
women), irrespective of group-mean differences on the latent variable.
Typically, in IRT-based DIF testing, the latent variables are assumed to be
normally distributed in the populations of people. However, this assumption may
be untenable for some variables. The present research develops statistical
methodology and software for IRT-based DIF testing in which the latent
distribution for each group of people is estimated simultaneously with the item
parameters.

This research fills a gap in extant methodology and is aimed at improving the
match between data and the statistical models used to assess DIF. Questionnaires
measuring latent variables which are potentially nonnormally distributed are
used as part of making, for example, psychological and medical diagnoses and
treatment plans, and hiring or admission decisions in businesses or
universities. Assessment instruments constructed based on majority-group
individuals may provide misleading results for underrepresented groups. The
proposed methodology could be applied in these areas to promote fair, accurate,
and inclusive measurement. The research is supported by the Methodology,
Measurement, and Statistics Program, the REESE Program, and a consortium of
federal statistical agencies as part of a joint activity to support research on
survey and statistical methodology.