* 0818243
* RIG: Postsynaptic Molecular Assembly at the Onset of Neuromuscular Synaptogenesis in vivo
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2008,11/30/2011
* Franklin Carrero-Martinez, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* James Deshler
* 11/30/2011
* USD 174,242.00

The mechanisms that initiate a synapse have rarely been analyzed in living cells
due to limited access in embryos. The investigator has previously observed
filopodial processes (myopodia) extending from muscle cells toward neurons prior
to neuromuscular synaptogenesis, using three- and four-dimensional imaging of
fluorescent-labeled bioprobes in live Drosophila embryos. This appearance of
myopodia was seen to coincide with motoneuron outgrowth, suggesting a mechanism
in which synaptic partners interact before they make permanent contact. As
development continues, transient stabilization of pre- and post-synaptic
filopodia from matched partners can be observed. This myopodial clustering event
is the focus of the current project. The investigator will test the "synaptic
nucleation" hypothesis, which states that myopodial clustering serves as a sub
cellular signaling compartment where the nascent synapse is coordinated. Using
in vivo imaging and immunocytochemistry, the researcher will study the
underlying molecules involved in synaptic partner-induced myopodial clustering,
and in particular, will investigate how these proteins are recruited to the
myopodial cluster compartment. The goal of this project is to gain a better
understanding of synaptic matchmaking and synaptogenesis by identifying the
postsynaptic molecular players at the site of synapse formation and to
characterize the mechanism by which they are recruited. Once considered as
passive players, muscle cells are emerging as active synaptogenic partners, and
myopodial interactions offer a chance to dissect the molecular integrations that
lead to the successful formation of the synapse. With over 99% of the total
undergraduate student enrollment in the Department of Biology at the University
of Puerto Rico Mayaguez identified as members of underrepresented groups in the
sciences, this proposal will support training of a significant number of
minority students. Their research experiences will be enhanced through access to
mentors and role models which will be facilitated by the investigator.