* 0818325
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Medical Rumors and Humanitarian Relief Clinic Closures in Ethiopia
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Mark Nichter, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2009
* USD 15,000.00

In the aftermath of humanitarian crises, numerous people have benefited from
antibiotic therapies supplied by international humanitarian relief clinics. Yet
when emergency funding dissipates, many of these clinics close, leaving
impoverished populations without trusted sources of medication. Preliminary
research in rural eastern Ethiopia by Lauren Carruth, a graduate student
supervised by Dr. Mark Nichter, suggests that in the wake of relief clinic
closures, demand for contraband antibiotics increases, while paradoxically,
rumors of bad medicine abound. Although the consumption of non-prescribed
antibiotics is common, people may take only a few antibiotics at a time because
they fear the local drug supply contains poisonous counterfeit pills. As a
result of shortened regimens, even if the medications are genuine, they are
likely to be taken inappropriately and ineffectively. This dissertation project
asks further: how do relief clinic closures shape local antibiotic practices and
informal health economies? And, how are medical risks and medical rumors
articulated and acted on within communities, markets, clinics, and international
humanitarian relief organizations? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be
carried out in the remote Shinile Zone of Ethiopia, a locus of transnational
contraband trade, recurrent humanitarian crises, and repeated relief operations.
Data will be gathered at multiple sites in the Shinile Zone through
participatory mapping, in-depth interviews, structured observations, and
participant observation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is important for
its potential to improve social science theory regarding the long-term but
sometimes hidden consequences of disaster relief. Unregulated pharmaceutical
practices and informal health economies are central to healthcare in Ethiopia,
but remain absent from studies of humanitarian intervention, medical systems, or
disaster. By affecting medical behaviors, fears of bad medicine and clinic
closures may importantly shape local epidemiology, the evolution and
manifestations of infectious microbes, future responses to pharmaceutical
products, and future health interventions. Most urgently, local strategies of
managing the risks of bad medicine by inappropriately consuming antibiotic pills
may provide an ideal environment for the development of diseases resistant to
the only medications available. The research also will contribute to the
education of a social scientist.