* 0818072
* Meeting: Keystone Symposia meeting on Plant Sensing, Response and Adaptation to the Environment January 11-16, 2009 Big Sky Resort, CO
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2009
* Andrew Robertson, Keystone Symposia on Molecular and Cellular Biology
* Standard Grant
* Stephen J Tonsor
* 06/30/2009
* USD 11,500.00

The Plant Sensing, Response and Adaptation to the Environment meeting will be
held Jan. 11-16 at Big Sky Resort in Big Sky, Montana. This meeting brings
together ecologists, geneticists and biochemists all interested in integrating
systems approaches, the simultaneous experimental investigation of the many
different complex interacting molecular components of cells and organisms. To
understand the mechanisms that drive the appropriate growth responses under a
wide range of environmental conditions, plant physiology is pursuing a level of
sophistication that requires the field to move into such systems-type
approaches. A major goal of this meeting is to excite a new generation of
multidisciplinary students to study the basis of phenotypic plasticity, i.e.,
how plants with the same genome give rise to different characteristics. In the
future, such studies may explain how to more efficiently create ethanol-based
fuels and will be crucial for understanding the consequences of global warming
and climate change on plant life. This meeting will enhance infrastructure by
fostering networking and initiation of collaborations. We anticipate the
following educational benefits: acquaint trainees and investigators new to the
field with the state-of-the-art; critical scientific feedback; and career
development for trainees and new investigators, including opportunities both to
see successful scientists presenting cutting-edge science and to network with
prospective mentors and others who might contribute to their scientific and
professional development. Invited speakers are top-notch scientists who will
present unpublished results. Keystone Symposia provides an internationally
recognized platform as well as resources to ensure the success of this meeting.