* 0818678
* Mining Multiple Solvent Crystal Structures for Properties of Protein Binding Sites
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2008,04/30/2012
* Carla Mattos, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michele McGuirl
* 04/30/2012
* USD 576,525.00

Intellectual merit&lt;br/&gt;Proteins are biological polymers that fold into
specific three-dimensional structures. They are the molecular workhorses of life
and are involved in a wide variety of functions such as increasing the rates of
chemical reactions, storing and transporting small molecules such as oxygen,
mediating the propagation of signals or "instructions" within the cell and much
more. Most protein function involves binding to a small molecule or another
protein through special features on the surface within so-called binding sites.
Dr. Mattos and members of her group are interested in understanding the features
that distinguish binding sites on proteins from other areas on the protein
surface. This project aims to do this by observing how a variety of small
molecules bind to a set of well-studied proteins using a method called X-ray
crystallography that allows visualization of the three-dimensional structure of
proteins and the associated small molecules at near atomic resolution. The
Mattos lab has collected the experimental data sets necessary for this type of
analysis and is now using computational methods to mine the data sets for
fundamental properties of protein surfaces in general and binding sites in
particular. The quantitative methods will be used to validate the correspondence
between protein surface properties obtained in the small molecule solvent
environment and those observed in the more natural aqueous environment. Once the
validation is complete the fundamental protein binding site properties will be
directly obtained from experimental data sets acquired in the non-natural
solvent environment. Understanding the properties of protein binding sites is
critical to understanding of how proteins work and therefore a very important
step in making sense of the complicated processes of
life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Mattos has developed
this project in such a way that research is an integral part of teaching
undergraduates. The research will build on the thriving and diverse educational
environment that she has already created in her group. Ten undergraduates from
her classes each year will be invited to work with graduate students and the
more senior members of the laboratory. The team will participate in an
international collaboration with Prof. Janet Thornton's group at the European
Bioinformatics Institute (EBI) in England, which is at the forefront of
computational analysis of protein experimental databases. Dr. Mattos has
recently returned from a sabbatical at the EBI, during which both a graduate and
an undergraduate student also participated. She plans to continue to engage
students in this international collaboration. In addition, Dr. Mattos is
involved in mentoring minority junior faculty members at various universities in
the United States and is working to encourage minority undergraduate and
graduate students at North Carolina State University to write research proposals
for fellowship applications to graduate school.