* 0818934
* RUI: Function of LacI-type Transcription Factors in Caulobacter
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Craig Stephens, Santa Clara University
* Continuing Grant
* Susannah Gal
* 08/31/2013
* USD 388,146.00

The genome of the Gram-negative aquatic bacterium Caulobacter crescentus encodes
numerous enzymes for extracellular breakdown of plant-derived polysaccharides
such as cellulose, xylan, arabinogalactans, and pectin. Both Caulobacter
crescentus and a closely related groundwater species, Caulobacter strain K31,
avidly consume D-glucose and D-xylose, the monosaccharide constituents of
cellulose and xylan, as carbon and energy sources. A LacI-type repressor, XylR,
controls the expression of genes involved in uptake and degradation of D-xylose,
and there is evidence to suggest that another LacI homolog ('GlcR') controls
glucose uptake and metabolism. This project will explore the regulatory and
physiological functions of XylR and GlcR in greater depth, and extend these
studies to the remaining 10 members of the LacI family encoded in the C.
crescentus genome, which are hypothesized to also regulate expression of
extracellular hydrolases, transport systems, and metabolic pathways for
consumption of various sugars and other organic molecules. Each LacI homolog
will be knocked out, and comprehensive gene expression profiles will be obtained
through microarray technology to characterize gene sets controlled by each
transcription factor. This project will provide the first comprehensive view of
the physiological roles of the LacI-type transcription factors in the biology of
a single organism, thereby expanding our understanding of the function and
evolution of the LacI family of transcription factors, which is ancient and
widespread in bacteria. The role of LacI homologs in controlling extracellular
degradation of biopolymers such as cellulose and xylan makes them of great
interest for enhancing biofuels production. The project will also provide
insight into regulation and coordination of carbon transport and metabolism,
which is fundamentally relevant to growth and niche colonization in bacteria.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From an educational and human resource perspective, this
project will have tremendous impact by providing 20-40 undergraduates with
research and educational opportunities through multi-year projects for two
research-intensive courses, Bio 176 Recombinant DNA Technology, and Bio 178 Gene
Expression Analysis. These courses are an integral part of the Biotechnology
Program at Santa Clara University, through which students learn sophisticated
microbiological, molecular biological, and biochemical techniques, and explore
the social ramifications of biotechnology. Development of technical skills, and
more generally development of critical thinking and scientific thought
processes, prepares these students to undertake skilled positions in life
sciences research and related fields after graduation. In supporting these
courses, this RUI grant strongly aids the broader educational mission of Santa
Clara University, an undergraduate-focused institution.