* 0818896
* Allosteric Role of Dynein Light Chains in Dynein Assembly and Regulation
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2013
* Elisar Barbar, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2013
* USD 861,072.00

Cytoplasmic dynein is a microtubule-based molecular motor that uses the energy
derived from ATP hydrolysis to move and transport cellular cargo towards the
minus ends of microtubules. This transport is essential in several aspects of
cell behavior including cell migration and division, chromosome segregation, and
vesicle trafficking. The dynein heavy chain subunits bind to microtubules and
contain the ATP sites that provide the motive force, while the light and
intermediate chains are thought to bind to cargo and regulate the activity of
the motor. Recent data from the Barbar lab have suggested that the role of light
chain LC8 is to facilitate dimerization of the natively disordered N-terminal
domain of dynein intermediate chain, rather than to primarily function as a
cargo adaptor, as commonly thought. Light chain Tctex-1, which is a structural
homolog of LC8 and binds the intermediate chain at a site contiguous to the LC8
binding site, is likely to have a similar role as LC8. The research project will
test the hypothesis that the tandem roles of light chains LC8 and Tctex-1 are to
promote dynein assembly and the interaction with the cargo adaptor dynactin, and
not to act as cargo adaptors themselves. Using a combination of biophysical
approaches including nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR), isothermal
titration calorimetry and X-ray crystallography, the Barbar lab will elucidate
the mechanisms of three important outcomes of the interactions of both light
chains to dynein intermediate chain: 1) how they contribute to formation of a
tight dynein assembly, 2) how they promote dimerization of the intermediate
chain, and 3) how they may promote a tighter interaction of the intermediate
chain with p150Glued subunit of dynactin. The essential roles of these light
chains will be tested in vivo in the lab of Professor Tom Hays, a collaborator
on this project. The studies should provide novel insights into the structural
biology and thermodynamics of dynein motor function, and will complement the
cell biological approaches that predominate in the field of intracellular
transport. Since these studies provide the first structural insights into the
role of the disorder-to-order transition in dynein assembly and its association
with dynactin, they allow the opportunity to develop a tractable system to probe
the role of intrinsic disorder in the assembly of large macromolecular
complexes. Broader Impacts: The PI has a strong record of research contributions
with undergraduate students, and of mentoring minorities and students with
disabilities. The PI is taking a leading role on her campus to introduce
molecular biophysics to the research community by providing access to
instrumentation and training workshops. Furthermore, the PI will take an active
role to promote basic science among high school students by providing
opportunities for research lab experience, and by developing instructional
material and a hands-on module in the Saturday Academy program. The latter is a
highly successful program at Oregon State University for outreach for high
school students in which biochemistry and biophysics have not yet been
represented.