* 0818767
* Conference: FASEB-2008 Conference on Mechanisms in Plant Development, August 10-14, 2008 in Saxtons River, VT
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Neelima Sinha, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P.  Jack
* 06/30/2009
* USD 16,000.00

Studies of how plants grow and develop are vital for our ability to continue
improving agricultural productivity and efficiency while minimizing negative
environmental impacts. Investigators around the world are working to understand
mechanisms of plant development using a variety of experimental systems and
techniques. It is of utmost importance for investigators in this diverse and
rapidly moving field to have a forum for discussion of recent work in which
common principles and new themes can emerge, and in which key, unanswered
questions can be identified. This proposal is for partial funding for a FASEB
Summer Research Conference entitled "Mechanisms in Plant Development" to be held
August 10-14th, 2008 in Saxtons River, VT (organized by Neelima Sinha and Cris
Kuhlemeier). This conference, held every other year for the past twenty years,
has a small size (~100 participants) and will facilitate the distillation of new
themes and principles emerging from recent work in the plant development field,
as well as fostering new acquaintances and collaborations between participants
with shared interests. Participants will include principal investigators,
postdocs, and Ph.D. students, 40-50% of whom are expected to be female based on
the recent history of this meeting. The conference program includes seven
sessions. For each session, speakers were chosen based on the high quality and
interest value of their ongoing research, and on our knowledge of their ability
to give a clear and engaging presentation. In addition, speaker choices were
made to create a balance between male and female speakers, between junior,
intermediate and senior investigators. Moreover, several speakers were invited
who employ emerging technologies and approaches in their research. Daily poster
sessions and 10-12 short talks will provide opportunities for all participants
to present their work to an international audience. There will be ample time for
informal discussions among participants.