* 0818018
* RUI: Glucose Production and Disposal During Long Term Fasting Northern Elephant Seals.
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Daniel Crocker, Sonoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 08/31/2012
* USD 307,887.00

A major challenge of long-term fasting is the provision of glucose for glucose-
dependent tissues (e.g. central nervous system) while sparing protein in vital
body organs. Seals provide an excellent system to investigate metabolic
strategies during fasting because they undertake natural fasts during periods
that elevate nutrient demands. Weaned northern elephant seals fast for 2-3
months, during which time physiological development supporting their diving
ability occurs. Previous investigations in this system revealed a number of
unique features of metabolism that differ from the traditional view of fasting
adaptation. Despite efficient protein sparing, plasma glucose levels in elephant
seals are high throughout the fast. Levels of glucose production fail to exhibit
the suppression with fasting that is seen in other species. Breakdown of protein
and fats provides only a small portion of this glucose production and,
therefore, the source of this endogenous glucose production has not been
identified. This research project will investigate glucose production and
disposal during long-term natural fasts in northern elephant seals. Isotopic
tracer techniques and respirometry will be combined to 1) examine the
contribution of various substrates to glucose production 2) examine the
metabolic strategies for glucose clearance 3) examine variation in fuel use over
fasting period and 4) examine the activity of several key metabolic cycles that
may regulate glucose production. This study will provide important information
about the metabolic strategies that enable long-term fasting during development.
Increased understanding of the novel features of carbohydrate regulation in
fasting-adapted animals, including maintenance of high blood glucose while
fasting, avoidance of ketoacidosis, protein sparing despite high rates of
glucose production, and high rates of glucose disposal despite low insulin
levels and insulin resistance can potentially inform our understanding of human
pathologies of carbohydrate metabolism. This research will also promote research
training and education to undergraduate and graduate students, especially
underrepresented minority students, through participation in exciting research
on a unique wildlife system.