* 0818467
* Collaborative Research: Controls of ecosystem development during rapid environmental change: Yellowstone in the late-glacial and early-Holocene periods
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2013
* Cathy Whitlock, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 09/30/2013
* USD 260,000.00

The period between the late-Pleistocene glacial maximum and the early-Holocene
thermal maximum (ca. 21,000 to 7,000 years ago) was a time of dramatic
environmental change and biotic adjustments. The creation of new ecosystems in
deglaciated regions was governed by the rate of ice recession, the nature of
postglacial climate change, the characteristics of new landscapes, and the life-
history traits of the biologic colonizers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Yellowstone
region supported the largest independent ice field in the western U.S., and ice
recession after 17 cal ka set in motion a sequence of poorly-documented biologic
events that ultimately led to the present-day terrestrial and aquatic
ecosystems. This examination of the late-glacial and early-Holocene periods in
the Yellowstone region poses the following questions: What are the primary
controls of terrestrial and aquatic ecosystem development on newly created
landscapes? Specifically, how are past biota influenced by intrinsic biological
constraints, landscape evolution, and subregional climate differences during a
period of dramatic climate change? The study tests hypotheses concerning the
importance of climatic and nonclimatic drivers in ecosystem development through
an examination of lake-sediment records from sites that (1) lie along the path
of ice recession, (2) span a variety of substrates, and (3) are situated within
summer-wet and summer-dry precipitation regimes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Yellowstone is an ideal region to examine the development
and structuring of terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems, because (1) the climate
history of the western US is reasonably well understood from prior data
syntheses and paleoclimate model simulations; (2) a well-documented glacial
history of the Yellowstone region offers independent information on local
environmental change; (3) different substrates and precipitation regimes shape
modern ecosystem distributions and likely have in the past as well; and (4)
previous paleoecologic findings motivate more-nuanced research questions that
can be addressed with the acquisition of new high-resolution
records.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit of the Research: Understanding
the biotic consequences of climatic change is a major challenge in Earth systems
research and identified as a high priority in recent international and US
climate change assessments. The proposed study builds on existing knowledge of
Yellowstone's past in an effort to better understand the resilience of
terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems to environmental change, including abrupt
climate events of the magnitude projected in the future. This project adopts a
stratified sampling approach that is not possible in most locations where
paleobiotic data are sparse, and the information gained will help answer basic
biologic questions about the importance of abiotic and biotic variables in
modulating the effects of climate change on species, communities, and
ecosystems. The resulting synthesis will be a critical step in bridging the gap
between current understanding of ecological processes on short time scales and
evidence of dramatic change preserved in paleoecologic data on long time
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts of the Research lie in its
contribution to ongoing efforts that better inform the public, land and resource
managers, and students about the importance of environmental history in the
national parks, including an understanding of past climate change and ecosystem
sensitivity. This project in particular, extends outreach activities in a number
of ways, among them regularly updated web-disseminated information by the
National Park Service on Yellowstone's history; education and training
activities for Park staff on cutting-edge paleoclimate research; incorporation
of Yellowstone findings in Park-directed K-12 curricula and university
coursework; publication in popular scientific magazines; and content for a new
museum exhibit on Yellowstone. The project also continues the PIs' commitment to
train and educate the next generation of diverse scientists and to contribute to
ongoing efforts to build multidisciplinary paleoclimate datasets for use by
researchers, land managers, educators, and the public.