* 0818962
* Social Environment, Hormones, and Ontogenetic Carry-Over Effects on Male Reproductive Phenotypes in a Polymorphic bird
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2010
* Michael Webster, Washington State University
* Continuing grant
* J. Steven de Belle
* 02/28/2010
* USD 280,000.00

Male animals typically show considerable plasticity in the behavioral tactics
and signals that they use to obtain mates. For example, in many bird
populations, some males breed in bright plumage while others breed in relatively
dull plumage. It is generally thought that plastic expression of sexual traits
depends on both intrinsic (body condition) and extrinsic cues (social
interactions), allowing males to adjust their investment in signals according to
their quality and relative likelihood of mating success, and consequently that
such traits honestly signal male quality to conspecifics. However, the
mechanisms that translate these cues to male sexual traits, and thereby allow
for plastic expression of sexual traits, are poorly understood. This research
will examine the mechanisms of flexible expression of male reproductive
phenotypes in the red-backed fairy wren (Malurus melanocephalus). In particular,
this project will determine experimentally the effects of physical condition,
social environment and stress on the hormones that affect male reproductive
type. This work will combine both functional and mechanistic analyses, and will
push the study of phenotypic plasticity and sexual signals in new directions. In
addition, the research will explore carry-over effects of early life environment
on male condition and reproductive type, a cutting-edge field of research
emerging from the recent acknowledgement that early development can have
important effects on adult traits. These results will have major implications
for theoretical models of the evolution of sexual signals. This research also
will contribute directly to the training of two graduate students and numerous
undergraduates. Undergraduate training will include a novel internship program
that will pair students from American universities with Australian students to
conduct collaborative research. Thus, this project will involve undergraduates
in all aspects of the research experience, from project design through
publication, as well as giving them an enriching international experience.