* 0818620
* Developmental Functions of SNR1 and the BRM Chromatin Remodeling Complex in Drosophila
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Andrew Dingwall, Loyola University Stritch School of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2012
* USD 577,051.00

Intellectual merit of the project: Access to genetic information embedded within
the genome is essential for the proper development of all eukaryotic organisms
from simple yeast to vertebrate animals; thus, it is of great importance to
understand the cellular processes that guide proper gene regulation in vivo.
Several key steps involved in gene regulation require chromatin remodeling,
defined as the alteration of DNA-Histone contacts that comprise the basic
building blocks of the genome. Recent advances have revealed that chromatin
remodeling "complexes" that include multiple proteins are essential cofactors in
initiating transcription on chromosomal templates during development, as well as
the regulation of alternative splicing and epigenetic control of gene
expression. Although considerable progress has been made in recent years in our
understanding of the biochemical mechanism of chromatin remodeling, fundamental
questions remain as to how chromatin remodeling complexes are targeted to
certain genes in vivo and how they contribute mechanistically to both
transcription activation and repression. This project explores the role of the
Drosophila Brahma (SWI/SNF) chromatin remodeling complex in coordinating hormone
signaling with gene regulation at developmentally appropriate time points
through effects on transcript elongation by RNA Polymerase II--an exciting and
unexpected role only recently discovered. The Drosophila SNR1 and BRM proteins
are core components of the Brahma complex, which is highly conserved among all
eukaryotes. This project uses unique genetic and biochemical tools in both
fruitflies and cultured cell systems to unravel the functional relationships
among complex components, including the ATPase subunit BRM and the critical
regulatory subunit, SNR1. These analyses will help to define the mechanisms of
in vivo target gene selection and regulation by chromatin remodeling complexes.
The relationships between the Brahma complex and nuclear receptor coactivators
that direct the hormone response pathway are also the focus of this
investigation. While coactivator complexes have been identified in both insects
and vertebrates and there are strong links between chromatin remodeling and
coactivator function, the biological roles of individual components are poorly
understood. This project focuses on a biological analysis of the cmi gene,
encoding a conserved homolog of the N-terminal portion of the mammalian
ALR1/MLL2 protein found as a component of several nuclear receptor coactivator
complexes. Through the deployment of recently generated genetic tools this
project will enable an unprecedented dissection of the normal functions of cmi.
These analyses will provide an important model system to help understand
coactivator functions in metazoan development and the relationship with
chromatin remodeling. These studies using Drosophila as a genetic model system
will provide greater understanding of the basic mechanisms by which chromatin
remodeling complexes participate in programming gene expression during
development, as the regulatory systems in flies and vertebrates are remarkably
similar, including transcription control and nuclear receptor function. Thus,
the results of this project should provide important insights to help biologists
better understand chromatin remodeling functions as well as the regulation of
RNA polymerase elongation in diverse systems.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact of the
project. Graduate (both MS and PhD), undergraduate and several high school
students directly participate in the research projects and are trained by the PI
and senior personnel. Women and minorities are highly represented.
Multidisciplinary training is a vital aspect of education to prepare students
for diverse science careers and this project takes full advantage of the unique
tools currently available for Drosophila research. Students are trained in
molecular and developmental genetics, biochemistry, molecular biology and
bioinformatics/structural biology. Student research (both graduate and
undergraduate) is frequently included in publications. Students are encouraged
to present their work at local, regional and national meetings and to
collaborate with expert investigators outside the institution to enhance their
training experience.