* 0818399
* PBI:  A Complete Web-based Monograph of the Tribe Miconieae (Melastomataceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2018
* Frank Almeda, New York Botanical Garden
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 03/31/2018
* USD 2,999,756.00

A collaborative effort led by scientists from The New York Botanical Garden, the
University of Florida, the Universidade Federal de Paran√°, and the California
Academy of Sciences, along with several collaborators in the US, Latin America
and Europe, will produce a complete taxonomic inventory and monographic
description of the tribe Miconieae in the plant family Melastomataceae.
Melastomataceae is a group of over 1800 species from the Americas, mostly trees
and shrubs from tropical rain and montane forests. These plants are ecologically
important due to their diversity and abundance in forest understories, and
because they are an important food source for tropical birds and mammals. The
Miconieae also include two of the worst plant invasives in the Hawaii and South
Pacific Islands (Koster's curse [Clidemia hirta] and purple plague [Miconia
calvescens]), and the distributional changes of these invasives will be
documented. The project will comprehensively review all of the 1,800 species,
combining studies in the field, herbarium, and laboratory to produce a thorough
taxonomic inventory and phylogenetic analysis of the group.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All of the information generated by the study will be
available online through a dedicated module of NYBG's botanical database, the
Virtual Herbarium. The database will include complete description and images for
all species, keys for their identification, and distribution maps for each
species. The project will train postdoctoral associates and graduate students in
the US and Latin America on the tools of modern monographic treatments and
taxonomic nomenclature. Local scientists will be integral part of the field work
and will also be trained, and an intensive course for Latin American students
and scientists on the systematics and taxonomy of the Melastomataceae will take
place during the third year of the project.