* 0818259
* RUI: Neurogenesis in adult brains: the vascular niche, glial progenitors, migratory streams and neuronal differentiation in the olfactory pathway of crustaceans
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2008,12/31/2011
* Barbara Beltz, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* James Deshler
* 12/31/2011
* USD 406,000.00

This project focuses on the birth of new nerve cells (neurons) in the brains of
adult organisms. Over the past decade it has been discovered that a variety of
invertebrate and vertebrate species, including humans, incorporate new neurons
into brain circuits during adult life; the processes underlying the production
of these new neurons (neurogenesis) are not well understood. Adult neurogenesis
in crustaceans (lobster, crayfish) can be used as a model system, and allows
fundamental questions to be asked about basic underlying mechanisms. The entire
cellular lineage that produces the new neurons in the olfactory pathway of the
adult crustacean brain has been identified, and therefore targeted experiments
on particular cells in this lineage can be conducted in order to explore the
basic controls involved in neurogenesis. This project will examine the cellular
and molecular properties of precursor cells that produce the new neurons, the
migration of the precursors to the regions where they will differentiate, and
the processes underlying the acquisition of neuronal properties by these adult-
born cells. Cell biological methods will be used to explore, for example, the
influence of hormones (e.g., serotonin) on the rate of the cell cycle of the
precursor cells at the top of the lineage and to search for the molecules that
guide cell migration. These studies will involve undergraduate students, who
participate in scientific research as part of their education at Wellesley
College. Hence, in addition to obtaining answers to fundamental questions
related to the genesis of new neurons in adult brains, this project also is
closely tied to educating students who will become scientists, teachers and
clinicians.