* 0818837
* Regulation of the Snf1 Protein Kinase in Yeast
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2013
* Sergei Kuchin, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 07/31/2013
* USD 543,199.00

a. Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to adapt to stress is one of the
main characteristics of life. The molecular mechanisms by which such adaptation
is achieved are of fundamental interest to modern biology. It is increasingly
clear that stress tolerance is coupled to the cell's ability to be a good
shepherd of its resources. The vital importance of molecular resource-managing
systems is reflected in the remarkable evolutionary conservation of their key
regulatory components. Members of the Snf1/AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK)
family are found in eukaryotes as complex as mammals and as simple as yeast.
Mammalian AMPK is activated in response to energy limitation (increased cellular
AMP-to-ATP ratios), and functions to restore the energy balance by stimulating
ATP generation and inhibiting ATP consumption. Snf1 protein kinase of budding
yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) becomes activated and promotes the utilization
of alternative carbon/energy sources when the preferred source, glucose, becomes
limiting. In addition to glucose limitation, Snf1 has been implicated in
responses to various other stress conditions. Due to advantages offered by the
yeast system, studies of Snf1 have been providing invaluable insights into the
most fundamental aspects of Snf1/AMPK structure and function. However, many
questions still remain unanswered. It is known that Snf1 is activated by
partially redundant upstream kinases (Sak1, Tos3, and Elm1) and inhibited by the
Reg1-Glc7 phosphatase, but the exact mechanisms that shift the balance between
these opposing processes remain unknown. To gain further knowledge, an
innovative genetic screen for mutants with defects in the Snf1 pathway has been
devised and performed. This project uses genetic, molecular, and biochemical
methods to determine how the novel regulators thus identified interface with the
known elements of the Snf1 pathway, and how they deliver signals from other
sensory systems of the cell. This research will advance our understanding of the
Snf1/AMPK family and its functions, general mechanisms of protein kinase
regulation, and mechanisms of stress tolerance in eukaryotes. The results
obtained will be of general interest to the scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;
Broader impacts: Graduate and undergraduate students, including women and
minorities, will participate in this project, and will receive excellent
training to pursue their careers in research and science education. Experiments
from this work will be incorporated into an experimental microbiology course for
graduate and undergraduate students. The results obtained will be used to
constantly update an advanced graduate course on signal transduction. Because
Snf1-related kinases are involved in stress responses in plants, this work also
has the potential to suggest new approaches to improving agricultural practices.