* 0818957
* RUI: Molecular Modules of Aggression; Maternal Behavior in the African Cichlid Astatotilapia Burtoni
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Albyn Jones, Reed College
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 09/30/2015
* USD 409,750.00

In all animals, aggression is a complex social behavior with multiple causes and
manifestations. Growing evidence suggests that different mechanisms underlie
different forms of aggression. This project examines different forms of
aggression in the African cichlid fish Astatotilapia burtoni. Aggression in
males of this species is associated with territoriality and is regulated by
social factors and testosterone. Previous research has identified brain regions,
physiological mechanisms and patterns of gene expression that underlie the
variety of aggression levels in males. Laboratory stock females do not care for
their young nor do they show stereotypical forms of aggression. However,
aggression can be induced in the laboratory through manipulation of the social
environment. This form of female aggression, as in males, is associated with
elevated testosterone levels. Recent observations of a newly acquired wild stock
reveal a "good mother" phenotype that includes defensive aggression to protect
free-swimming fry. This new stock will allow a comparison of different hormone
levels correlated with different levels of maternal aggression. Furthermore, the
availability of genomic tools for this species (a cDNA microarray) will allow
the identification of gene expression associated with maternal aggression. The
pattern of gene expression can be then compared between natural maternal
aggression, induced female aggression and territorial male aggression. This work
will answer questions regarding the extent of overlap between the gene sets that
regulate each of these forms of aggression and will identify specific subsets of
the gene expression pattern that are uniquely associated with male, female,
and/or maternal forms of aggression. Through collaboration between the Renn Lab
in the biology department and the Jones team in the math department,
undergraduates at Reed College will engage in cutting edge genomic research and
rigorous statistical analysis of datasets incorporating measures of behavior,
physiology and gene expression.