* 0818823
* Collaborative Research: PBI: A survey of the tapeworms (Cestoda: Platyhelminthes) from the vertebrate bowels of the earth
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2016
* Kirsten Jensen, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 09/30/2016
* USD 412,273.00

A team of 22 tapeworm experts from 13 countries will conduct collections of
tapeworms&lt;br/&gt;from the digestive tracts of vertebrates (i.e, birds,
mammals, fishes, amphibians and&lt;br/&gt;reptiles, and sharks and rays) on land
and in the waters of 20 countries globally. The&lt;br/&gt;project will likely
yield approximately 1,600 to 1,700 tapeworm species new to
science&lt;br/&gt;from previously unsampled vertebrates and geographic regions.
DNA sequence data&lt;br/&gt;will be generated for 1,000 species, will be
analyzed, and the results used to revise&lt;br/&gt;tapeworm classification. The
existing Global Cestode Database will be expanded to&lt;br/&gt;include
descriptions of all tapeworm species and enhanced to allow data entry
from&lt;br/&gt;anywhere in the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project website
will provide public access to information on new and known&lt;br/&gt;tapeworm
species, and to resources including a list of tapeworm specimens available
in&lt;br/&gt;museums around the world, keys to aid in the identification of
tapeworms, and&lt;br/&gt;check-lists of vertebrates and their tapeworms. The
project will include 4 post-docs, 4&lt;br/&gt;graduate and 4 undergraduate
students, and will result in the generation of 5 children's&lt;br/&gt;books,
narrated by "spokesworms," describing life for tapeworms in the
various&lt;br/&gt;vertebrate groups. The project will ultimately lead to a
global understanding of&lt;br/&gt;tapeworms and their hosts that is
unprecedented for any host/parasite system to date.