* 0818223
* RUI: Elucidating The Role of Hoxa-5 In Cervical Somite Morphogenesis and Evolution
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2013
* Jennifer Mansfield, Barnard College
* Continuing Grant
* Anthea Letsou
* 07/31/2013
* USD 407,198.00

One of the earliest events in animal development is the establishment of the
main, head-to-tail body axis. Embryonic cells and tissues must receive a
molecular "address" along this axis, and then develop appropriately for their
location. In most animals, these processes are regulated at several steps by the
highly conserved Hox gene family. Hox proteins regulate the expression of other,
mostly unknown, genes, and play central roles in both the development and
evolution of animal body plans. Despite enormous progress toward understanding
the roles of Hox proteins in development and evolution, we still know relatively
little about which cellular processes they regulate in the various tissues in
which they act, especially in vertebrates. This project will examine the
cellular processes regulated by one Hox gene, Hoxa5, during the development of
vertebrate axial tissues (bone, muscle, and connective tissues of the vertebral
column and ribs). Molecular genetic methods will be employed to ask (1) which
cells within developing mouse express, or have a history of expressing, Hoxa5,
(2) whether there a lineage relationship between cells that express Hoxa5 at
different stages of embryogenesis, (3) how cells with a history of having
expressed Hoxa5 differ from cells that do not, both in terms of their
development and eventual fates, and finally, (3) how changes in Hoxa5 expression
influence the differentiation of vertebral segments in chick embryos. Together,
these approaches are aimed at teasing apart the elusive and context-dependent
roles for this Hox protein in one embryonic tissue in which it acts. In
addition, the genetic reagents produced by this work will be useful for future
studies examining Hoxa5's roles in other tissues. This research will be
conducted at Barnard College: an undergraduate, liberal arts college for women.
Undergraduates will collaborate with the PI and a research technician in all
aspects of this work, from experimental design to conducting experiments to
analysis of results. The broader impacts of this study are (1) to provide new
insight into how Hox proteins regulate patterning and differentiation of
vertebrate tissues and (2) to provide a hands-on training experience for
undergraduate researchers in a lab environment where they are the driving force
behind the research.