* 0818659
* Collaborative Research:  Law, Normative Discrimination, and the Caretaker Penalty
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Catherine Albiston, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 09/30/2012
* USD 39,354.00

PI: Shelley Correll and Catherine Albiston&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Law,
Normative Discrimination, and the Caretaker
Penalty&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SES-0818734; 0818659&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will examine whether laws
protecting leave takers can change negative normative judgments about working
mothers and leave takers. Using experimental procedures to be conducted at
Cornell University, the investigators will compare subjects? evaluations of
workers? files in situations where the law prohibits discrimination and
situations in which no law is in place. The main hypothesis is that laws that
protect leave takers from discrimination will not only reduce discriminatory
outcomes but also produce more positive evaluations of these workers. The
findings from this study will make important contributions to understanding
whether laws can change both behavior and normative belief systems. Results
could also provide scholars with new knowledge and information to understand
whether employers will penalize workers when they defy stereotypes that women
should be family caretakers and men should be family breadwinners.
Theoretically, the project will collect new data to illuminate whether normative
discrimination -- whereby employers discriminate because they believe that
mothers should stay at home with their children and fathers should support the
family ? is widespread or contingent. This project offers several broader
benefits. First, the social benefits to workers and families of identifying
effective legal reforms are potentially enormous; one estimate is that caretaker
bias costs mothers as much as $1 million over the course of their careers.
Second, the project will give both undergraduate and graduate students first-
hand experience conducting empirical research. From past experience, the
investigators expect that up to half of these students will be women and/or
minorities, increasing the likelihood that these students will pursue scientific
careers. Finally, this project will not only establish a new, interdisciplinary
collaboration between UC Berkeley and Cornell, but will also reach out to other
innovative organizations focused on work and family issues. &lt;br/&gt;