* 0818153
* Collaborative research:  Correlations in neural dynamics and coding
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Eric Shea-Brown, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 07/31/2012
* USD 143,197.00

Multi-electrode recording technology and voltage sensitive dyes allow
researchers to probe the structure of correlated, stimulus-driven neural
activity in groups of cells. However, the diversity of brain areas and stimuli
make a complete sampling of these patterns and their effects impossible.
Furthermore, the evidence of correlations in stimulus response is strong, yet
its role in neural coding difficult to intuit. Therefore, a combined, predictive
theory of correlation formation and impact is required. This challenge is
approached in three stages. First, a general mathematical theory is developed
that relates input correlations of a stochastic forcing to the output
correlations of resultant spike trains. The underlying tools will be linear
response, population density, and Monte-Carlo methods for the nonlinear
stochastic differential equations of spiking neural circuits. Next, this theory
is applied to a variety of neural models to quantify how neuron biophysics,
morphology, and coupling influence input-output correlation transfer. Finally,
information-theoretic analyses are performed to estimate the impact of spike
train correlations on the encoding and propagation of sensory inputs in
representative neural circuits. Throughout the project, the investigators will
work with experimental collaborators to refine and test these predictions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the mechanisms by which the nervous system
represents and processes information is a fundamental challenge for mathematical
biology. It has long been known that information is represented by the intensity
of individual neurons' responses. However, new multi-neuron recording and brain
imaging techniques are revealing that the information carried by neural tissue
is much more (or much less) than the summed contributions of individual neurons.
In other terms, the cooperative, correlated features of neural responses can be
essential. This poses a pair of fundamental, but unresolved theoretical
questions: What are the basic mechanisms by which correlated activity is
generated and propagated through layers of neural tissue? What are the
consequences for information processing in neuronal networks? The answers will,
in stages, make predictions for ongoing neurobiological experiments. For
instance, understanding the relation between correlations and neural coding
stands to impact the design of neural prosthetics, which code motor and sensory
signals via cortical, retinal, thalamic, and cochlear implants. From an
alternative perspective, many neurological disorders, such as epilepsy and
Parkinson's disease, involve excessive correlation in neural tissue--describing
the genesis of correlations and its negative impact on neural coding will aid in
designing appropriate treatments that ultimately reduce correlation in the
nervous system. Along the way, graduate students involved in this research will
receive training in a highly interdisciplinary field, and will gain a broad
perspective on mathematical neuroscience through regular visits between three
research groups in different regions of the United States. The active
involvement of the investigators in undergraduate research and course
development will provide an opportunity to translate the questions addressed
here into compelling educational topics on the cooperative activity in neural
networks that will be accessible to a wide audience.