* 0818930
* Dynamics of Higher Order Chromatin Structure
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Blaine Bartholomew, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2011
* USD 495,000.00

In the last several years chromatin structure has been shown to be a highly
dynamic entity, one through which DNA-centered processes such as transcription,
replication, repair, and recombination are carefully controlled. A vast
multitude of protein complexes alter chromatin structure through the exertion of
mechanical work (ATP hydrolysis) or chemical modification (acetylation,
methylation, and so on). Yet little is known about the higher-order structure of
chromatin or how these many complexes perturb it, and it is therefore imperative
that better approaches for examining higher-order chromatin structure be
developed. In this project the investigator will engineer nucleosomes such that
chemical modification and site-directed cross-linking can be used to monitor (1)
the accessibility of a series of specific sites throughout the nucleosome and
(2) their proximity to other regions. With this monitoring ability, the
investigator will be able to identify the nucleosomal regions involved in the
compaction of chromatin fibers, and to model the structure of the higher-order
chromatin. The investigator will focus particularly on the structural changes
that occur as the chromatin fiber transitions from a 10 nm fiber to a 30 nm
fiber, and then to self-associated arrays. Currently it is extremely difficult
to probe the structure of higher-order chromatin due to its inherent complexity
(size, heterogeneity, and protein composition). So far most of the information
available on higher-order structure has been derived from low resolution
structures obtained by techniques such as electron and atomic force microscopy.
Successful completion of this project will provide key missing structural
information that will complement that obtained by these conventional methods and
will also address fundamental questions concerning cell development and the
organization and regulation of the genome.&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide
an enhanced learning experience for the undergraduate and graduate students
involved in the project. As part of an undergraduate research class, students
will be organized into small teams to make histone mutants and to participate in
the large-scale purification of the engineered histones. Those in this project
will meet weekly to present their own research, discuss recent publications on
chromatin structure and function, and solve technical challenges. This research
will augment Southern Illinois University's tradition of providing research
opportunities to those from groups underrepresented in science and engineering.