* 0818283
* Support for Training at the Intersection of Developmental and Cognitive Science at CogSci2008
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2008,12/31/2008
* Jennifer Wiley, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Vincent R. Brown
* 12/31/2008
* USD 20,500.00

This proposal requests NSF funding to provide support to pre-conference
tutorials and distinguished speakers at the 30th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society in July 2008 (CogSci2008) in Washington, D.C. CogSci2008 will
highlight cognitive science research that deals with all types of cognitive and
neural development, as well as cognitive aging and cognitive neuropsychological
research using patient populations. The proposed project aims at bridging gaps
that exist between developmental science and cognitive science, which fits the
overall theme and scope of CogSci2008. The five tutorials will be pre-conference
events associated with the annual meeting, and will focus on two broad topics
that connect cognitive and learning sciences: computational modeling of
development, and developmental neuroscience. These tutorials will be hosted by
leading scholars in the respective fields such as developmental robotics,
computational neuroscience, dynamical systems modeling, ERP, and eye-tracking.
Two plenary speakers, Linda Smith and David Plaut, will present their exemplary
work related to the conference theme. The combination of the tutorials and
distinguished speakers are intended as a training opportunity for both students
and scholars with interests in disciplinary approaches that cut across
developmental and cognitive boundaries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Annual Meeting
of the Cognitive Science Society is the most prominent meeting of cognitive
science researchers in the world. The Cognitive Science Society encourages the
growth of the next generation of scientists who possess interdisciplinary
skills. In particular, researchers are increasingly relying on sophisticated
computational and neuroscience theories and methods at the interface between
cognitive and developmental sciences to answer complex theoretical questions.
The proposed tutorials will help support the participation of young
investigators, including junior faculty, post-doctoral researchers and graduate
students, and so will facilitate the entry of new generations of researchers
into the cognitive and developmental sciences with innovative and powerful
methodologies.