* 0818089
* Collaborative Research: Ceramic Geography and the Social Formations of the Smoky Hill Phase, East-central Kansas
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2011
* Robert Speakman, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2011
* USD 112,049.00

With National Science Foundation support, the researchers will analyze curated
ceramic assemblages to investigate social formations of the Smoky Hill phase of
the Central Plains tradition (CPt) of North America. The 18-month project will
apply detailed ceramic style analysis and neutron activation analysis to
problems of social organization and interaction, and will control chronology by
radiocarbon dating 36 Smoky Hill phase sites in central and north-central
Kansas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The late prehistoric period in the Central Plains
(cal A.D. 1100?1350) featured an emerging farming economy, with attendant
changes in technology, settlement, and social organization. The social
organization is the least understood of these dimensions. The basic social unit
was the economically autonomous household, but households by necessity were
integrated into communities. This late prehistoric adaptation really has no
historic analog in the region. The project's primary objective is to develop an
empirically based model to map the late prehistoric social landscape and to
delineate the individual communities formed among the people of the Smoky Hill
phase.&lt;br/&gt;The team will use ceramic style analysis as a proxy measure of
the community affiliation of individual households. The analysis will examine
multiple dimensions of stylistic variation and will examine the geographical
distribution of style groups. This analysis will be augmented with extensive
radiocarbon dating using annual plant species to ensure that analyzed materials
are contemporaneous with the associated component. Extensive neutron activation
analysis (NAA) will allow the evaluation of interaction within and among
communities by delineating chemical compositional groups and mapping their
distribution. GIS will be a critical visual and analytical tool for mapping
ceramic style groups and chemical compositional groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merits of the project are grounded in a break with the traditional
ways of viewing late prehistoric social organization on the Central Plains and
of lifeways on the Plains in general. Traditional ways have relied on historic
analogies and have reified rather than truly exposed aspects of social
organization. Contemporary theory and method, however, now allow social
organization to be addressed empirically. The results of this research will be a
baseline study of the organization of this underrepresented type of social
formation from a geographical area that has also been largely underrepresented.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the study are that it will
contribute to advances in theory, education, and outreach. The project supports
theory concerning the effects of the transition to food production on social
organization, including gender, as well as the chronology and structure of
social change across the Central Plains. Undergraduate and graduate students
will be educated and trained in the analysis of Smoky Hill phase material
culture and the application of ceramic data and GIS tools to that analysis. By
defining the community structure of twelfth through fourteenth century people on
one part of the Central Plains, the result will be a better understanding of the
social organization of early Plains farmers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;.