* 0818731
* The evolution of serial homology: a case study with nymphalid butterfly eyespots
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2013
* William Piel, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Anthea Letsou
* 07/31/2013
* USD 570,998.00

Ant√≥nia Monteiro and William Piel&lt;br/&gt;Proposal number:
IOS-0818731&lt;br/&gt;"The evolution of serial homology: a case study with
butterfly eyespots."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The bodies of complex organisms have
been found to reuse developmental structures, such as teeth, vertebra, and ribs,
in order to build "serially" repeated parts or processes. This composite or
modular design suggests that certain genetic programs are redeployed multiple
times in different places during the developing embryo. It remains to be
understood how such modules come to be redeployed over the course of
evolutionary diversification. This project aims to explore the evolutionary and
developmental origin of complex repeated structures by studying serially-
repeated "eyespot" patterns in the wings of butterflies. The researchers will
assemble a large phylogenetic tree of nymphalid butterfly species, photograph
and code their wing patterns with respect to the presence or absence of spots or
eyespots, and use comparative methods to infer how eyespots evolved. In
addition, the evolution of the eyespot gene developmental "network" will be
investigated by monitoring the expression of four candidate network genes in
twenty species chosen on the basis of phylogenetic distribution of wing pattern
evolution.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project has considerable educational
Broader Impacts over a wide range of educational levels, supporting a graduate
student, postdoc, and several undergraduate work-study students. Moreover,
several New Haven high school student researchers will be involved through
"Evolutions", the Peabody Museum's outreach program to city youth. This project
will also generate a publicly accessible high-resolution image database of
butterfly species (ca. 8,000 images from 1,000 nymphalid species), a large
phylogeny of nymphalids, and the first database for gene expression images in
the Lepidoptera. In addition, interactive web-accessible animations will be
produced and incorporated into the exhibits of the Peabody Museum. This software
will illustrate the diversity of nymphalid wing patterns and will animate the
evolution of eyespot changes on phylogeny. This exhibit will introduce the
public to the diversity and evolution of wing patterns, the evolution of
individuation of repeated modules, and the evolution of morphological novelties
such as eyespots.