* 0818118
* Even-Skipped Locus Control and Enhancer-Promoter Interaction
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* James Jaynes, Thomas Jefferson University
* Continuing Grant
* Martha Peterson
* 08/31/2013
* USD 600,985.00

Intellectual merit &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chromosome dynamics are important not
only for such basic cellular processes as proper segregation during mitosis and
recombination during meiosis, but for gene regulation as well. Localized DNA
sequences have been identified that mediate large-scale regulation involving a
chromosomal region, a complex genetic locus, or an entire chromosome. Examples
include X-inactivation and locus control in mammals, and dosage compensation and
master regulatory gene function in the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster. Such
regulation has been shown to be critically important for proper gene expression
during development. Despite much progress in recent years in illuminating some
of the underlying mechanisms, fundamental questions remain as to how regulatory
proteins binding at localized sites produce global regulation. The project
consists of two main parts. The first deals with the locus control elements that
flank the Drosophila even skipped (eve) locus. These elements mediate positive
regulation with locus-wide effects on early gene expression, in that the
relevant enhancers are spread throughout the locus. The second deals with
regulatory DNA at the 3' edge of the eve locus that causes trans-gene homing, in
which exogenously introduced genes containing the eve promoter respond to
endogenous eve enhancers from as far away as 120 kilobase pairs, "across"
several other genes. The main thrust of each part will be to determine how long-
range chromosome interactions change with changes in the DNA elements that
mediate these activities, allowing development and testing of specific
mechanistic models. In each case, the focus is on analyses that are feasible
with established techniques, that provide fundamentally important information,
and that take advantage of unique features of our model system, of which there
are several. In addition to highly detailed knowledge of the eve regulatory DNA,
it is possible to make fully functional transgenic copies of the entire locus.
This will allow us to go beyond cataloguing correlations between chromosome
dynamics and gene regulation, to test the functional significance of the
observed changes. Thus, our analysis will lead to a greater understanding of
mechanisms that regulate both chromosome dynamics and expression of the eve
locus, and how the two are interrelated. The results of our studies will have
important implications for how these processes are integrated for many other
genes. This goal represents a major remaining frontier in the quest to learn how
the genome directs the development and behavior of multicellular organisms, and
their interactions with the environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;I. Students are strongly encouraged to participate.
Both graduate and undergraduate students have earned authorship on recent
publications from the laboratory. Post-doctoral associates receive training that
prepares them to pursue independent research in the future. In each of these
categories, women and minorities are highly
represented.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;II. The work provides exciting, current
examples that are incorporated into lectures for graduate students, as well as
presentations in a Community Outreach Program. These activities advance
discovery and understanding while promoting teaching, training, and learning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;III. The results of the work are disseminated broadly
through presentations at research conferences as well as in scientific
publications. Aspects of previous work by the investigators have also been
included in a number of college textbooks in recent
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IV. Funding of this project will facilitate an
established Outreach Program. K-12 student participation generates increased
excitement about biological sciences, and encourages consideration of scientific
career options. Teacher training is included. Under-represented groups with
respect to economic status and race are largely those served in the
Philadelphia, PA and Camden, NJ school districts, the target institutions of
this program. This program has reached thousands of students and dozens of
teachers over the past 3 years.