* 0818595
* Elucidating the Genetic and Neural Basis of a C. elegans Male Motor Behavior using Stimulatory and Inhibitory Light-Activated Channels
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Robyn Lints, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* David Coppola
* 08/31/2013
* USD 556,892.00

Animals are exposed to myriad external stimuli and must prioritize this
information and respond appropriately in order to survive and reproduce. This
study investigates how this fundamental capacity is encoded in an animal's genes
and mediated by circuits of the nervous system. The nematode worm C. elegans is
an ideal model for investigating this question because it has a simple nervous
system and genome. A striking example of sensory reprioritization is seen in the
mate recognition behavior of the C. elegans male. Passing contact between a male
and prospective mate causes the male to instantly halt ongoing behaviors and
attempt mating. The specific objectives of this project are to define the neural
circuitry that enables the male to respond, and to identify the genes that
control circuit function. Circuit mapping tools include state-of-the-art light-
inducible protein channels that can test a neuron's function simply by turning
the cell off or on with a pulse of light. Forward and reverse genetic approaches
will be used to identify genes required for circuit function. The results of the
study will provide important insights into the genetic control of sensorimotor
integration and also potentially contribute to the fields of reproductive
physiology, evolutionary and computational biology. Graduate and undergraduate
students will carry out the research. Because the project involves a combination
of genetics, molecular biology, statistics and mathematics it will provide these
developing scientists with exposure to a broad range of fields and a fuller
understanding of biological phenomena. In addition to publication in scientific
journals, the findings of the study will ultimately be added to an established,
publicly-accessible and free C. elegans web site targeted to students interested
in nervous system development, function and cell biology.