* 0818729
* Spatial and Temporal Regulation of Cytokinesis in the Early Embryo
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2013
* Charles Shuster, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Koonce
* 07/31/2013
* USD 586,358.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt; The generation of new daughter cells from
preexisting cells is a fundamental property of life, and proper development and
survival necessitates that cells execute mitosis and cytokinesis with high
fidelity. In animal cells, cytokinesis occurs through the action of an
actomyosin contractile ring, whose position is dictated by microtubules of the
mitotic apparatus. While major inroads have been made towards identifying the
constituents of the contractile ring, cytokinesis remains the only phase of the
cell cycle where a unifying model has yet to be distilled from the plethora of
approaches and model systems employed over the last century. This project seeks
to examine how models proposed for spatiotemporal regulation of cytokinesis in
somatic cells apply to the early embryo, where the large cell size and rapid
division cycles pose challenges not faced by cells later in development.
Questions to be addressed include how the chromosome passenger complex, which
translocates from the centromere to the cell equator during anaphase,
contributes to cytokinesis in cells where chromosomes are dispensable for
cleavage plane determination. Additionally, the project will examine how
microtubules contribute to cleavage plane determination by actively suppressing
contractility at the polar regions of the cell. Lastly, the project will examine
how the sequence of events leading to cytokinesis are coupled to the machinery
of the cell cycle. These studies will be performed on sea urchin eggs and early
embryos, whose optical clarity, amenability to physical and molecular
manipulation, and sequenced genome afford the ability to ask unique questions
regarding the spatial and temporal regulation of cytokinesis. The planned lines
of experimentation will merge classical manipulations of cellular geometry with
advanced imaging, molecular- and chemical biology. Together, these studies will
make significant inroads into reconciling how mechanisms directing the spatial-
and temporal regulation of contractile ring assembly defined in somatic cells
work in larger, embryonic cells. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;
The project will increase diversity of scientists in the cellular and
developmental biosciences. New Mexico State University is a minority-serving
institution, and the training of underrepresented minority- and first generation
college students is a fundamental part of all activities in the PI's laboratory.
Minority undergraduate- and graduate trainees, including visiting scientists
from tribal colleges in New Mexico, will participate in all aims of the project.
To recruit participants from tribal colleges, both the PI and students will make
presentations at two year- and tribal colleges to generate interest in the study
and interested participants will be invited to join the research team as summer
trainees or as undergraduate students enrolled at New Mexico State University.
Results from the study will be shared and broadly disseminated. Images and
timelapse sequences generated by the research will be integrated with the
educational mission of the PI, and in-class activities utilizing the sequences
will be disseminated through peer-reviewed educational web portals.