* 0818534
* Roles of Ribosomal Proteins in Eukaryotic Ribosome Assembly In Vivo
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* John Woolford, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 07/31/2011
* USD 510,000.00

The long-term goal is to discover principles of dynamic interactions among
proteins and RNAs leading to construction of an essential cellular nanomachine,
the ribosome, whose function is intimately connected with regulation of cell
growth and proliferation. Assembly of the two subunits of the ribosome,
containing 79 different ribosomal proteins and four rRNAs, is an essential,
evolutionarily conserved process. The experimental system is the yeast
Saccharomyces cerevisiae, in which eukaryotic ribosome biogenesis has been most
thoroughly characterized, using genetic, molecular biological, and proteomic
tools. Biogenesis begins in the nucleolus, where rRNA is transcribed and folds
into specific conformations that enable its site-specific modification,
nucleolytic processing, and binding to ribosomal proteins to form productive
assembly intermediates. Maturation continues as preribosomal particles transit
from the nucleolus through the nucleoplasm to the cytoplasm, to form mature,
functional subunits. These processes require more than 180 trans-acting assembly
factors. When and how these assembly factors function are beginning to be
understood, yet the roles of ribosomal proteins in ribosome biogenesis in vivo
remain largely unexplored. This project involves systematic investigation of the
function in subunit assembly of each of the 46 ribosomal proteins found in the
large (60S) subunit of yeast ribosomes. Strains conditional for synthesis of
each of these ribosomal proteins in 60S ribosomal subunits are being constructed
to investigate their roles in processing of pre-rRNA, nucleocytoplasmic transit
of preribosomes, and particle maturation. The order of assembly of ribosomal
proteins into 60S ribosomes, and the ribosomal proteins or assembly factors with
which they associate during assembly will be
determined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact of the proposed research will
arise from mentoring of six to eight undergraduate and two to three graduate
students. Ribosome biogenesis offers outstanding opportunities to learn how to
approach systems biology at a molecular level, by integrating training in
molecular genetics and proteomics. In addition, the proposed research should
provide mutant yeast strains and an extensive dataset to enable the larger
community to develop a complete catalogue of roles of ribosomal proteins in
ribosome assembly and ribosome function.&lt;br/&gt;