* 0818206
* Acquisition of an Instrument Network to Investigate Zooplankton Dormancy in the Finger Lakes of New York.
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Meghan Brown, Hobart and William Smith Colleges
* Standard Grant
* Vicki Martin
* 08/31/2011
* USD 418,430.00

The National Science Foundation is funding Hobart and William Smith Colleges to
study the invasive Fishhook waterflea (Cercopagis pengoi) causes ecological and
economic damage to North American lakes. It continues to spread, likely in its
dormant egg stage, which is poorly understood. An instrumentation network will
be created to investigate the production and distribution of the dormant egg in
Seneca Lake (New York) in concert with meteorological and lake conditions. The
network will combine collection of dormant eggs using automated sediment traps
with information about the physical environment from remotely recording
instrumentation that will measure water quality, temperature, and current, as
well as meteorological conditions. Linking diapausing egg production and
distribution with the physical environment will provide a more complete
understanding of Cercopagis, essential for predicting, managing, and preventing
further invasions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The network will improve the
understanding of the ecology of Cercopagis and advance the monitoring of the New
York State Finger Lakes. Approximately 300 undergraduates will make use of the
network and, in a framework of integrated interdisciplinary research. Students
will gain experience with field and laboratory techniques, as well as data
management, analysis and interpretation. In addition to student co-authored
articles and presentations, the PIs and their student collaborators will develop
an online database and website for managing and disseminating the gathered data
to the public and scientific communities.&lt;br/&gt;