* 0818421
* RUI: The Chemical Basis for Protein Self-assembly and Polymerization
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2008,07/31/2013
* Robert Fairman, Haverford College
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2013
* USD 529,750.00

The objective of this project is to study the molecular and chemical role of the
amino acid, glutamine, in the process of misfolding and aggregation of proteins
containing long glutamine repeats. This aberrant process, resulting in the
formation of large fibrils, is a general molecular problem common to all
organisms and can lead to metabolic and structural deficiencies. Recently, the
process of this aggregation has come under scrutiny since the intermediates
formed during fibril growth can themselves persist in the organism and interfere
with normal cellular processes. Stretches of glutamine repeats fold into a
b-sheet structure, which then acts as a template for aggregation by the further
addition of polypeptide strands to form a long filament. Individual filaments
can further associate to form multi-filament fibrils. The glutamines are thought
to stabilize these structures through mechanisms involving hydrogen bonding and
hydrophobic interactions, although the details of these interactions and their
respective roles during the self-assembly process are still controversial. The
PI has developed a peptide model system that can form a prototypical b-sheet,
called a b-hairpin, that can be studied using a variety of biophysical methods
to probe the role of the glutamines in fostering b-sheet, filament, and fibril
formation. Three specific goals are: (1) finding conditions to stabilize
intermediates in the fibril assembly pathway so that the role of glutamine
interactions on growth and stability can be assessed; (2) measuring the effects
of amino acid mutations on these processes to probe chemical mechanism; and (3)
isotope-labeling of specific glutamines to probe directly for stable hydrogen
bonding in the various intermediates. The outcome of these studies will help to
understand a fundamental problem in protein misfolding and to test a variety of
structural models that have been proposed for proteins containing poly-glutamine
repeats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has been developed as a set of
projects suitable for undergraduates since the primary research efforts will be
undertaken by students working to complete their thesis requirements in biology.
Students engaged in this work will gain training in interdisciplinary research.
This necessitates collaborative work and students will be working closely with
colleagues in the Chemistry Department and collaborators at the University of
Pennsylvania. Work on this project has led to the creation of lectures in
protein folding and misfolding for an introductory course, more advanced
lectures for an upper-level course in protein structure and function, and the
development of a 7-week primary-literature-based course on protein misfolding
and aggregation. The PI has a long-standing commitment to improving access to
research for under-represented groups. In addition to a long-term commitment to
an existing outreach program for science and writing for K-12 students from
Philadelphia, he has regularly reserved space in his research lab over the
summer and during the academic year for at least one student self-identified as
belonging to an under-represented group. More broadly, as the director of the
HHMI-sponsored programs at Haverford College, the PI is responsible for awarding
student interdisciplinary research fellowships and funding internal and external
research opportunities for students belonging to under-represented groups,
administering several outreach programs, and supporting faculty development
seminars and workshops to enhance the overall research program in the
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;