* 0818758
* Molecular Analysis of Brucella Host Factors
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Thomas Ficht, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Beth Saffo
* 07/31/2012
* USD 319,063.00

Many bacteria possess the extraordinary ability to invade, replicate, and
persist within host cells. However, an understanding of the molecular mechanisms
mediating these processes has remained elusive. The long-term objective of this
research is to illuminate the way in which the intracellular bacterial pathogen
Brucella melitensis interacts with host cells. The specific research objectives
of this effort are to define the molecular mechanisms by which inositol-
requiring enzyme-1 (Ire1), an important regulator of the cell's response to
stress, supports B. melitensis movement and replication in host cells. In
addition, this research will examine whether additional candidate genes
participate in this process. Taken together, this research will provide insight
into the molecular mechanisms by which intracellular bacterial pathogens invade,
replicate, and persist in the host, and thereby, have a broad scientific
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Important educational objectives will be pursued in
parallel with these research aims. These objectives include expanding graduate
student recruiting activities at Hispanic Serving Institutions in the Texas Rio
Grande Valley and U.S.-Mexico border regions. This enhanced recruiting effort
will help attract students from diverse backgrounds into life science and
agriculture graduate programs at Texas A&amp;M University. In addition, this
research will provide research opportunities for highly motivated
undergraduates. The Rio Grande Valley and U.S.-Mexico border regions experience
the highest incidences of human brucellosis (the disease caused by Brucella
infection) in the nation. Therefore, the commitment to train students from these
regions will create unique opportunities for integrating the specific research
activities in elucidating Brucella pathogenesis with the concerns of affected
communities.