* 0818588
* Processing of Visual Words in the Human Fusiform Cortex:  Selectivity and Plasticity
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Sheng He, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Akaysha Tang
* 08/31/2012
* USD 617,982.00

The human visual system has tremendous capabilities for processing a complex
world. For literate people, such expertise includes extremely efficient
processing of written script. How does the visual system achieve this goal? One
hypothesis is that an area in the mid-fusiform cortex, often called the Visual
Word Form Area (VWFA), plays an important role in processing visual words.
However, the level of functional selectivity of VWFA remains controversial, as
well as its learning capacity (plasticity). With the support from the National
Science Foundation, Dr. Sheng He and colleagues at the University of Minnesota,
in collaboration with colleagues in China (Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chinese
University of Hong Kong, and Huaxi hospital in Chengdu), will investigate the
specific functional selectivity of VWFA, especially in terms of its role in
processing Chinese characters. The project will be able to obtain information at
very fine spatial scales using high field functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) scanners. Fast dynamical information will be obtained using
magnetoencephalography (MEG) and electroencephalography (EEG). Advanced data
analysis methods will be used to extract more information from the brain imaging
data than has previously been possible. The completion of this research project
will result in a comprehensive understanding of the properties of the mid-
fusiform region. Through close collaboration with colleagues in China, this
project will also have the unique opportunity to track the potential change of
functional properties of the mid-fusiform region in native Chinese illiterate
participants as they are taught to read. Results from illiterate adults learning
to read Chinese will be compared to results from native English speakers
learning Chinese. This comparison will help determine whether extensive visual
experience in adulthood is sufficient for the development of a functional
specialization in the brain, or if early exposure is critical.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Detailed understanding of the specific functional
selectivity and plasticity of this early brain area related to reading will
contribute to the formulation of scientifically sound educational strategies.
Because the project will explore the extent of plasticity in the adult reading
brain, it will provide guidance to the strategies and policies regarding the
alleviation of adult illiteracy. It could also contribute to better
rehabilitation procedures and processes for people who suffer from reading
disabilities due to brain damage. The use of multiple advanced brain imaging
techniques will provide excellent training opportunities to both graduate
students and undergraduate students. The collaboration between scientists in the
US and China will facilitate long-term communication on many fronts and promote
an exchange of ideas between the scientists of these two countries. &lt;br/&gt;