* 0818401
* Development of Adaptable Cell LA-ICP-MS and Support for External Collaborations in the Elemental Analysis Facility at The Field Museum
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Patrick Williams, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2013
* USD 189,956.00

With support from the National Science Foundation, Drs. Laure Dussubieux and
Ryan Williams of the Elemental Analysis Facility at the Field Museum will expand
the services of the laboratories to a wide range of archaeological scholars. The
facility includes a scanning electron microscope with an energy dispersive
spectrometer (SEM-EDS), and an inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer
(ICP-MS). The ICP-MS can be fitted with two lasers. One of the lasers is
dedicated to the sampling of small objects with a high throughput, whereas the
second laser, a totally unique, custom-transformed apparatus, accommodates large
objects. This equipment was complemented by the recent acquisition of two
portable XRF instruments for totally non-invasive investigations of artifacts on
the premises of the Museum or in the field. The facility is used to determine
the composition, including major, minor, and trace elements, of a large range of
materials in a non-destructive manner to address questions related to the
archaeology of cultural production, interaction and exchange in the Americas,
Africa, Oceania, Europe, and Asia and advancing the cause of material
conservation of The Field Museums reknowned anthropology
collections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The elemental analysis facility serves the
Field Museum community as well as scholars and students from the Chicago area,
the Midwest and throughout the world. This project will develop our interaction
with outside scientists to attract high profile collaborative projects by
offering financial support to offset travel and accommodation expenses as well
as a subvention of analytical costs. The laboratory provides a unique training
opportunity for students. They are initiated into the analytical process by
undertaking the analysis itself and are trained in method development, the
statistical processing of the data, and interpretation. The acquisition of a
laser system with an adaptable cell will extend the range of artifacts possible
to analyze to whole specimens and reduce the risk of biased samples that a
selection of only small objects could introduce. The presence of an on-site
laboratory at the Field Museum creates the opportunity to study artifacts from
the unique collections of the museum that could not be moved easily to outside
analytical facilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of the
project include the establishment of extensive new datasets of archaeological
and ethnological material from around the world that directly informs hypotheses
about ancient trade and exchange, technology, and their relationship to the
development of social complexity around the world. By sharing our expertise for
the investigation of ancient material and linking leading scholars and graduate
students to the museums extensive collections and giving them the tools to
analyze these one of a kind assemblages, the project will significantly enhance
understanding of the role of cultural production in the development of complex
societies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the research include
student training and public education. This project integrates research and
training of undergraduate and graduate students. Results of this research will
inform future exhibits and education activities of the institution, which
educate hundreds of thousands of school children and millions of visitors
annually. We will focus our efforts in developing the use of laser ablation ICP-
MS to investigate new materials and new issues as long as it helps us addressing
important questions related to cultural and technological interaction and
exchange.