* 0818198
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Phonological Permeability Hypothesis: The (In)stability of L2 Phonology as Evidenced By the Acquisition of a Third Language (L3)
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2011
* Jason Rothman, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 06/30/2011
* USD 11,999.00

One question that remains unanswered within Second Language (L2) phonology
concerns just how native-like a so-called native-like adult L2 phonological
system truly is. This dissertation project tests the Phonological Permeability
Hypothesis (PPH), which predicts that if native and seemingly successful non-
native phonological systems are acquired in the same manner in adulthood, then
an addition of a third language will affect these systems equally.
Alternatively, if they are configured differently in the mind, then the additive
system will undergo much more rapid and pervasive cross-linguistic phonological
interference from the Third Language (L3) on the L2 as proficiency in the L3
increases. Examining cross-linguistic effects of L3 phonological systems on a
successive L2 system as compared to a native system of simultaneous bilinguals
with the same language pairings is deemed crucial to determine possible
differences (or lack thereof) between pre- and post-pubescent phonological
systems as it relates to their mental constitutions. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
study will chart the phonological acquisition of L3 Brazilian Portuguese from
the initial state throughout the first year of complete immersion between two
types of English/Spanish bilinguals: successive bilinguals, i.e., native
speakers of English who attained near-native Spanish proficiency as young
adults, and simultaneous bilingual speakers of English and Spanish. Analyses of
phenomena at various levels of the phonological hierarchy will be made via the
testing of spirantization (a segmental phenomena) and vowel neutralization (a
segmental phenomena conditioned by stress, a suprasegmental phenomenon).
Evidence from a pilot study supports the PPH, therefore providing initial
phonological evidence in support of representational deficit hypotheses, at
least in the domain of phonology, which claim that adult linguistic acquisition
does not implicate (all of) the same biologically endowed linguistic mechanisms
used in childhood acquisition. This results of this study will contribute to
contemporary debates in adult second language acquisition and theory of mind.