* 0818973
* Cardiopulmonary Function in Archosaurs During Hypoxic Exercise
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2013
* Colleen Farmer, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 12/31/2013
* USD 366,406.00

It is well known that birds can fly at altitudes where the partial pressure of
oxygen is so low that mammals cannot function, but it is not known whether the
sister group of birds, the crocodilians, have the physiological responses and
pulmonary structures to support activity in hypoxic conditions. Conditions of
low oxygen cause animals to breathe excessively, which then reduces the tension
of carbon dioxide (CO2) in their blood. Low CO2 tension in turn reduces blood
flow to the brain of mammals, leading to disorientation and even death. In
contrast birds tolerate low blood CO2 levels without these adverse effects.
Furthermore the pattern of air and blood flow in the lungs of birds, a
crosscurrent design, facilitates the absorption oxygen by blood under conditions
of low oxygen. Birds and crocodilians share a common ancestor dating back to the
Mesozoic, a time of environmental hypoxia compared to today's atmosphere. Are
the features that allow birds to function in environmental hypoxia a primitive
archosaur trait or are they derived? If they were present ancestrally, then an
exceptional ability to exercise under conditions of hypoxia may partially
explain why archosaurs dominated the Mesozoic terrestrial fauna. To address
these questions this project will study how air and blood move in the lungs of
American alligators, as well as whether low CO2 tension affects brain blood
flow. These studies will shed light on the evolutionary connections between the
crocodilian and avian pulmonary systems. This research will test the hypothesis
that crocodilians have a simple crosscurrent lung design and, if correct, then
only a few small modifications would be requisite for evolution of the more
complex avian lung. Thus, this research will potentially impact both the
scientific community and the lay community, because it will provide insight into
why and how archosaurs dominated the Mesozoic and it may provide a plausible
explanation for the evolution of the avian lung. This project will also support
the training of students, including those from groups underrepresented in the
sciences.