* 0818738
* Evolution of Development of Facial Bone Morphology in Threespine Stickleback
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Charles Kimmel, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Anthea Letsou
* 08/31/2013
* USD 555,016.00

Biologists are just beginning to understand the genetic basis of variable
aspects of or-ganisms such as size, shape and color, to name a few. However,
most traits are com-plex, their development directed by many genes whose effects
are influenced by environmental conditions. These combined effects on trait
variation must be mediated through the identity and behavior of cells such that,
for example, some cells proliferate more to make larger cartilages, or excrete
additional matrix to make stronger bones. However, little is presently known
about the precise mechanisms of cellular integration, and filling this gap in
knowledge is a fundamental problem in biology and is the primary focus of this
project. Natural variation in threespine stickleback fish provides an excel-lent
opportunity to address this question. The goal of this research is to understand
how cells integrate genetic and environmental information and lead to variation
in complex head and jaw traits among populations of stickleback. These
structures vary tremen-dously among individuals, populations and species.
Despite this diversity, all vertebrates share conserved genetic interactions for
the development of head and jaw struc-tures. Thus, research on these traits is
useful for understanding the situation in stickle-backs, and is also highly
informative about the proper development of similar structures in other
vertebrates such as humans. These conditions are the product of many genes and
their interactions with the envi-ronment, and lead to variations in cellular
identities or behaviors (i.e. uncontrolled cell growth in cancer). This research
will provide a much better understanding of the genetic and cellular basis of
complex traits, be they characters important for stickleback, or the most common
types of human diseases. In addition, Alaskan stickleback populations are
studied in collaboration with laboratories at the University of Alaska
Anchorage, which has a large Alaska Native student population, and the unique
opportunity exists to include individuals in this underrepresented group into
research and educational activi-ties. Furthermore, an educational website is
maintained that uses stickleback to provide educators and researchers around the
world with knowledge and skills necessary to learn about and perform research
with stickleback.