* 0818119
* Roles for Mitochondrial SIRT Deacetylases and Mitochondrial Trafficking in Steroid Hormone Biosynthesis
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2008,12/31/2009
* Marion Sewer, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 12/31/2009
* USD 494,035.00

In the human adrenal cortex, cortisol is synthesized in response to signaling
cascades initiated by the trophic peptide hormone adrenocorticotropin (ACTH).
The mechanisms by which ACTH directs cortisol production are multifaceted and
include controlling the transcription of genes involved in steroidogenesis,
regulating cholesterol (substrate) uptake and transport, modulating
steroidogenic enzyme activity, and controlling electron availability. Although
many of the molecular processes that underlie transcription of steroidogenic
genes is well-established, post-translational mechanisms regulating the
expression and activity of steroidogenic enzymes are less studied. Moreover,
steroidogenesis is a multi-step process that occurs in two organelles,
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and mitochondria, yet the precise mechanism by which
substrates are delivered back and forth between these two organelles is unclear.
In this project, the PI will investigate the factors that control cortisol
production in adrenal cells. Research will be carried out in two main areas.
First, the PI will study the role of acetylation in controlling the protein
expression of steroidogenic enzymes in mitochondria. The second objective is to
identify and characterize the proteins that control the transport of
intermediate steroid metabolites between ER and mitochondria. To achieve these
goals, the PI will employ molecular, biochemical, and spectroscopic techniques
such as confocal microscopy, site-directed mutagenesis, mass spectrometry, and
enzyme activity assays. The studies outlined in this project will not only
increase the understanding of the factors regulating steroid hormone
biosynthesis, but also provide a training program for high school students and
teachers, undergraduate and graduate students, as well as a postdoctoral
researcher.

The primary focus of the research in this project is aimed at increasing an
understanding of the processes that control cortisol production in the adrenal
cortex. In addition to training graduate students and postdoctoral researchers
in laboratory research, the PI will also mentor and train high school teachers
by providing summer research internships. Each summer, a science teacher from a
high school in the metropolitan Atlanta area will join the lab and carry out
studies investigating the factors that control cortisol production. In addition
to laboratory research, the teacher will also develop new modules that will be
incorporated into his/her curriculum during the following school year. Through
this partnership, graduate students will be afforded the opportunity to serve as
mentors and high school students will be introduced to molecular and biochemical
techniques. As in previous years, high school students will also spend time in
the laboratory and the PI will visit the high school class periodically during
the school year to discuss research and careers in science. Finally, the PI will
continue to host undergraduate students year round. Like graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers, the PI anticipates that the undergraduate students on
the project will carry out independent research and disseminate their findings
at national meetings and in peer-reviewed journals.