* 0818121
* Proton Transfer and Cofactor Function in Photosynthetic Reaction Centers
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Colin Wraight, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Michele McGuirl
* 08/31/2012
* USD 584,999.00

All of life is based on a small subset of chemical reactions and processes,
among the almost infinite number of possible ones. The selected reactions are
catalyzed by biological macromolecules that speed up the reaction rates by very
many orders of magnitude. The vast majority of these catalysts are proteins
known as enzymes, and many of these have small molecules as cofactors that are
intimately involved in the chemistry. In biological energy conversions,
oxidation-reduction (redox) free energy is converted into transmembrane proton
and electrical gradients. The redox chemistry is performed by diverse organic
and metal cofactors that are invested with extraordinary properties by the
proteins that bind them. The protein-cofactor interactions that yield these
properties are the same as those that operate on a substrate in an enzyme active
site. Because of the exceptional spectroscopic attributes of redox and
photobiological cofactors, the membrane proteins of respiration, photosynthesis
and methanogenesis provide ideal systems for studying the essential and defining
quality of biochemistry - catalysis with astonishing specificity. This project
focuses on the photosynthetic reaction center (RC), which catalyzes a light-
driven electron transfer with almost 100% quantum efficiency. The primary aim is
to elucidate the mechanisms whereby the photo-activated electron is delivered to
the acceptor and stabilized against wasteful backreaction. In large part, this
is due to accompanying charge redistributions within the RC, including internal
proton transfers and net uptake from solution. The known structure of the RC,
its rich spectroscopy, and the light-activatable nature of its reactions allow
the origins of these cofactor properties to be characterized in terms of the
dynamics and energetics of the molecular structure. In all projects, the impact
of chemical and mutagenic perturbations on energetics and kinetics will be
studied. Kinetic and equilibrium consequences will be determined by optical
absorption spectroscopy, free energy levels by delayed fluorescence and by
potentiometry, and structural implications by FTIR, X-ray diffraction and pulsed
EPR spectroscopy. Broader impacts: The broader impacts of this research derive
from the very diverse methodologies employed, which provide an exceptional
training environment for young scientists, with a substantially
multidisciplinary component. This work contributes to the practical
understanding of processes with global and human impact, including alternative
energy sources, biofuels and global warming. They form a strong basis for
teaching, mentoring and motivating students in the classroom, at the high school
as well as college level.