* 0818818
* Ultrastructural Analysis of RNA Synthesis and Processing
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Ann Beyer, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 07/31/2011
* USD 300,000.00

This project addresses the long-standing question of how a eukaryotic ribosome
is assembled in a living cell. The process is both very rapid and extremely
complex, requiring over 200 proteins and multiple RNA species. These components
work together to modify, cleave and fold the ribosomal RNAs and ensure proper
deposition of ribosomal proteins, though the process is poorly understood. The
Beyer laboratory takes a unique approach to study ribosome assembly.
Specifically, nascent ribosomal RNA transcripts are visualized by electron
microscopy (Miller chromatin spreading) in the context of an active rRNA gene.
These genes encode large pre-rRNAs that are cleaved to yield the major small and
large subunit RNAs. Analysis of the structures forming on the multiple
transcripts displayed on an active gene, each one a few seconds older or younger
than its neighboring transcripts, allows elucidation of the very rapid and very
dynamic assembly process. Using this method, multiple discrete assembly steps
have been discovered in small ribosomal subunit assembly, allowing hypotheses
about the RNP composition of the individual intermediates and the required
components for specific restructuring steps. The goal of this project is to test
these hypotheses using probes to specific RNA and protein components, thus
testing the presence, location, and deposition time of specific essential
snoRNAs (including U3 and U14 snoRNA) and specific essential proteins. The
project involves the development of improved methods for probing specific RNAs
and proteins in Miller chromatin spreads. Successful completion of these
experiments will significantly contribute to the common goal of understanding
eukaryotic ribosome assembly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: This project
will broaden the representation of under-represented minority students in
science via an arrangement between the PI's lab and the Summer Research
Internship Program (SRIP) at UVA, in which one undergraduate student is
recruited annually to the program for placement in this lab. The planned
research is well suited for student research projects and is also well suited
for integration into the PI's classroom teaching on transcription and RNA
processing. Results will be disseminated broadly via publications and meeting
presentations. The research also promises to have the broader impact of
providing a visual window and new insight into the extremely complex process of
eukaryotic ribosome assembly, which will complement the biochemical, genetic and
proteomic approaches being taken by many other laboratories.