* 0818277
* Collaborative Research: Quantum Decision Theory
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Zheng Wang, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 12/31/2012
* USD 238,434.00

Research on human judgment and decision making has revealed a number of
paradoxical findings that have resisted explanation under a common theoretical
framework. These include violations of the sure thing axiom of decision making,
interactions between inferences and decisions, violations of the reduction axiom
of decision making, violations of the conjunctive and disjunctive axioms of
probability theory, and order effects on judgments. In the past, separate and
disconnected explanations have been proposed using variants of classic decision
theory. This research proposes a unifying explanation for all of these
paradoxical results based on a new quantum decision theory. Classic decision
theory is based on classic probability theory. Probabilities are assigned to
events defined as subsets of a universal set, which obey all the laws of Boolean
algebra. Quantum decision theory is based on quantum probability theory.
Probabilities are assigned to events defined as subspaces of a Hilbert space,
which obey all the laws of Boolean algebra except the distributive axiom.
Following from the distributive axiom, classic probability theory adheres to one
of its most important theorems, the law of total probability. Because quantum
logic does not have to obey the distributive law, quantum probabilities do not
have to obey the law of total probability. Instead, quantum probability theory
must obey another law called the doubly stochastic law, which the classic
probability model does not obey. Hence, the two probability theories are
fundamentally different and the critical question is which set of rules provides
a better description of human behavior. The immediate goal of this research is
to rigorously compare decision models built upon classical probability theory
with those built from quantum probability theory. To rigorously compare quantum
versus classical probability models of decision making, a series of experiments
will be conducted. The experiments focus on tests of the law of total
probability and tests of the law of double stochasticity, where the two classes
of models make major and qualitatively different predictions. The research will
accomplish three objectives: (1) develop a new quantum theory of human inference
and decision making, (2) conduct new empirical tests of the fundamental laws of
total probability and double stochasticity using human inference and decision
behavior, and (3) rigorously compare and contrast classic versus quantum models
of decision making with respect to the new empirical findings. A quantum or
classic model will be preferred only if it provides a superior scientific
explanation of the phenomena with respect to both accuracy and parsimony.

The broad and long-term goal of this research program is to break new ground and
pioneer a new path by building probabilistic and dynamic systems for social and
behavioral sciences from quantum rather than classical probability principles.
Previously, theorists in these fields have relied on mathematical models (e.g.
stochastic differential equations) based on fundamental assumptions borrowed
from classical physics. What are these fundamental assumptions? Are they overly
restrictive? Social and behavioral scientists also face findings that remain
paradoxical from a classic probability point of view. These paradoxes suggest
that measurements in these fields may not always obey the law of total
probability and entail different assumptions. This program of research also will
contribute to the training of students at the undergraduate, graduate, and post
doctoral levels at two major state universities. In addition to student
training, the investigators will make an effort to train scientists in the area
quantum cognition. They have conducted a full day tutorial at the annual
Cognitive Science meeting and they plan to continue these tutorials in the
future. They also plan to organize a special issue on Quantum Cognition in the
Journal of Mathematical Psychology. New graduate courses on quantum cognition
and decision making will be prepared and presented at the graduate level, and
finally, a resource web site will be developed with tutorial and reference
information on quantum theory for social and behavioral sciences.