* 0818051
* Collaborative Research: Redox and Metabolomic Regulatory Mechanisms Underlying Guard Cell ABA Signal Transduction
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Sixue Chen, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel Roberts
* 08/31/2012
* USD 533,830.00

Intellectual Merit. The research team will use modern biological tools to
understand signal transduction processes of an important plant hormone, abscisic
acid (ABA), in guard cells. Guard cells are highly specialized plant epidermal
cells that enclose tiny pores called stomata. Stomatal movements (enabled by
turgor changes in guard cells) control both CO2 uptake for photosynthesis and
transpirational water loss, and thus play important roles in plant growth and
acclimation to environmental stresses. ABA is a key indicator of drought stress.
It induces stomatal closure via an intricate intracellular signaling network
comprised of proteins and metabolites, thereby promoting plant water
conservation. This research will analyze the roles of many proteins, especially
those subject to reduction and oxidation (redox) modifications, in guard cell
ABA signal transduction. Dynamic changes in key intracellular metabolites in
guard cells upon ABA treatment will also be characterized. The project is
expected to identify novel redox-regulated proteins and metabolites and put them
into functional context of ABA signal transduction. The resources from this
project will be distributed via a publicly accessible web interface and FTP
sites for maximum scientific impact. The project is expected to provide
comprehensive knowledge of regulatory mechanisms underlying stomatal movements
that will help to develop crops with enhanced drought tolerance and improved
productivity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. This project will benefit
society at large because a better understanding of ABA signal transduction will
inform rational crop engineering for better agricultural yield and stress
tolerance. Since protein redox regulation is a ubiquitous biological process,
occurring in essentially every organism including plants, animals, and micro-
organisms, the data, techniques and resources developed in the project will be
of immediate value to a broad range of scientists and will be disseminated via a
web interface and FTP sites, as well as in publications and at scientific
conferences. The project will involve cross-disciplinary training of personnel,
including high school students, undergraduate and graduate students, in the
frontiers of modern biological sciences. Given that knowledge of large-scale and
high-throughput protein analysis (proteomics) is still not widespread, a
proteomics workshop will be offered to graduate students and post-doctorates
nationwide. Graduate students and post-doctorates from the Chen and Assmann
laboratories will participate in developing and running the workshop, thus
gaining valuable experience in teaching outside the standard classroom setting.
Students from under-represented groups will be recruited for the training
opportunities.