* 0818832
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: The Politics of Help Seeking in Marginalized Populations
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2010
* Cathy Cohen, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Carol A. Mershon
* 07/31/2010
* USD 12,000.00

In a society acutely invested in the ideal of the Protestant work ethic, people
who turn to the government for help are seen, at best, as passive victims of
uncontrollable circumstances and, at worst, as shiftless free riders living off
the dime of upstanding taxpayers. Neither of these portrayals lends itself to
conceptualizing help seekers as constrained yet viable political actors.
Nonetheless, disadvantaged groups that cannot or do not exert power via
traditional political avenues, such as voting, are capable of taking political
action within local institutions that distribute critical resources (Soss 2000).
If we ignore these potential political arenas, then we close off one possibility
for more thoroughly understanding the everyday politics of those most vulnerable
in our society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will examine political
participation within local bureaucratic institutions that are particularly
embedded in the lives of marginalized people. These institutions supply
essential goods and services such as housing assistance, child care vouchers,
supplemental income and unemployment compensation. For people who are
preoccupied with the fundamental task of maintaining a decent standard of
living, such institutions can be crucial, not only as sites of subsistence, but
as spaces that can stimulate a range of political exchanges, negotiations and
actions which one can consider as the "politics of help seeking." There are
three important questions at the heart of this research: How do racially and
economically marginal individuals engage politically with the bureaucratic
institutions that they turn to for help in meeting their daily needs? How are
such efforts affected by individual characteristics as well as by the larger
structural dynamics of bureaucratic and neighborhood contexts? What are the
broader political consequences of citizen participation in these contexts both
for individuals and for institutions? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
employ both qualitative and quantitative methods to answer these questions. On
the qualitative end, the project will combine ethnographic observation of local
bureaucracies with selected in-depth interviews of bureaucratic "clients" and
workers. On the quantitative end, the project will conduct an original survey of
low to moderate income white, black, and Latino Chicagoans as well as an
organizational survey of select local bureaucracies. By exploring the politics
of help seeking, the project seeks to gain theoretical insight into the
interplay between agency and structure in poor communities. Although the
targeted populations are numerical minorities, awareness of how and under what
circumstances they enter into the political arena is imperative for policymakers
concerned with ensuring that bureaucratic structures are not obstacles for
people taking advantage of benefits provided to them by their government.