* 0819054
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Performance, Sovereignty, and Violence in Contemporary Haiti
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2011
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 02/28/2011
* USD 10,157.00

Graduate student Chelsey L. Kivland, working under the direction of Dr. Stephan
Palmie, will undertake research on popular conceptions of political sovereignty
in contexts where there are outside peacekeeping forces present. The research
will be carried out in Haiti, where a United Nations peacekeeping mission
currently seeks to secure the political and legal authority of the state.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher will examine the relationship between the
social meanings of peacekeeping and the practices of music and dance groups,
known as foot bands (band a pye), in Port-au-Prince, Haiti. The foot bands
present a vision of the United Nations force as an "occupation," which, instead
of enforcing state authority, renders state authority impotent. The researcher
will focus on how foot bands have engaged with this contradiction through public
ritual performance and other activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher
will undertake an in-depth analysis of foot band activities, which include
grassroots social service projects, such as public surveillance, trash
collection, and literacy education. She will use semi-structured and informal
interview procedures along with participant observation to collect information
on these practices and interactions between foot band members and residents,
peacekeepers, and governmental representatives. The overarching focus of the
research will be on the processes through which domains of governance and the
political authority to govern are actually produced. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will contribute to social science theory about the practical sources of
sovereign authority, extending the theory beyond the usual focus on the state
itself. The study will have the broader impact of informing policy discussions
on the hidden impacts of peacekeeping missions. The research also will build
international scholarly collaborations and contribute to the education of a
social scientist.