* 0819776
* Family and school influences in the determination of child outcomes:  Evidence from two sources of variation
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Miguel Urquiola, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2011
* USD 458,332.00

In analyses of human capital, a classic issue concerns to what extent outcomes
for children are influenced by their school vs. their home environment. On the
one hand, it may be that outcomes are fully determined at home, and that good
schools are little more than clubs for good children. On the other, schools may
really produce value added, for example, by providing students with good
teachers or peers. Additionally, assuming parents do think schools have an
effect, a recurring question concerns whether they view school quality and their
own effort as substitutes? Parents whose children are admitted into a good
school may react to this by increasing or reducing their own effort. Solid
evidence on these issues has been difficult to produce, mainly because children
are not randomly allocated to schools, let alone to family environments. This
study would address this challenge by analyzing a setting that provides two
independent sources of arguably exogenous variation in the school and home
environments that children experience. Specifically, it would study Romanian
children born between 1989 and 1990, a group which faced two analytically useful
circumstances. First, these students transitioned into secondary education at a
time when children were allocated to high schools via a centralized system under
which admissions substantially depended on performance in a national (middle
school to high school) transition exam. This yields situations in which students
with very similar transition scores end up in schools of substantially different
quality. Second, the births of these cohorts chronologically contain the lifting
of the stringent Romanian ban on abortion and birth control. Following this
change, birth rates decreased abruptly by 30 percent, implying that prior to it,
about one third of children were unwanted and therefore born into adverse family
environments.

The study would use these two sources of variation to implement a regression
discontinuity and a simple difference estimation strategy. These two strategies
would be applied to data from (existing) administrative sources and a (proposed)
survey, addressing the following questions: 1) Does attending a more selective
school affect students cognitive and behavioral outcomes? 2) What are some of
the mechanisms that mediate such effects? 3) How does unwantedness at birth
affect educational and behavioral outcomes? 4) What are the mechanisms behind
these effects? 5) How do family environment (due to being an unwanted/wanted
child) and school environment (due to attending more/less selective school)
interact to shape the outcomes for children?

Broader impact: The findings of this project on how family and school shape
child outcomes will be policy relevant in both developing and developed
countries. The findings would be disseminated via Economics and Education
journals and seminars, as well as through direct contacts with agencies like the
World Bank and multiple ministries of education. Additionally, our data, which
we plan to make public after our initial analysis, would be useful to the
broader research community. In particular, its mix of cognitive and non-
cognitive outcomes would allow for meaningful cross-disciplinary work covering
education, economics and sociology. Finally, the creation of a baseline survey
sample with detailed geographic information would allow to track and study the
longer term socioeconomic outcomes of students.