* 0819024
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science:  Investigating Majority Rule Voting in Common Pool Resource Settings
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2010
* Elinor Ostrom, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2010
* USD 11,983.00

Large scale resource systems, such as ocean fisheries and national forests, are
managed by a variety of governance systems. Over the past few decades, these
resource systems have been the subject of numerous case studies and large-sample
analyses investigating the efficiency of alternative forms of governance at
encouraging long run sustainable harvesting. In particular, studies have focused
on how government bureaucracies, specialized courts, religious figures, or
privatization of the commons can improve long run resource management. As the
advanced democracies increasingly utilize voting institutions like commissions,
committees, legislatures, or user-based associations to govern natural resource
settings, however, it has become increasingly important to understand the
capabilities and limitations of voting systems to produce policies yielding
stable, long run resource yields. How do different voting rules affect the final
distribution of resource harvesting rights? Under what structural conditions can
voting lead to long run sustainability of resources? And, under what conditions
will voting create incentives to over-harvest? The project investigates these
questions by creating controlled laboratory experiments of how individuals
divide a shared resource using majority rule voting.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To
date, surprisingly little research has examined the effect of voting
institutions in producing sustainable, long run extraction policies. One might
expect that a voting system will produce equitable outcomes since a diverse set
of actors or stakeholders are a part of the decision making process. It might
also be the case, however, that some actors are capable of pushing through a
proposal that either benefits one group at the expense of others or that short
run political interest will trump long term sustainability considerations. The
project investigates how voting operates to aggregate or potentially mediate
individual resource users' preferences for un-sustainable levels of extraction
into successful resource management systems. By utilizing laboratory experiments
that carefully control the characteristics of a shared resource among
harvesters, this study tests the capabilities and limitations of existing theory
to explain policy outcomes. The findings will contribute to the real-world
policy debates over how best to manage fragile resource stocks. &lt;br/&gt;