* 0819044
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Competing Projects over the Social Landscape in Southern Bahia (Brazil)
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2010
* Webb Keane, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 02/28/2010
* USD 3,983.00

Graduate student Jonathan DeVore, under the direction of Dr. Webb Keane, will
undertake research on land reform policies and their effects on socioeconomic
equality in contexts where there are multiple stakeholders. The research will be
carried out through an ethnographic study of several new land reform communities
in southern Bahia, Brazil, where landless poor, plantation owners,
environmentalists, and tourism workers vie for primacy in planning for the
social and physical landscape. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To understand what kind of
worlds the different social groups hope for and strive to bring about requires
attention to the range of ethical and aesthetic norms, ideals, values and future
orientations that influence these different groups' activities, as well as to
how the groups themselves are constituted and categorized. Therefore, the
methodological orientation of this research is ethnographic, entailing long-term
engagement and daily interactions with local people. The research design also
incorporates semi-structured interviews, community surveys, and an adapted
version of photovoice methodology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this
research will contribute to debates among academics and policy makers who are
concerned with defining agrarian reform policies that will be most equitable and
effective. It will contribute to social theory about the relationship between
national policy and local social structure. The research also supports the
education of a social scientist.