* 0819627
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Subjects of Prevention: 21st Century Policing and the New Community Order
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Joseph Dumit, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2010
* USD 14,000.00

Graduate student Michelle Stewart, under the direction of Dr. Joseph Dumit, will
undertake ethnographic research on how "community policing," a new policing
policy, affects police and public relationships and mutual perceptions.
Community policing requires police and residents to collaborate on crime
prevention. This form of policing introduces ongoing training programs to
encourage police and residents to become collaborators in crime prevention. The
researcher will investigate the consequences of this collaboration, particularly
in how it may result in redefining and altering expectations of police officers,
community members, crime, and criminal activity.

The research has a comparative research design. It will carried out in two urban
sites: Los Angeles, California, and Vancouver, Canada. The researcher will
conduct interviews and observe at both police training and citizen's academies,
stratifying the sample by age to detect changes in cognitive models of policing
and crime that may have developed after the introduction of community policing.
She also will observe community policing in action, using gang violence
prevention as a focal case.

The research is important because it will contribute to ongoing social science
research on changing configurations of governance. The research also will
contribute to the work of those involved in advocacy and reform projects
surrounding policing, crime prevention, and gang violence. In addition, the
research supports the education of a graduate student.