* 0819549
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Pro Bono Publico, The Large Law Firm, and Social Movements: A Relational Approach to the Study of Cause Lawyering
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2010
* Steve Boutcher, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Christian A. Meissner
* 06/30/2010
* USD 10,644.00

Large firm pro bono practice has undergone dramatic changes over the last few
decades. This study examines large elite law firms' pro bono practices along two
dimensions. First, this study analyzes large firm commitment in terms of hours
between 1993 and 2005 for the top 200 firms in the United States. Specifically,
the study seeks to understand the organizational and social factors that predict
how much time a firm commits to its pro bono practice. Second, this study
analyzes the scope of pro bono representation. Through a cross-sectional
analysis of the interorganizational relationships between a sample of large
firms and their pro bono clients, this study will address the types of causes
that are represented and the organizational factors that predict these
relationships. Qualitative interviews with large firm managers will supplement
the quantitative analyses in order to contextualize contemporary pro bono
practices. &lt;br/&gt;This study also aims to analyze the role that elite
lawyers from large corporate law firms play for social movement causes. Previous
scholarship has largely overlooked the contribution of elite lawyers to social
movement activity. This study will also contribute to legal scholarship by
examining the organizational structure of large firm pro bono practice, which
has largely been examined at the individual level. Furthermore, this study aims
to contribute to legal scholarship by bringing social scientific approaches to
the study of pro bono.&lt;br/&gt;This study also has the potential to assist in
the actual pro bono practices within large firms. Previous research has argued
that large firm pro bono is currently the largest provider of civil legal
assistance to the poor and other marginalized groups. This is unlikely to change
as federal legal assistance to the poor continues to decline. Thus, a study of
the organizational factors that facilitate the growth of large firm pro bono has
important implications for the delivery of legal assistance to marginalized
individuals as well as ensuring that the weakest members of American society are
ensured equal access to justice.