* 0819149
* Doctoral Disseratation Research: Women and Direct Selling as a Household Economic Strategy in the Lower Brazilian Amazon
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2010
* Jessica Chelekis, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 02/28/2010
* USD 13,853.00

Over the past 30 years, direct sales corporations have increasingly penetrated
rural markets in the Third World, offering a new, flexible way for women to earn
money while fulfilling traditional gender expectations and performing domestic
tasks. Graduate student Jessica Chelekis, under the guidance of Dr. Richard R.
Wilk, will undertake research on women's participation in direct sales in the
Lower Brazilian Amazon, and the link between gender roles, women's work, and
economic globalization. This study will examine how economic opportunities
intersect with local household economic strategies and contexts, and the
potential to transform or conserve gender roles as a
result.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher will conduct 12 months of fieldwork
in three different riverine communities in a rural municipality in the Brazilian
Amazon. She will use a combination of qualitative research methods, including
participant-observation, unstructured and semi-structured interviews, and life
histories. She will conduct semi-structured interviews with middle- and upper-
level management personnel of these direct sales corporations in the urban
centers of Brazil. She will also conduct archival research and collect available
socio-demographic statistics for this area from institutions such as regional
offices of the Brazilian Geography and Statistics Agency and municipal
secretaries for health and social services. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
will contribute to existing scholarship through its examination of gender roles
by providing critical information for understanding household economic
strategies that is missing from the literature on household organization and
economies of this region. This research will also contribute to anthropological
theories of globalization. This work is also important because the economic
roles women perform in the Amazon region are often ignored, rendering women
invisible to policy and regional development programs. The award also supports
the education of a social scientist.