* 0819493
* Collaborative Research:  The Wieslander Dataset : Using a Historic Dataset to Test Uncertainty in Species Distribution Model Projections Under Climate Change
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2013
* Jonathan Greenberg, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Thomas J. Baerwald
* 02/28/2013
* USD 163,769.00

Much is unknown about the effects that climate change might have on the biota.
To date, investigators have relied extensively on the use of species
distribution modeling (SDM) to assess the potential impacts of climate change on
species ranges and on extinction risks. SDMs are empirical models that relate
field observations of species to environmental predictors based on statistically
or theoretically derived response functions. Despite their extensive use in
climate change impact analyses, however, SDM projections are largely untested.
Data used in SDM development often are split into training and test sets, and
goodness-of-fit is assumed to represent projection accuracy under novel
climates. This research project will produce a temporally independent validation
of SDM climate-change impact projections for vascular plant species of the
mountain ranges of California. SDMs will be developed using a 75-year old
dataset of vegetation distribution, and projections of these models under
measured climate change will be compared to current data on the presence or
absence of species. The investigators will use historic data from approximately
17,000 plots developed by Albert Wieslander from 1928 to 1940 as well as modern
vegetation inventory data. This project will address several fundamental
questions related to the development and interpretation of SDM projections: (1)
Are SDM projections under novel climates accurate? (2) How does uncertainty in
climate estimates affect SDM projections? (3) Do SDM accuracies vary by species
and are they related to species ecological traits? (4) What is the influence of
fire regime and land-use history on SDM predictive performance? (5) Is there
systematic bias in SDM projections and is it large compared to the variability
in projections introduced by model choice? The investigators will examine the
predictive performance of SDMs across a number of species varying in ecological
traits and through multiple modeling approaches.

Understanding biotic response to climate change is of major importance, with
long-term implications for social welfare and biodiversity conservation.
Concerns about climate change impacts have led to the widespread use of SDMs as
tools for predicting species extinction risks and range shifts under climate-
change scenarios. The potential impact of these studies on political and public
debate is high. Consequently, determining whether SDM projections are accurate
is of particular importance. This project will improve understanding of the
predictive performance of SDMs in climate-change impact analysis. It will help
to provide a backdrop for the interpretation of existing climate-change impact
studies and a foundation for the development of future studies. Broader impacts
of this work include the training and support of a diverse set of scientists and
the education of students at the University of Montana and at the University of
California,-Davis. Outreach will be conducted through an environmental education
program in the central Sierra Nevada.

