* 0819882
* Dynamic Deadlock Avoidance in Concurrent Software via Discrete Control
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Stephane Lafortune, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2012
* USD 507,998.00

Proposal Number 0819882&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: Dynamic Deadlock Avoidance
in Concurrent Software via Discrete Control&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Stephane
Lafortune&lt;br/&gt;Co-PI: Scott Mahlke&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ensuring deadlock-
free execution of concurrent programs is an increasingly important problem as
multi-core processors compel performance-conscious software developers to
parallelize applications. A novel methodology for dynamically controlling the
execution of concurrent software in order to provably avoid deadlocks is
proposed. It addresses today's dominant concurrent programming paradigm, multi-
threaded programs that employ locks. In this approach, the responsibilities for
deadlock avoidance are placed upon a feedback controller that is automatically
synthesized from application software source code. A model of the source code
will automatically be constructed from a whole-program control flow graph
obtained at compile time. The feedback controller will be synthesized offline
from the model using techniques from discrete control theory and used to
instrument the code. At run-time, the controller will operate by carefully
managing lock acquisition and release to ensure that potential deadlock states
are never entered. The research plan of this proposal presents a systematic
approach for the development, implementation, performance evaluation, and
classroom deployment of this novel methodology. By allowing deadlock-free
execution of programs via automated feedback control, the full value of
unmodified legacy code will be preserved and programmers will be empowered to
write code with increased safety, confidence, and productivity.&lt;br/&gt;