* 0819250
* Social Cognitive Neuroscience of Social Groups
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* William Cunningham, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Sally Dickerson
* 07/31/2012
* USD 399,994.00

The psychological study of prejudice (and its reduction) has been at the
forefront of social psychology for over a half century. Recently, research in
social psychology has been extended by work in cognitive neuroscience that has
provided some evidence of the ways in which the brain processes information
about social groups. Excitement surrounding this neuroscientific approach has
led to an explosion of research findings and has already been used to inform
legal decision making. Yet, this research is still relatively new and often
times raises nearly as many questions as it answers in mapping brain, process,
and behavior if only because knowledge of brain structure and function in these
contexts is still somewhat unclear. For example, although regions such as the
amygdala have been implicated in certain aspects of social bias, and areas of
frontal cortex have been implicated in the correction of these biases, the
precise role that these regions play in social bias is still relatively unknown.
To help resolve these questions, three functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) studies are proposed to examine the neural processes that underlie two
intertwined mechanisms for prejudice. The first is the learned prejudices that
give rise to evaluations of social groups. The second is the preferences that
develop out of the categorization of people into ingroups (e.g., "us") and
outgroups (e.g., "them") in the absence of any particular knowledge or attitude
structures. In each study, participants will be randomly assigned to a group
that has both Black and White members and will be presented with these faces
(along with new Black and White faces) during fMRI scanning. The advantage of
using novel groups in conjunction with pre-existing groups is that this allows
us to compare the processing of people from novel groups (for which people have
no learned evaluations) to the processing of people from groups where there are
learned evaluations. These studies will help yield a better understanding of the
basic cognitive and neural mechanisms involved in group perception and
evaluation - core aspects of human social cognition. In addition, this approach
to group processing and social prejudice will advance scientific theory and
train graduate and undergraduate students in social psychology and neuroscience
(in particular, neuroimaging). More broadly, this research will highlight the
flexible aspects of intergroup biases and provide policy makers with possible
methods for reducing intergroup (e.g., racial) biases.