* 0819106
* BRIGE: Validating an Intrinsic Damping Model for the Dynamic Response of Soil-Structure Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2011
* Judith Wang, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Mary M. Toney
* 07/31/2011
* USD 174,999.00

The two objectives to this BRIGE project are: (1) The initiation of the
Principal Investigator?s long-term research in dynamic soil-structure
interaction and (2) The motivation of a diverse spectrum of students to become
engineering practitioners, researchers, and educators. Modeling intrinsic
damping, a measure of a materialÂ´s ability to dissipate energy, is critical in
predicting a soil-structure system?s dynamic response. However, it is unclear
how to mathematically model the intrinsic damping characteristics of both the
natural earth and manmade components of a typical infrastructure system. This is
a significant shortcoming, as many civil engineering structures subjected to
dynamic loading must be considered in conjunction with their soil foundations to
appropriately predict dynamic response. The BRIGE research will: (1) Validate an
equivalent linear modeling procedure for nonuniform intrinsic damping in soil-
structure systems using experimental data gathered from resonant column tests
and instrumented centrifuge models and (2) Result in an accessible, robust
finite element framework for rationally modeling soil-structure dynamics. By
advancing the state of knowledge in predicting infrastructure systems? responses
to typical (e.g., traffic and wind) as well as extreme dynamic loads (e.g.,
earthquakes and blasts) and disseminating an accessible finite element algorithm
incorporating these advances, civil engineering systems may be more effectively
designed to safely protect their human occupants and users.

The diversification efforts involved in this BRIGE project will consist of
creating positive engineering experiences for a wide variety of students through
research participation, outreach service, recruitment, and education geared
toward fostering an inclusive engineering community. Specifically, the PI will:
(1) Create undergraduate and graduate engineering research opportunities that
support a diverse group of engineering students; (2) Participate in outreach
activities aimed at encouraging interest in engineering for females at local,
predominantly minority middle and high schools; (3) Actively recruit female and
minority undergraduate and graduate students; and (4) As a female faculty member
with experience in mentoring engineering students, act as a positive role model
who implements teaching techniques to retain interest in engineering,
particularly in those students from traditionally underrepresented groups.