* 0819190
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Glossolalia Influences on Stress Response Among Apostolic Pentecostals
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Christopher Lynn, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2009
* USD 17,275.00

State University of New York (Albany) graduate student Christopher D. Lynn,
supervised by Dr. Lawrence M. Schell, will test the hypothesis that the cultural
phenomenon of Pentecostal glossolalia (speaking in tongues), a form of
dissociation, has physical, stress-reducing benefits. Dissociation is a
psychological construct for processes that partition consciousness to focus or
reduce awareness. It appears in myriad forms, such as daydreaming or absorption
in a book or television program. It occurs clinically in hypnosis or in
pathologies such as multiple personality and is also a cultural phenomenon, as
in shamanic spirit journeys or the possession trance of voodoo. Dissociation is
often functionally interpreted as a means of reducing stress. Research suggests
that other culturally-mediated dissociative practices (e.g., focused meditation)
affect the physiology of stress response by increasing the threshold at which it
is activated. This means such people experience less stress although the
potential stressors in their lives remain the same. There are no studies testing
a similar threshold mediation for dissociation in religious contexts.

Pentecostalism is an excellent candidate for such research. It is a form of
evangelical Protestantism that regards glossolalia as a gift and sign of the
divine. To test the relationship between glossolalia and stress response, pilot
study data were used to develop a questionnaire to measure glossolalia
experience. Glossolalia experience will be compared to cortisol and alpha-
Amylase levels, two biomarkers of stress reactivity, and to additional
questionnaire measures of dissociation and self-perceived stress. In addition to
glossolalia, the researcher will test the effect of cultural consensus on
stress. Cultural consensus is the degree to which individuals live up to
cultural models of behavior. This will be measured using questionnaires related
to religiosity and faith maturity.

This research is important because it will further scientific understanding of
the relationship between culture and human biology. It also may have public
health benefits because stress reduction reduces risk for many stress-related
health problems. In addition, the research will contribute to the education of a
graduate student.