* 0819012
* RIG: Biogenesis of Peptide Signals in Arabidopsis: Processing of Precursor Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Javier Narvaez-Vasquez, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 07/31/2011
* USD 145,411.00

BIOGENESIS OF PEPTIDE SIGNALS IN ARABIDOPSIS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the past decade peptide signals have been
recognized as important regulatory molecules involved in plant growth and
development, reproduction and defense. Similar to polypeptide hormones in other
eukaryotes, most plant regulatory peptides are extracellular signals derived
from larger precursor proteins. Although thoroughly studied in animal systems
and yeast, the regulation of synthesis, processing, storage and secretion of
peptide signals in plants is poorly understood. The main goal of this research
is to establish the intracellular pathway for the biogenesis of the defense-
related AtPep1 peptide signal in Arabidopsis. AtPep1 is derived from a larger
prohormone precursor (PROPEP1) that appears not to be synthesized through the
secretory pathway. PROPEP1 processing enzymes have not been identified, and the
mechanism for AtPep1 deposition in the cell wall apoplast to interact with a
membrane receptor is not known. The research plan will incorporate the use of a
novel biarsenical-tetracysteine (TC) labeling system for live-cell fluorescent
imaging that offers unique advantages and capabilities to study the dynamics of
peptide biogenesis, correlated with ultrastructural analysis by electron
microscopy and immunocytochemistry. The proposed study represents the first
complete characterization of the biogenesis of a peptide hormone in plants. The
results will be a foundation for future work on the identification of the
processing enzymes, and the isolation of the molecular carriers involved in
peptide transport, using a combination of pharmacological, biochemical and
functional genomic tools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deciphering non-classical mechanisms involved in the
processing and secretion of regulatory peptides will improve our understanding
of the biology of peptide hormones in plants, and the evolution of defense
peptide signaling in eukaryotes. Due to the role of AtPep1 in innate immunity
and the presence of AtPep1 homologues in crop plants, the results of this
research may have important applications in the future improvement of plant
resistance against insect and pathogen attacks through crop biotechnology. This
study may result in a new application of the TC tagging system to study peptide
hormone biogenesis in plants and other organisms. The proposed research
activities will be carried out with the participation of undergraduate students
from underrepresented groups, fostering education and community outreach. The
research will provide undergrads with intellectual challenges and meaningful
learning experiences in plant biology and the use of modern cellular imaging and
molecular biology techniques. &lt;br/&gt;