* 0819400
* Social Networks and Online Spaces:  A Cohort Study of American College Students
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Andreas Wimmer, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2010
* USD 170,129.00

SES-0819400&lt;br/&gt;Jason Kaufman&lt;br/&gt;Nicholas A.
Christakis&lt;br/&gt;Andreas Wimmer&lt;br/&gt;Harvard University
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ?new? science of networks has become one of
the most vibrant and promising fields of social scientific inquiry. In
particular, the rapid growth of social network sites (SNSs)?online spaces
specifically dedicated to articulating users? networks?has spurred a bustle of
academic activity. Using one popular SNS, Facebook.com, and collaborating with
the administration at an undisclosed American university, the PIs have compiled
two waves of network data on a complete college cohort of 1,640 students. The
data also include information about the cultural preferences and group
activities of our respondents over time. They will study phenomena such as the
ethno-racial locus of homophily among students; the relationship between
cultural ?tastes? and friendship; and the competing roles of spatial proximity
and on-line affiliation in the formation of friendship groups. The PIs will
collect data on the students for one additional year (when the majority will
graduate from college); continue analyzing these data across multiple research
agendas; present and publish this research; and, most importantly, make this
dataset available to other researchers. Not only does this dataset contain some
of the richest personal and relational data to be extracted from an SNS to date,
but it also has a number of important advantages vis-Ã -vis past network
datasets. 1) By collecting naturally occurring data, the Facebook instrument
avoids a number of prominent measurement issues in social network research,
including interviewer effects, memory limitations, and the artificial truncation
of respondents? reported network ties; 2) Facebook enables complete network data
to be collected on a large, naturally-bounded population. Hence, both ego-
centric as well as ?socio-centric? analyses are possible; 3) The dataset is
multiplex, containing data on Facebook friends, ?picture friends? (coded using
postings in online photo albums), and?in a ?real life? supplement to these
online measures?various kinds of housing data provided by the university; 4)
Unlike the majority of network datasets, the final dataset will include four
waves of longitudinal data; and 5) Facebook enables the collection of extensive,
open-ended cultural data in the form of favorite movies, music, and books. As a
result of these five features, the dataset can be employed for a number of
intellectual projects that have heretofore been difficult or impossible to
pursue. Such projects include examining the distinct role of race/ethnicity in
network behavior; inductively determining the best way to measure and classify
cultural preferences in light of the extant literature on cultural capital; and
comparing the respective importance of cultural, demographic, and geographical
factors in the formation of entire social networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact. The final dataset will contain four waves of data corresponding to the
four years respondents are in college. It will be available via the Internet to
other researchers interested in utilizing this data. The project thus provides
an important new resource for the broader community of network scholars, one
that can be used for methodological development (refining tools for analyzing
large, multiplex, directed, longitudinal, and/or two-mode data) and for
examining diverse empirical phenomena (spanning fields from social
stratification to cultural sociology). The methodology will be widely emulated
and improved upon by other researchers, thereby enhancing our understanding of
both general network phenomenon and American college students? social and
cultural worlds more specifically.