* 0819901
* Chromosome evolution: Models and tests
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2015
* Mark Kirkpatrick, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 07/31/2015
* USD 789,998.00

Genome research has recently revealed that chromosomes often evolve at
astounding rates. The evolutionary forces responsible for these changes are very
poorly understood. This research will study those forces using a combination of
mathematical models and statistical analyses. There are three specific research
themes: (1) models to explain rapid evolutionary changes in which a pair of
chromosomes determines sex (seen for example in salmon and tilapia), (2) models
to explain how chromosome number and gene arrangement change over evolutionary
time, and (3) statistical analyses of data on a new gene arrangement in
Drosophila that will test the models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will have
five kinds of impact beyond its contributions to basic science. First, it will
illuminate history of the human genome, which has experienced substantial
chromosomal evolution. Second, it will provide key insights regarding how
disease vectors (notably the mosquitoes that transmit malaria) have adapted to
humans and thus become more virulent. Third, the project will develop and
distribute computer software useful for a wide range of genetic analyses.
Fourth, the project will train young scientists at the undergraduate, graduate,
and postdoctoral levels and will give them opportunities to work with
collaborators abroad. Fifth, the research will develop international
partnerships between laboratories in the US, the UK, Australia, Switzerland, and
France.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;