* 0819494
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Conflict-Induced Displacement, Understanding the Causes of Flight
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2009
* Prakash Adhikari, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2009
* USD 12,000.00

Unrest in places such as Afghanistan, Sudan and Iraq forces millions of people
from their homes every year. The plight of internally displaced persons (IDPs)
has become an increasingly discussed topic in academia as well as in the
international community. Most literature on forced migration tends to conclude
that displacement is an obvious consequence of conflict and people flee because
they have no choice. However, this is an oversimplified conclusion. Many
questions remain unanswered, such as why do some people stay behind and risk
their lives while others flee? Little is known at the individual level about how
those who choose to stay cope with conflict. Furthermore, only around a fraction
of those who leave home ever return back. This raises yet other questions, such
as why do some people not return home after they are displaced and under what
conditions are they able to resettle into their new locations? The present
research is motivated by puzzles such as these. Specifically, why do some
people, even when faced with extreme violence, stay put and risk their lives
while others flee? How do those who stay cope with the conflict and what choices
do they make when life is at risk? Finally, what affects the choices of
displaced persons to resettle in the place to which they migrated, return home,
or remain in limbo in the aftermath of flight?

A face-to-face public opinion survey of around 1500 randomly selected Nepali
citizens will be conducted during the summer of 2008 to collect primary data and
test a series of hypotheses to address the above questions. A multi-stage
research design will be used to test a variety of hypotheses related to internal
displacement. A logistic regression model will be used in the first part of the
research to assess the significance of a number of factors beyond the threat to
physical integrity of life, such as economic opportunity and physical
infrastructure in explaining individual choice. The primary data collected at
the individual level will be used to understand the factors that contribute the
most to an individual?s decision to leave or stay put in the face of violent
conflict. Conditioned on the choice to leave or stay, a variety of hypotheses
regarding factors that lead to multiple possible outcomes for those who stay and
those who leave will be tested in the second stage using conditional multinomial
logit models.

The present research will make a significant contribution to the ongoing effort
to develop a theoretical foundation for understanding forced migration, and will
have significant policy implications. Using primary data collected in Nepal, the
present study will move from existing aggregate analyses to a micro-level
analysis and provide a more nuanced test of the existing explanations of forced
migration. The study will provide the first statistical analysis with primary
data at the individual level with a focus on IDPs and the findings are expected
to be sufficiently generalizable. The data will be made available to other
researchers and will be a valuable contribution to the research community. The
proposed research will also be important to policy makers in Nepal as well as
the international community. It will shed light on the reasons behind people?s
decisions to leave home and offer insights into the alternative mechanisms
available for dealing with this problem, such as investment in creating economic
opportunities, physical infrastructure and other coping alternatives.