* 0819499
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Political Institutions and Economic Organization
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2010
* Stephen Weymouth, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 09/30/2010
* USD 12,000.00

This project measures the effect of political democratization on private sector
economic organization in Chile and Mexico using firm- and industry-level data.
Economic organization is defined broadly to include the organization of power
within firms (corporate governance), and the degree of competition between
firms. Economic organization matters because it influences a country's overall
competitiveness and its prospects for economic
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The arguments establishing a long-run
relationship between political institutions and economic development are well-
known (Engerman and Sokoloff, 1997; Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson, 2001), and
recent scholarship ties democratization to growth using sophisticated panel data
techniques (Persson and Tabellini, 2006; Papaioannou and Siourounis, 2007).
However, both of these literatures leave intermediate links in the causal chain
unexplored. This project seeks to fill a gap in the literature by studying the
effects of political institutions on economic
organization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project derives
from its unique research design and theoretical framework. It extends the
current research by studying how changes in political institutions within
countries affect corporate governance and market structure using a comparative
research design known as an interrupted time series with switching replications
(Shadish, Cook, and Campbell, 2001). The design exploits the alternating periods
of democratization among the two countries: Mexican firms serve as the "control"
group during Chile's democratization, and subsequently represent the "treated"
group during the late 1990's, when Chilean firms become the "control"
group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This design is particularly strong at approximating
the effect of democratization on economic organization for several reasons. Most
importantly, rather than studying a country-level dependent variable such as
economic growth, this research employs firm and industry-level dependent
variables, which enable the researcher to account for alternative explanations
related to initial sectoral or technological heterogeneity. It also allows for
an exploration of a potentially differential impact of political reform across
different industries or sectors (as in Aghion, Alesina, and Trebbi, 2007).
Furthermore, the two countries are carefully chosen to follow a most-similar
case design, which attempts to hold constant as many alternative explanations as
possible. Most importantly for this project, economic reforms likely to affect
economic organization occurred in Chile and Mexico at nearly the same
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study integrates two components of economic
organization that are often studied in isolation. Regarding corporate
governance, my study will collect and analyze firm-level measures of ownership
concentration and stock market capitalization. To measure the relationship
between political institutions and economic competition, the study will collect
and analyze concentration ratios, Herfindahl-Hirschman indices, and price-cost
ratios. It makes sense to study corporate governance and market structure under
a unified framework, since both components are governed by corporate laws and
other institutions produced by national governments, which makes them subject to
common pressures following political reform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad
impact of the study includes a contribution to two important debates. First, it
improves our knowledge of the determinants of private sector development in
emerging markets by drawing attention to politics. A consensus view has that
"institutions matter" for economic development in general, but little is known
about which specific institutions are particularly important, and channels
linking them to growth. Second, this project contributes to broader debates
about democracy (see, for example, Acemoglu and Robinson, 2006). For instance,
evidence of changes in corporate organization following periods of democratic
reform would provide strong support for the proposition that democracy reduces
the economic power of special interest groups. By contrast, a null result would
suggest that de jure political institutions such as democracy are insufficient
for economic change due to the substantial de facto political power of
entrenched elites.