* 0819715
* Collaborative Research: Foreland basin development and biotic change in Late Ordovician trilobite faunas of eastern North America
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Stephen Westrop, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 08/31/2013
* USD 130,000.00

Collaborative Research: Foreland basin development and biotic
change&lt;br/&gt;in Late Ordovician trilobite faunas of eastern North
America&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stephen Westrop, Univ. Oklahoma,
EAR-0819715&lt;br/&gt;Lisa Amati, SUNY Potsdam, EAR-0819717&lt;br/&gt;Carlton
Brett, Univ. Cincinnati, EAR-0819820&lt;br/&gt;Matthew Saltzman, Ohio State
Univ., EAR-0819832&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses
on the minor extinctions that restructure ecosystems on regional to continent-
wide scales and commonly punctuate intervals of relative ecological stability.
These geologically frequent extinction events may have a cumulative effect on
the biosphere that exceeds the impact of the better-known, relatively rare
global mass extinctions. Such minor extinctions are also of interest because
they may be closer in scale to many of the processes of anthropogenic habitat
alteration that threaten the modern biota.&lt;br/&gt;PIs will study two episodes
of biotic turnover in the Late Ordovician trilobite faunas of eastern North
America that are responses to profound environmental changes associated with the
development of the Appalachian Foreland Basin during the Taconic Orogeny. They
will use a comparative approach to discover features common to both events. The
younger event, in the late Edenian-Maysvillian is characterized by incursions of
trilobite biofacies dominated by the oleniodean, Triarthrus that may be the
biotic signatures of regional paleoceanographic shifts associated with
tectonically-related changes in basin configuration and/or eustasy. Other
environmental changes are expressed at the older event (Turinian?Chatfieldian
boundary interval) by the appearance in shallow water settings of cryptolithine
trilobites, a group that typically occurs in deeper environments.&lt;br/&gt;Two
transects into the foreland basin, Kentucky?Tennessee?Virginia and central New
York?southern Ontario, will be included in the study. South-central Oklahoma, a
region outside of the Appalachian foreland basin, will be used as a ?control? to
help isolate faunal patterns that are unique to the basin. The environments will
be reconstructed by combining data from the sedimentary rock succession with
carbon isotope curves. The project includes a full treatment of the systematics,
biostratigraphy and paleoecology of the trilobite faunas.&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact of the proposed activity lies in education and training; four graduate
students and at least four undergraduates will participate in the study. PIs
will also bring the broader implications of the study of extinctions to the
public by developing a ?virtual exhibit? and other web-based educational
resources in collaboration with the Education Department at the Oklahoma Museum
of Natural History. They will consider not only extinctions in ?deep time?, but
also the recent past (Quaternary extinctions) and the challenges currently
facing the biosphere (such issues as global climate change, ocean acidification,
and habitat destruction).&lt;br/&gt;