* 0819812
* Biomaterials in Ancient Salt Formations: Examination of Primary Crystals for Biological Materials
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2010
* Russell Vreeland, West Chester University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 09/30/2010
* USD 110,000.00

Intellectual Merit: The intellectual merit of this activity relates to
continuing the search for ancient biomaterials trapped in primary halite
crystals of significant geological age. These live organisms, DNA and/or viruses
represent the state of evolution during each of the ages represented by the
salts. They are also significant study materials for issues of long-term
survival of microbial species and the possible movement of microorganisms from
planet to planet across space. Recent research has shown that halophilic
microorganisms can be isolated from brine inclusions in salt crystals of
various&lt;br/&gt;ages (Norton and Grant 1988, Vreeland et al. 2000) and that
fragments of bacterial and haloarcheal DNA can be recovered from fluid
inclusions in ancient halite (Fish et al. 2002, Park et al. 2008 PNAS
submitted). These reports are only the latest in a series of announcements made
over the last century (Namyslowski 1919, Dombrowski 1961, Tasch 1963, Reiser and
Tasch 1960). One study (Vreeland et al. 2000) has received significant publicity
because of the extreme sterilization techniques used to avoid contamination by
modern microorganisms. The 250-million-year-old Virgibacillus (strain 2-9-3)
reported by Vreeland et al. (2000) has profound implications for long-term
survival on Earth and for finding life on planets such as Mars. This project
will continue to advance these fascinating discoveries. The research will be
conducted in two different Permian-aged salt formations in an attempt to
duplicate the original NSF funded discovery. Further, the project will gather
additional samples from even older formations (Devonian 320 million years of
age; Silurian 412 MYA) in an attempt to document sound evidence for even longer
term survival in primary halite minerals. Due to the excellent preservation of
the sites, vertical samples will also be obtained from an entire evaporation
cycle in order to examine population differences that might have occurred as the
saline chemistry of the ancient lakes changed over time. In addition, the
project will examine these same layers in different horizontal samples of each
of the mines in order to develop data regarding the spatial distribution of
biological materials in each of the formations. The microbial populations in
these various formations will be studied using both culture dependent and
independent assays. Consequently, this project will provide data on the types of
microbes that are able to survive within the salts while concurrently providing
the first systematic DNA-based survey of microbial diversity within the
formations and that may have been present during the original precipitation of
the salt formations. The project also includes the first examination of these
primary salt brines for the presence of bacterial viruses trapped within the
ancient brines that formed the fluid inclusions within the crystals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The project has many broad areas of impact
including the support and training of several research interns, supporting
training for several K-12 teachers in a joint educational effort between the PI
and the Kansas Underground salt museum, and providing training in geobiology to
a current NSF minority Post-Doctoral fellow who has expressed a sincere desire
to become involved in the rapidly developing field of geological microbiology
with a specific interest in the study of ancient biomaterials. In addition, the
research focuses on an area of great public interest as it seeks to break the
current record for the oldest live organism known while at the same time
attempting to duplicate previous work that isolated the current record, a
Permian aged microbe (ca. 250 MYA).