* 0819064
* Empirical and Theoretical Integration of Geochemical and Morphologic Evolution of Soil-Covered Hillslopes: Responses to Channel Incision
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2008,05/31/2011
* Kyungsoo Yoo, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 05/31/2011
* USD 333,257.00

River incision drives hillslope topography and this topography affects the
chemical properties of the soil catena. However, the linkages between these two
fundamental landscape properties as they evolve in response to basal channel
incision, have not yet been quantitatively studied. This project integrates
hillslope geomorphology based onsediment budgets with the spatial varioation in
the geochemistry of soil. Modeling, field, and laboratory approaches are used to
examine two key hypotheses. The first hypothesis states that at a given
hillslope position, the rate of soil chemical weathering is limited by the rates
of mineral supplies via soil transport and soil production. The second
hypothesis states that the rate of soil chemical weathering is determined by the
mean age and age distribution of minerals in the soil. Two independent models of
hillslope soil mass balance and mineral grain tracking will be developed and
combined with toposequence measurements of soil and bedrock elemental chemistry
and soil production rates and Airborne Laser Swath Mapping. The study will be
conducted at three hillslopes with increasing rates of basal channel incision
within a tributary basin to the Feather River in the western Sierra Nevada,
California. The outcomes from this study will include the temporal and spatial
dynamics of soil chemical weathering rates within hillslopes experiencing
different history and rates of basal channel incision rates.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Landscapes are often characterized as repeating units of
stream channels and hillslopes. This study will investigate the complex coupling
between the formation of stream channels and soils. Both of these processes are
relevant to managing land use effectively, maintianing sound agricultural
practices, and evaluating how soils and landscapes change in response to a
variety of natural and human-induced influences. The processes will be
investigated in the field as well as in the laboratory and through the
development of a sophisticated numerical model. The project will include science
teachers in a local middle school and bring soil-stream interactions plus real-
world scientific research into these classrooms.