* 0819769
* Energetics and Stability of Geologically-Confined Water
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2008,09/30/2014
* Elizabeth Screaton, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 09/30/2014
* USD 273,766.00

Water confined in Ã…- to nm-scale pores is volumetrically and chemically
important in surficial and near surface geological environments. Partitioning of
water between bulk liquid and vapor phases and water confined in spaces within
and between minerals plays a critical role in determining the fate of
geochemical and geobiological processes. Despite considerable effort over the
past several decades focused on the properties of confined water, rigorous
thermodynamic models permitting simultaneous consideration of confined water
stability relative to bulk water that are consistent with widely employed
geochemical models are generally not available. In part, this is due to a
paucity of physical chemical models permitting quantitative description of the
hysteresis that is commonly observed between sorption and desorption of confined
water. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The present study addresses these needs through a
combination of equilibrium observations, calorimetric measurements, and
thermodynamic modeling of a selected suite of systems containing confined water.
Model zeolite and nanoporous systems exhibiting hysteretic sorption/desorption
behavior will be studied in order to test a newly developed thermodynamic model
that shows promise in predicting hysteretic behavior. In addition, two other
types of systems will be studied to fill in gaps currently present in the
understanding of the factors controlling the stability of confined water: a)
pure silica zeolites in which water molecules do not solvate ions; and c)
zeolite systems containing confined water that is only bonded to ions. Water in
these systems exhibits ?endmember? structural states, that when combined form
the environments found in most previously studied microporous confined water
systems (that is, those containing water molecules that both solvate ions and
interact with the confining medium). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific outcomes:
The results of this study will be synthesized through thermodynamic modeling to
describe the stability of confined water molecules as a function of temperature,
pressure, and the chemical potential of water. The resulting thermodynamic data
and models will significantly expand capabilities for assessing the relative
stability and behavior of confined water molecules in a thermodynamic framework
that is congruent with standard practices in geochemical thermodynamics. Models
describing hysteretic behavior in the systems studied will provide a heuristic
basis for macroscopic thermodynamic description of other systems exhibiting this
behavior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The proposed study will provide
enhanced educational opportunities for students at the University of Florida and
will lead to widespread availability of the data and thermodynamic models.
Graduate and undergraduate student involvement in the project is integral for
its success. Students participating in this project will receive training and
experience in modern experimental methods and thermodynamic analysis. In
addition, the methods of the proposed study will be used to develop innovative
classroom exercises to give students hands-on experience in thermochemical
methods in the P.I.?s physical geochemistry course. Data generated in the study
will be disseminated not only as publications in international scholarly
journals, but will also be available for free download on the
internet.&lt;br/&gt;