* 0819570
* Economic Globalization and Mass Politics in Advanced Industrial Democracies
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2008,01/31/2010
* Timothy Hellwig, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 01/31/2010
* USD 254,578.00

The present era is defined by globalization. However, beyond recognizing that
citizens are aware that the world economy affects their lives, academics,
policymakers, and the public in general knows very little about the effect of
exposure to world markets for electoral democracy. Contemporary analyses of
advanced industrial countries generally conclude that democracy functions no
worse-and possibly better-in today's worldwide economy than in previous times.
The evidence supporting such conclusions, however, remains indirect,
extrapolated from analyses of highly aggregated political and economic data.
Parting from these analyses, this study will be the first to examine the
implications of market integration for electoral politics. Where earlier studies
consider whether and how globalization matters for public policy,
redistribution, and economic performance, this study investigates whether and
how globalization matters for representative democracy. In doing so, this
research will redirect the study of the politics of globalization, away from the
relationship between market exposure and policy outcomes and toward a
consideration of how citizens perceive of the world
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Informed by advances in the study of public
opinion, this project poses several questions: What do citizens know about
globalization? How does it affect their policy preferences, policy attributions,
and vote decisions? Do perceptions of the world economy vary according to
particular groups or classes, and if so, what are the implications for political
competition? How do political parties craft positions on the world economy? Do
politicians have coherent positions or are they characterized by high levels of
intra-party division? Ultimately, how does globalization affect policy
representation by political elites? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address these
questions, nationally-representative public opinion surveys will be conducted in
ten democracies having a range of political institutional and experiences with
the world economy. These are Australia, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Great
Britain, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Sweden, and the United States. Data will
also be collected on the opinions of political elites in these same ten
democracies through the use of expert surveys. The combination of data on mass
and elite attitudes will give the scholarly community the tools to investigate
whether beliefs about the effects of the world economy are based on personal
experience or whether public attitudes are shaped by cues from political
leaders. Data will be analyzed using a variety of statistical techniques,
including simulation of "fully-informed" preferences, models of multinomial
choice, instrumental variables regression, and multilevel modeling.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While "globalization" is often mentioned in public
discourse as a defining feature of the 21st century, we know little beyond
anecdotal accounts about how the world economy influences voter perceptions of
democracy and popular sovereignty. Findings from this study promise to close the
gap between hyperbole and what we actually know about globalization and mass
politics. Results will help determine whether market integration is conducive to
democracy, as much of the current research implies, or whether the growth of the
economy beyond national borders is harmful to healthy mass politics.