* 0819032
* Estimating and Explaining the Intergenerational Nature of Crime
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2010
* Randi Hjalmarsson, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2010
* USD 166,951.00

U.S. crime rates peaked in the early 1990s; by 2004, crime rates were more than
30 percent lower than in 1991. Most research studies the sources of these
declines and little is known regarding whether these declines will be reflected
in the crime patterns of the next generation. Thus, the primary goal of this
project is to estimate the correlation of criminal activity across generations
and decompose the mechanisms driving these correlations. This project also aims
to identify how interventions, such as incarceration, mediate this relationship.
This project takes advantage of a unique Swedish data set that spans more than
40 years and that contains administrative crime records for two generations.
There are many mechanisms that could generate intergenerational criminal
correlations. Common socioeconomic factors may lead a father and son both to
have an elevated criminal propensity. Biology could also play a role. For
instance, a father may pass on to his son low intellectual ability or a limited
ability to regulate impulsivity that leaves both the father and son at a higher
risk for antisocial behavior. Third, it is also possible that behavioral
mechanisms play an important role. The father as role model is a prime example
of learned behavior.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project first uses traditional
regression techniques to explain the father-child crime relationship,
controlling for: (i) common background characteristics, (ii) ability, (iii)
other sources of household heterogeneity, such as mental illness, and (iv)
neighborhood. Such a regression, however, does not yield evidence that a
father?s criminality causes that of his child. Thus, the project also provides
more direct evidence of the inherited traits and father as a role model channels
through three experiments. First, the investigators calculate sibling crime
correlations for the sample of twins as well as for monozygotic and dizygotic
twins. Second, they compare the father child relationship for adopted and non-
adopted children. Third, they assess whether this relationship varies with the
timing of the fathers? criminality. The primary challenge to identifying the
role of interventions is unobservable heterogeneity. For instance, in studying
the effect of father incarceration on child criminality, there could still be
omitted characteristics that are both correlated with whether a father is
incarcerated and whether the child commits a crime, even with a vast set of
controls. Thus, choosing an appropriate comparison group is essential; the
project will consider fathers convicted of crimes but not incarcerated as well
as fathers incarcerated before the child is born.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research fills gaps in both the crime literature and the labor literature on
intergenerational mobility. First, while the crime literature has considered
many determinants of crime, little is known about the role of paternal
criminality and incarceration. Second, if one equates certain criminal
activities with the illegitimate labor market, then previous research, which
focuses on intergenerational mobility in legitimate earnings, has omitted to
study a segment of the labor market that is particularly important to children
of low income parents. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The existence of
intergenerational criminal correlations potentially has substantive policy
implications. If common background factors, such as socioeconomic status, are
the driving force, then policies aimed at reducing poverty also reduce crime,
and do so for more than one generation. On the other hand, if inherited traits
play an important role, then there may be less scope for policies aimed directly
at the children of criminals, unless one believes that there are strong
interaction effects between nature and nurture. However, if the observed
intergenerational criminal correlations are mainly due to behavioral responses,
such as criminal parents being role models for their children, then a new avenue
for fighting crime appears feasible. Deterring crime today has a larger impact
on total crime than previously recognized, since it also produces a second
generation effect. Identification of such a behavioral mechanism would be among
the most important contributions of this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;