* 0819968
* Collaborative Research: Bioarchaeological Signatures of Sedentism in the California Delta
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Jelmer Eerkens, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2012
* USD 102,642.00

With support from the National Science Foundation, and full support from the
identified Native American Most Likely Descendant (MLD), Drs. Jelmer Eerkens and
Eric Bartelink will conduct stable isotope analysis on nearly 250 prehistoric
human skeletons recently excavated from the Marsh Creek site (CA-CCO-548). The
site is located in the Delta region of central California and the burials date
to approximately 4500-3000 years ago, a window of time often referred to as
"Windmiller" or the "Early Period."

The Early Period is generally recognized as the time when societies in the Delta
began to settle down and establish permanent villages, a process known as
sedentism. It is unclear if this transition occurred abruptly or developed over
hundreds or even thousands of years. The main goal of the research is to examine
the effects of sedentism on human populations, as reflected in stable isotope
data. Moreover, with AMS radiocarbon dates on the majority of the burials, the
data will be collected at a fine-scale level that will reveal how quickly the
transition occurred.

There are three main components to the research that provide life-history data
for individuals buried at Marsh Creek. The first seeks to understand the effects
of sedentism on diet, as reflected in stable carbon and nitrogen isotopes. As
societies settled down, archaeologists predict increasing plant and small fish
consumption (r-selected species). The second examines the effects of sedentism
on migration and post-marital residence patterns, as reflected in strontium
isotopes. If people increasingly relied on plants and small fishes,
archaeologists predict an increased reliance on, and value in, womens labor, and
by extension, matrilocality (where men, after marriage, move to the women's
village to live and raise families). The third explores the effects of sedentism
on weaning as determined by nitrogen isotope analysis of teeth. If women were
working harder, the prediction is earlier ages at weaning, which should
concomitantly decrease inter-birth intervals and ultimately lead to population
increase.

The broader impacts of the study will contribute novel information to California
prehistory that will shed light on longstanding archaeological issues such as
the origins and correlates of sedentism among hunter-gatherer cultures. Using
newly developed analytical techniques, it will demonstrate the value of
archaeometric and bioarchaeological research in reconstructing the past. This
will be the first isotopic migration study on human burials from California.
Likewise, this is the first study to examine ancient weaning patterns in this
region. Anthropology faculty and graduate and undergraduate students will all
contribute to the project, which will provide an avenue for training the next
generation in new analytical methods. Finally, the site is within the John Marsh
property owned by California State Parks. A visitor's center including
archaeological and ethnographic displays will be constructed in the near future.
With the support of the MLD, the project results and visitor's center will
provide a venue for archaeologists, Native Californians, and the general public
to interact, dialogue, learn about and bring alive California's past.