* 0819422
* PASI on Patterns and Mechanisms of Change in Neotropical Forests:   La Selva as a Case Study, Costa Rica, April-May 2009
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2010
* Elizabeth Losos, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 07/31/2010
* USD 100,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;This Pan-American Advanced Studies Institutes (PASI) award, jointly
supported by the NSF and the Department of Energy (DOE), will take place April-
May, 2009 at La Selva Biological Station in Costa Rica. Organized by Dr.
Elizabeth Losos of Duke University, the PASI will address patterns and
mechanisms of changes in neotropical forests. More specifically, this PASI will
focus on current and future research directions related to identifying and
documenting forest change, including forest and stream dynamics, animal
populations, remote sensing and GIS-based inquiry, climate change, and carbon
balance, the role of altitudinal transect reserves as buffers against species
loss in a time of global warming, soil and microbial ecology, and the use of
embedded sensor arrays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activity will provide a diverse
group of students selected by the Organization for Tropical Studies (OTS) with
opportunities to participate in field-based educational programs in tropical
biology at one of the world?s major research stations. Expected outcomes in this
PASI will include the development of a core group of practitioners with
essential information, who know how to generate knowledge and can communicate
their knowledge to the larger population. The PASI results will be disseminated
through a PASI website which will be linked to the OTS and other
websites.&lt;br/&gt;