* 0819125
* Protein-protein Interactions in Signal Transduction
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2013
* Ronald Rock, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 02/28/2013
* USD 765,372.00

Post-translational modification of proteins by tyrosine phosphorylation is a
critical feature in the evolution of multicellular metazoans. Recognition of
phosphotyrosine-containing sequences is accomplished primarily by SH2 domains.
These modular protein domains emerged in the simplest animals and have co-
evolved with tyrosine kinases into complex and essential signaling systems. This
project seeks to establish an integrated program of research and education into
protein-protein interactions in signal transduction using approaches at the
interface of the physical and biological sciences. Bioinformatic approaches,
cell biology, peptide chemistry and genetics will be integrated to examine SH2
domains from a systems level, an evolutionary perspective and in terms of their
role in promoting self-assembling molecular machines for signal
transduction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual goals for the project
are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Following on Dr. Nash's bioinformatic analysis of
the human complement of SH2 domains, his research group will analyze the genomes
of 14 species that cover the full range of SH2 domain evolution from the first
appearance of functional phosphotyrosine signaling in social amoeba, through to
humans. The development of novel SH2 protein architectures along with
duplication and divergence will be traced to evolutionary events and changes in
organismal complexity in terms of body plans and the development of new systems
such as the adaptive immune system. His SH2 database and website
(http://sh2.uchicago.edu/) will be extended to contain updated information
regarding SH2 domain structures, targeted gene disruptions, alignments, tree
structures, and evolutionary. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. To define the specificity
of a wide range of SH2 domains for physiological peptide ligands, an array of
192 peptides has been developed that comprehensively defines early events in
Fibroblast growth factor, Insulin and Insulin-like growth factor signaling. By
probing such arrays with some 50 SH2 domains that represent the various classes
of SH2 domains, one can both identify potential interactions as well as use the
ensemble data to define the specificity of SH2 domains for physiological
ligands. The role of non-permissive residues and context-specific interactions
in governing selectivity for physiological ligands will be
investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit&lt;br/&gt; Successful
completion of this project will provide understanding of the evolution of
phosphotyrosine signaling in metazoans, how physiological interaction
specificity has evolved to detail complex signaling networks and how the SH2
interaction-space has evolved to generate diversity in cellular signaling. The
proposed work will extend our understanding of both individual SH2 domain-
containing proteins as well as how phosphotyrosine based signaling functions
have evolved to promote assembly of the molecular machines of signal
transduction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;This work will have
broad implications in terms of the understanding of phosphotyrosine signal
transduction as well as understanding of specificity and diversity among protein
interaction domains. As interaction domains are increasingly implicated in
generating combinatorial complexity required in the evolution of higher
organisms, it is increasingly necessary to fully develop paradigms of this sort.
Educationally, this project will expose a number of young scientists to
experimental and symbolic approaches at the interface of biology, chemistry and
computational/bioinformatic sciences. It will assist in training a future
generation of scientists equipped to tackle complex, multi-factorial problems
utilizing systems approaches