* 0819446
* DDRIG: Electorial Support and Resource  Allocation
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2009
* Jonathan Harris, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2009
* USD 11,717.00

Much research has established that economic development in Africa is a political
problem: governments choose policies that benefit a few constituents rather than
many. While research shows how national politics affect economic development,
systematic research exploring how local politics affects economic development
remains scanty. This study fills that gap by examining "development politics" in
Kenya: how the linkage between voters and local politicians leads to more (or
less) effective local economic development strategies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project accesses the local political landscape by
focusing on parliamentary constituencies in Kenya. Over the past 15 years, the
Kenyan central government has ceded resources and decision-making authority to
lower levels of government. This process of "decentralization" has endowed
members of parliament (MPs) with development funding to spend within their
constituencies. While the funds appeared to be a boon for incumbent MPs, the
2007 elections proved that perception inaccurate. Many MPs with productive and
transparent records of fund usage lost their seats, while others with less
savory records won handily. By focusing on how MPs allocate development funds,
and how constituents punish or reward their MP at the polls, the project traces
how local political incentives may lead to poor development choices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address these questions, this research traces both who
benefits from the allocation of funds, as well as the quality of the projects
implemented. This second focus-project quality-features centrally in the
research. Politicians face many incentives to implement inefficient or poor-
quality projects. For instance, such "white elephant" projects may create
employment to constituents or revenue for local contractors, while doing little
to improve public welfare in general. The research develops a flexible, low-cost
approach to measuring project quality. By eliciting the opinions of construction
and engineering experts, the method produces reliable estimates of the
distribution of likely project costs, which are then compared with actual
project costs. Using such data, the research will reveal the political
conditions that make poor-quality projects a good political strategy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both policy-makers and civil society organizations will
benefit from the study of development politics. For policy makers, this research
will indicate the kinds of political and administrative reforms may improve
public welfare. In addition, the new method of project evaluation will
drastically reduce the costs of monitoring the performance of elected officials.
The new method of project evaluation developed for this research will benefit
communities and civil society organizations by enabling them to effectively
judge whether or not elected officials are delivering high or low quality
development. With better information on politician performance, communities can
judge more accurately which incumbents should (or should not) be returned to
elected office.