* 0819397
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: From Consent to Enforceability: The Effects of Form-Adhesive Contracts on Social and Economic Exchange
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2009
* Susan Silbey, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Martinek
* 07/31/2009
* USD 12,000.00

PI and co-PI: Susan S. Silbey and Zev Eigen

Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Title: From Consent to Enforceability: The Effects of Form-Adhesive Contracts on
Social and Economic Exchange Experiences with and Interpretations of Law in
Every Day Life

0819397

ABSTRACT This research will examins experiences with and interpretations of
?form-adhesive? contracts?the ubiquitous fine-print documents offered by many
organizations on a take-it-or-leave-it basis to individuals seeking to receive
emergency medical treatment, rent a car, buy most anything online, use a credit
card or accept a job, to name a few examples. Empirical, this research addresses
the following questions: What is the connection, if any, between experience with
form-adhesive agreements and the way in which individuals interpret the
practical, legal, social and moral enforceability of contracts, and by
implication, the rule of law? What effects, if any, does exposure to such
agreements have on the way in which individuals interact with the organizations
that require signatures on such forms? The goal is to explain how the experience
with such forms and effects of forms vary across socio-economic status groups
and identify whether different socio-economic status groups behave differently
with respect to these agreements. The project will involve a web-based
experiment in which subjects are randomly assigned into conditions that vary the
presentation of the ?Terms & Conditions? governing their relationship with the
researchers. Using one of four randomly selected types of prompts (practical,
legal, social or moral), subjects are provoked to abide one particular term to
which they agreed in the ?Terms & Conditions?. The rate of compliance will be
observed as will other measures of interpreted enforceability across the control
and experimental conditions. Findings will inform policy and developing legal
doctrine with respect to the relationship of these ubiquitous contracts and
popular commitments to the rule of law. Broadly, the project will offer insight
into the ways in which support for the rule of law may be undermined or
enhanced.