* 0819141
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Cultural Attitudes Toward Child Welfare Policies in the United States
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2009
* Cathy Cohen, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2009
* USD 12,000.00

What do Americans believe the state should provide to its citizens in matters of
child welfare? How do attitudes about race and poverty structure beliefs about
government involvement in this area? This project uses original survey research
to inquire into opinion on policies that influence child welfare, including
foster care, childcare, welfare, and parenting policies that are targeted toward
low-income mothers. This project will provide new insight into the intersection
of racial attitudes and attitudes about welfare policy by interrogating the
impact of gendered racial stereotypes, such as the construct of the "welfare
mother." Last, developing new measures and gathering new public opinion data in
a politically important, yet unexplored, area is valuable in itself.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will survey online a random sample of 400
Americans from the general population, 300 Latino-Americans, and 300 African-
Americans. The survey poses questions about real and hypothetical policies
concerning child welfare, focusing on prenatal care, child support, and welfare.
It also includes an experimental manipulation, in which respondents are primed
to imagine a poor recipient of government assistance who is either Black, white,
or Latino before they are asked a battery of questions about welfare recipients'
behavior. Data analysis will assess, among other things, whether this racial
priming impacts survey responses. The investigator hypothesizes that ethnicity
and class are indeed central to public perceptions of policies that concern
child welfare and parenting. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will be relevant
to the interdisciplinary group of academics who study child welfare, parenting,
racial attitudes, gender, and/or social welfare policy, as well as to political
organizations and policymakers involved in politics of these issues. When the
survey is completed, the researcher plans to present this research to colleagues
at workshops and conferences, to relevant political practitioners, and to people
outside academia and politics through community forums and media exposure. In
short, this work will engage academics across disciplines, political
organizations and politicians, and Americans at-large.