* 0819885
* University of Minnesota Materials Research Science and Engineering Center
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2015
* Timothy Lodge, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Cooperative Agreement
* Daniele Finotello
* 08/31/2015
* USD 16,994,008.00

The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at the University
of Minnesota (UMN) unites established senior and promising junior faculty from
six departments and two other universities in a multidisciplinary program to
address fundamental issues spanning a broad spectrum of materials research. The
research mission of the Center is founded upon four Interdisciplinary Research
Groups (IRGs):&lt;br/&gt;IRG-1: Engineered Multiblock Polymers implements
powerful synthesis and processing strategies for advanced materials based on
self-assembly of multiblock copolymers. These new materials may be used for
controlled porosity membranes and drug delivery.&lt;br/&gt;IRG-2: Organic
Optoelectronic Interfaces is developing a comprehensive understanding of
structure-property relationships in a new generation of electronic
materials.&lt;br/&gt;IRG-3: Magnetic Heterostructures explores spin transport,
spin transfer torque, and novel highly polarized materials in precisely
engineered heterostructures. This may lead to new magnetic memory devices and
new paradigms in computation. &lt;br/&gt;IRG-4: Nanoparticle-based Materials is
creating environmentally benign nanoparticle-based materials for applications in
luminescence and photovoltaics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UMN MRSEC manages an
extensive program in education and career development. Center research
activities are integrated with educational programs, providing interdisciplinary
training of students and postdocs. The summer research program features four
distinct efforts, two of which, Faculty-Student Teams; Native American
Fellowships, target Tribal Colleges. The Research Experiences for Undergraduates
and Research Experiences for Teachers programs also attract a significant
population of female and underrepresented minority undergraduates to the
University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MRSEC faculty and student participate in
numerous K-12 outreach activities that include a program of summer camps for
high school students and working with the Science Museum of Minnesota in
developing exhibits, providing demonstrations, and staffing
booths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MRSEC is bolstered by a broad complement of
over 35 companies that contribute directly to IRG research through intellectual,
technological, and financial support in a collaborative and pre-competitive
environment through the Industrial Partnership for Research in Interfacial and
Materials Engineering (IPRIME) and the Center for Micromagnetics and Information
Technologies (MINT). International research collaborations and student exchanges
are pursued with leading research labs in Asia and Europe. The UMN MRSEC
benefits from an extensive suite of materials synthesis, characterization and
computational facilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;