* 0819645
* Typology and the Study of Language: Comparative Grammar and Beyond
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2010
* Larry Hyman, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2010
* USD 21,505.00

This proposal is for enhancements to the 2008 biennial meeting of the
Association for Linguistic Typology, to be held on the UC Berkeley campus in
summer 2008 during the Linguistic Society of America's biennial Linguistic
Institute. Typology is the branch of linguistics engaged in comparative grammar,
surveying the types of grammatical phenomena to be found in the world's
languages, classifying the world's languages, and providing the systematic
descriptive framework for documenting endangered languages and mapping all
linguistic phenomena. Formal grammar is engaged in working out a theory of what
is possible and impossible, necessary, optional, etc. in human language, with
implications for how language arose and developed, how language is related to
cognition, and what are universals of human language. Despite many clear common
interests, typologists and formal grammarians have had relatively little
interaction.

The intellectual merit and transformative potential of this proposal is its
explicit intention to bring typologists and formal grammarians together around
the discussion of concrete questions and themes. Two leading formal grammarians
with cross-linguistic and typological interests and one leading typologist with
theoretical and statistical interests will give plenary lectures. Heavily
discounted conference registration fees will be offered to student Institute
participants, which will familiarize the younger generation of linguists with
cutting-edge typology.

Conference topical themes will emphasize phenomena and concerns common to field
and documentary workers, typologists, and formal linguists (e.g. theoretically,
typologically, and geographically interesting aspects of the morphologically
complex verbs of languages of western North America, and other areas on which
major typologists and formal grammarians have worked).

The conference will shape the future development of both fields by drawing the
large audience of graduate students attending the Institute into debates on and
presentation of leading work in typology and cross-linguistic formal grammar
coming fom all parts of the world. The meeting will include significant outreach
to underrepresented countries and groups in typology and will provide
opportunities for U.S. students and young scholars to interact with leading
national and international typologists and to present typological and field-
based papers. ALT serves its junior members extremely well, and students at the
Institute will see this in action.