* 0819377
* The Diachronic Syntax of Early Indo-European Languages
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2008,01/31/2010
* John Whitman, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 01/31/2010
* USD 21,451.00

This award will support a workshop on the Generative Syntax of the Older Indo-
European languages, held in conjunction with the 10th biennial meeting of the
Diachronic Generative Syntax (DiGS) Conference at Cornell University in August,
2008. DiGS is the leading gathering of diachronic generative syntacticians in
the world, providing workshop participants with a major audience for their
research. The workshop will be an unprecedented event bringing together leading
specialists on comparative Indo-European with major researchers working on
syntactic change in a generative framework. A major focus will be on younger
researchers actively combining the tools of Indo-European linguistics with
current generative models of syntactic change. This award will support travel
for graduate student participants, and the workshop will include a session for
poster presentations. Selected papers will be published in an edited volume.

The workshop will be of importance to two disciplinary areas and groups of
researchers. The first is the community of linguists (and scholars in related
fields such as psychology and cognitive science) who study language as a formal
system. This conference will help make the community aware of the importance of
issues related to language change. The second impacted group is the community of
scholars involved in the historical/comparative study of the Indo-European
family. This is a small but traditionally influential group of scholars within
the larger field of historical/comparative linguistics. The conference and
ensuing publication will serve to bring these scholars into contact with
generative work on syntactic change, and vice versa.