* 0819571
* Collaborative Research: Race, Immigration, and Citizenship in the Americas
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2011
* David Cook-Mart√≠n, Grinnell College
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 06/30/2011
* USD 76,964.00

PI: David S Fitzgerald and David Cook-Martin &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institutions:
University of California, San Diego and Grinnell College
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Collaborative Research: Race, Immigration, and
Citizenship in the Americas &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SES-0819506 and 0819571
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What explains
racial and national origin preferences in immigration and citizenship policy in
the Americas over the last 150 years? Many scholars have argued that the end of
discrimination against particular groups was caused by the global triumph of
political liberalism and that powerful exemplars of liberal democracy shaped the
policies of countries in their sphere of influence. And yet, if liberalism is
incompatible with racism, why were the United States and Canada leaders in the
spread of racialized policy restrictions in the Americas during the early
twentieth century? Why did authoritarian Latin American regimes remove negative
racial discrimination from their immigration laws around World War II, a
generation before liberal-democratic states like the United States and Canada
did the same in the 1960s? This study will answer those questions by creating an
original database of racial and national origin preferences in the immigration
and citizenship laws of 22 major countries of the Americas since 1850. A
statistical analysis of time series data will test the extent to which specific
political, demographic, and economic conditions explain levels of racialization
in those policies. The quantitative analysis will be complemented by case
studies based on archival materials and the secondary literature of the five
primary countries of immigration ? the United States, Canada, Argentina, Brazil,
and Cuba ? and Mexico as a negative instance of a country that sought, but
failed to attract mass immigration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit
of this project lies in (a) its cross-country comparisons and long time frame,
and (b) a research strategy of using case-studies to address the puzzles and
gaps that emerge from quantitative analyses. The systemic long-view proposed is
potentially transformative because it shows how the internal inclusiveness of
liberal democracy often rests on categorical exclusions of outsiders. The
study?s broader impacts will include (1) lessons for contemporary immigration
policy (whether the current stance against racist exclusion is historically
contingent and thus reversible, how egalitarian laws may in practice
discriminate by race, and if racialist exclusions may be giving way to more
politically palatable, but still discriminatory categorical distinctions); (2)
using an inquiry-based approach to train underrepresented students in a
combination of qualitative and quantitative research methodologies; (3) the
integration of project data into the undergraduate curriculum and research
mentorship, and the provision of research apprenticeships for graduate students.
In addition, (4) findings will be disseminated to a wide audience of academics,
policymakers, and other stakeholders through workshops, conference
presentations, and publication of original data and results in high-profile
Internet sites and academic publications. Finally, (5) it fosters collaboration
across disciplines (sociology and economics) and types of research and teaching
institutions (UC San Diego and Grinnell College) by, among other things,
developing appropriate sharing technologies.