* 0819943
* UNDERSTANDING REPTILE PALEOECOLOGY: A STABLE ISOTOPE APPROACH
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2010
* Paul Koch, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Boush
* 07/31/2010
* USD 124,000.00

Understanding Reptile Paleoecology: A Stable Isotope Approach

Paul L. Koch, Univ. of California, Santa Cruz

Today most crocodilians (crocodiles, alligators, gavials, and their kin) live
in fresh to brackish water. Only a few crocodilians are able to tolerate marine
water using special salt-excreting glands to maintain osmotic balance. Yet, the
geographic distribution of crocodilians indicates that some groups crossed major
ocean basins in their evolutionary history, leading some workers to conclude
that they may have been more tolerant of salt water in the past. Paleontologists
have tried to identify trends in morphology or relationships that would
illuminate the origin and evolution of salt-water tolerance in crocodilians, but
these studies have been largely inconclusive. Isotopic methods offer powerful
tools for exploring the diet, habitat preferences, and physiology of modern and
fossil animals. We will study the origin and evolution of salt-water tolerance
in crocodilians using naturally occurring variations in stable isotopes. We will
use carbon and strontium isotope variations to monitor the habitat in which
crocodilians were feeding, and oxygen isotope variations to determine whether
they were drinking fresh or marine water. Reptiles have not been studied
extensively using isotopic methods. Therefore, we will take a close look at
modern crocodilians to ensure that our studies of ancient crocodilians are on a
solid foundation. First we will study captive crocodilians in Florida. In this
controlled setting, we can measure the stable isotope composition of all the
water and food ingested by the animal. This will let us determine the
contribution of each source to the tooth enamel of a crocodilian. We will then
study wild crocodilians at a coastal wildlife refuge in Louisiana. Here we will
measure the isotopic composition of crocodilians and their prey to better
understand how much "noise" is introduced by a natural environment. These two
modern experiments will inform our study of ancient crocodilians, and serve as a
basis for other workers using isotopes to study modern and fossil reptiles.
Finally, we will use these isotopic methods to assess the salt-water tolerance
and adaptations of different fossil crocodilians. In most cases, these fossils
come from coastal settings, so they may potentially have used saline habitats.
We will analyze fossil species that are classified near the origins of the major
groups of living crocodilians. This approach will shed light on the ecology of
these groups as they began to diversify and radiate. Our ultimate goal is to
determine if the crocodilians are a primitively salt-water group that has become
more restricted to freshwater, or a primitively fresh-water group with a few
derived groups that tolerate salt water.