* 0819600
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Electoral Strategies and Poverty Programs
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2009
* David Collier, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2009
* USD 11,979.00

This project investigates the politically motivated targeting of poverty
programs in Northeast Brazil, focusing on mayors in rural municipalities. This
topic stands at the intersection between literature on distributive politics
that is commanding central theoretical attention in political science and
research on the politics of poverty in Northeast Brazil, the poorest area of
Brazil and one of the most unequal regions of the world.

A wide body of literature vigorously debates how politicians target distributive
benefits such as particularistic goods and infrastructure projects. Some
scholars argue that they target core supporters while others contend they target
swing voters. This project directly engages this debate, but also pursues a new
research agenda on how mobilization affects the targeting of benefits.

Four questions are examined. When do mayors target core vs. swing voters as they
allocate benefits, in order to influence the vote choices of individuals who
already participate in elections? When are benefits distributed to induce the
turnout of individuals who do not participate in elections? How do targeting
strategies vary across different attributes of targetable goods? Do potential
recipients believe that benefits are conditional on political support and trust?

These questions are answered through the use of 144 in-depth interviews of both
municipal officials and the rural poor. The quantitative component, funded from
other sources, uses official Brazilian data that remains untapped by social
scientists for which among other things Global Positioning System technology is
employed to map beneficiaries in over 380,000 electoral precincts. The
econometric analysis of these data provides new leverage in understanding both
distributive politics and clientelism. The qualitative data suggests hypotheses
for quantitative tests and provides an ongoing check for the plausibility of
quantitative findings.

This project deepens our udnerstanding of the politics of poverty reduction. It
provides key information that can help policymakers improve poverty reduction
program, and it engages a broader audience concerned with poverty reduction in
Brazil and beyond.