* 0819870
* Towards a chemical weathering rate chronometer:  A U-series investigation of catena development in Kruger Park, South Africa
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Andrew Kurtz, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2010
* USD 27,663.00

Scientific Merit: We propose a pilot study that will make a significant
contribution towards the development of a new chemical weathering rate
chronometer and address fundamental issues involving chemical weathering and
soil development on hillslopes. We will measure U-series isotopes on carefully
selected, well-characterized set of soil profiles sampled from the South African
savanna. The soils comprise an exceptional example of a topographic catena
sequence, where soils have differentiated through long-term downslope
redistribution of solutes and weathering products. These sequences are only now
being quantified by modern geochemical and geomorphic approaches. This
represents a major step forward for geochemical studies of weathering profiles,
which have traditionally focused on ridgetops or geomorphically stable surfaces,
which represent a small fraction of Earth?s surface.

Uranium-decay-series isotopes have emerged in the last decade as a powerful
tracer of Earth processes on timescales shorter than one million years. The tool
has been underexploited for studying surface processes, but recent studies have
shown great promise. Most of these studies have approached weathering from the
riverine perspective, seeking to quantify landscape-integrated weathering and
erosion rates from U-series disequilibria in suspended sediments and river
water. These studies inherently depend on an understanding of the processes that
produce disequilibria by fractionating U-series elements (U, Th, and Ra) in
soils, but this understanding is lacking. The few studies that have been done on
U-series isotopes in soils often lack the geomorphic, pedogenic, and geochemical
characterization required to develop robust interpretations of U-series data.

They will measure trace element (including U, Th, and Nb) concentrations on 43
samples from 9 soil pits comprising a 1km transect of a well-characterized
catena sequence. These data will be used to select 20 samples for full U-series
disequilibria (234U/238U, 230Th/234U, and 226Ra/230Th) analyses. These isotope
ratios are sensitive to trace element redistribution on timescales of roughly 1
ma, 500 ka, and 10 ka, respectively. These time-sensitive data, plus additional
soil physical (textural, hydrologic) and chemical (mass balance) data will be
used to develop and test box models of catena differentiation. Theit approach is
in contrast to prior applications of U-series data to weathering profiles that
have sought to determine soil ages, an approach that is overly sensitive to
model assumptions. Instead, soil age here is constrained by existing cosmogenic
10Be data. The 10Be-derived ~220ka soil age in this environment is well-suited
to the applicable time scale of U-series data.

Broader Impact: This project will support lab costs for work initiated during
the PI?s sabbatical at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, where he will
begin a new collaboration with WHOI scientists Bernhard Peucker-Ehrenbrink and
Ken Sims. Importantly, the data collected and ideas developed here are intended
to be applicable beyond a single set of soils in South Africa, and should
improve our understanding of hillslope-scale weathering processes in general,
and provide much-needed constraints on weathering fractionations for future
studies of U-series isotopes in river studies. Based on data collected in this
pilot proposal, the PI intends to submit a larger proposal that will support a
future PhD student at BU to further develop U-series applications in the
weathering environment.