* 0819407
* ADVANCE Partnerships for Adaptation, Implementation, and Dissemination (PAID) Award:  On Ramps into Academia
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2013
* Matthew O'Donnell, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Beth Mitchneck
* 08/31/2013
* USD 569,002.00

Strategic interventions are needed to achieve gender parity in the faculty ranks
of science and engineering disciplines. Wooing women faculty in STEM from one
university to another is, nationally, a zero-sum game. Instead of recruiting
women away from other universities, there is a mostly-untapped pool of
Ph.D.-level women scientists and engineers in industry and research
laboratories. Many are very accomplished at their research, which is the primary
figure of merit for success at Research-Extensive universities. With the proper
mix of information, networking, and support, they could become very successful
professors. The goal of this project is to increase the pool of women faculty
available to all universities by providing professional development to
Ph.D.-level women in industry or research laboratories. In particular, we will
host a two-day workshop each year over a three-year period to provide practical
tools and support to women who are interested in making the transition to
academia. We will specifically target women who are a minimum of three-four
years past their Ph.D. and/or postdoctoral position. The attendees and speakers
will form a community who can support each other during the job application
period, the interview process, the startup negotiations, and the first years in
academia. In summary, the project will develop "On Ramps into Academia."
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: It is of great interest to determine
the challenges, skills, and resources needed for people to successfully make the
transition from industry or national laboratories to academia. The assessment
plan, which is strongly directed at outcomes evaluation, will help identify
concrete best practices to encourage women into faculty pathways. By providing
the necessary skills and advice to help women make successful transitions from
industry to academia, UW ADVANCE will help develop a third pathway into
academia, in addition to the current practices of hiring new Ph.D.s and
postdoctoral fellows and hiring women away from other universities. This third
pathway into academia is an original approach to recruitment and a creative way
to expand the pool of women faculty in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: This project will expand the national pool of women faculty in STEM
disciplines. Even a small increase of STEM women faculty can improve the image
of the disciplines and encourage more women to pursue them.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;