* 0819309
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Migrant Workers' Children in Developing Nations
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2008,02/28/2010
* Helen Siu, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 02/28/2010
* USD 5,330.00

China is experiencing phenomenal economic growth that is sustained by over 140
million rural migrant workers. Looking beyond the well-studied realm of adult
migrant workers, graduate student Minhua Ling, under the guidance of Dr. Helen
Siu, will undertake research on the coming-of-age experiences and prospects of
migrant workers' children as shaped by the forces behind China's remarkable
transformations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher will examine migrant
workers' children in their last year of middle school in suburban Shanghai and
rural Anhui. She will engage in multi-sited fieldwork linking schools, families,
villages, urban enclaves, local administrations, and migration routes. The
research is comparative, using three middle schools with contrasting
compositions to parcel out the effects of migrant status on these children.
Through case interviews, participant observations, and archival research, the
project explores the children's parentage, schooling, job placement, and
identity formation. It analyses how China's rural-urban divide is being
complicated by lingering population controls, entrenched prejudices, and
capitalist market forces. Through an in-depth look at the adolescence
experiences of such an unsettled population, the research seeks to illustrate
development priorities and the political ideals of social harmony translate into
everyday life. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dissertation will add to a much needed
pool of empirical knowledge on the hard-to-track population of migrant children,
found in many developing countries. This research thus has comparative value for
understanding other rapidly urbanizing societies. Supporting this research also
contributes to the education of a graduate student.