* 0819259
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Making and Unmaking Polish Persons: Aging and Memory in Postsocialist Poland
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2008,05/31/2010
* Jessica Robbins, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 05/31/2010
* USD 8,800.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Gillian Feeley-Harnik, graduate student Jessica C.
Robbins will conduct research on aging and memory in Poland. Robbins will
investigate processes of aging in the context of the large-scale transformations
in Polish society that have occurred during the lifetimes of the oldest
generations. She will study practices of memory in personal, medical, social,
political, and national contexts in order to address these key research
questions: 1) How does the past involvement of elderly Poles in the project of
state socialism correspond to their contemporary personal, social, and political
legitimacy, and how do both of these correspond to their self-identification
with the Polish nation? 2) How does identification with larger political forms
relate to practices of memory by elderly Poles and their kin, and how do these
practices of memory connect to the making, transforming, and decline of elderly
Poles? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Robbins will conduct ethnographic fieldwork in
Wroclaw and Poznan, two cities where the socialist past is remembered in
different ways. Contemporary commemorations of the 1956 labor uprising in Poznan
have entailed controversy over the relationship between the socialist past, the
historical Polish nation, and the contemporary Polish nation-state in a way that
has not occurred in Wroclaw. Methods will include semi-structured and
unstructured interviews, life histories, case studies, and extensive
participant-observation, in a variety of institutional and non-institutional
settings. This research will contribute an ethnographic perspective to popular
and scholarly debates on nationalism that often omit the relationship between
popular discourse and actual lives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
contribute to substantive and theoretical debates in kinship studies, medical
anthropology, and postsocialist studies. This research will be of use to policy-
makers who are considering the best way to care for the increasing number of
elderly in Poland and worldwide. This research will also contribute to the
training of a social scientist.