* 0819409
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: War Games at Work: Production of the U.S. Army Video Game Project
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2009
* Robertson Allen, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2009
* USD 15,000.00

University of Washington graduate student, Robertson Allen, supervised by Dr.
Miriam Kahn, will undertake an ethnographic study of the production network
behind the U.S. Army video game, "America's Army." The production and delivery
of the video game involves several different entities, indcluding military
representatives, video game programming units, video game production units,
soldiers, civilian entertainment companies, and consumers. The framing question
of the research is that the lines between war and play are becoming blurred as
the military uses video game technology for training, marketing and recruitment.
Previous studies of video games produced by the military are focused on player
experience. Few studies have examined the culture of the production behind the
games.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research will focus on the Army Game Project, a
group of organizations responsible for designing, publishing, and distributing
the official U.S. Army video game, "America's Army." Available as a free
download from its website since 2002, the game has expanded to a worldwide
audience that join to play as U.S. Army soldiers in a popular first-person,
squad-based combat video game. Successive versions and updates of "America's
Army" contain modifications that serve as educational and training tools for
enlisted Army soldiers, and applications of the game simulate future weapons
technologies under development. This research will study these cultures of game
production, proceeding empirically and looking at the everyday work
environments, experiences, and goals of individuals
involved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will conduct the research at
several contracting institutions. His methods of data collection will include 1)
participant observation; 2) in-depth interviews with a selected sample of
individuals associated with the project; and 3) a case study of the production
and public reception of one Army Game Project product, the Virtual Army
Experience. By employing these methods, this research will explore, at a variety
of levels the idea that a blurring is occuring between the binary categories of
war and game, work and play, education and entertainment, virtual and real, and
soldier and civilian. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is important because it
will contribute to the advancement of discussions regarding the social
significance of these types of blurrings. Theoretically the research stands to
make significant contributions to social science understanding of the changing
ways that governments interact with their populations. The research will also
support the education of a graduate student.