* 0819429
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: "Economizing Attention: Agendas and the Influence of Bureaucracy in American Policymaking"
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2010
* Bryan Jones, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2010
* USD 11,999.00

This project examines the role of the federal bureaucracy as the "antennae" of
government. The bureaucracy compensates for the attention limits of the elected
branches of government in sending them signals about important policy problems.
The research addresses two primary questions: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. What
effect does bureaucratic signaling about policy problems have on the policy
agendas of Congress and the President? &lt;br/&gt;2. How does attention and
authoritative political decisions affect the content and dynamics of signaling
by the federal bureaucracy? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A theory of bureaucratic
influence is developed that relates scarcity of attention and institutional
organization to the content and dynamics of policy agendas. Using time series
techniques, the substance and volatility of policy agendas in and between the
federal bureaucracy and elected branches of government are examined. The
theorizing in this project developed a new framework and a unique set of
research questions that pave the way for new avenues of inquiry that moves
beyond the state of current theorizing on the role of bureaucracy in democratic
governance. The research design generates a unique set of data related to agenda
setting in federal agencies since the Second World War. These data sets will
benefit scholars studying bureaucracies as well as those working in related
subfields such as presidential administration and congressional policymaking.