* 0819804
* A Field Experiment Incentivizing Exercise Among Workers
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2010
* Heather Royer, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2010
* USD 264,288.00

Many working-age adults in the U.S. engage in little to no physical exercise,
which is particularly troubling given the growing fraction of the US population
that is obese. The reasons for this inactivity are not entirely clear, but
misperceptions about the benefits of exercise or a lack of interest are not the
primary culprits. Instead, lack of self-control and an inability to commit
oneself to exercise appear to play a significant role. As a result, economic
incentives, which have been effective in other areas such as education and
health care, may be a natural solution. As a step towards answering this
question, the proposed research will study whether direct financial incentives
and self-commitment devices for exercise are effective at overcoming these
barriers. The direct financial incentives are per-visit payments for exercise,
while self-commitment devices allow individuals to define an exercise goal and
commit their own money that is forfeited if the goal is not attained.
Specifically, the study examines a) the effectiveness of these two types of
incentives during the period in which they are in place, b) whether the
incentives lead to lasting increases in physical activity in the post-
intervention period, and c) the relative effectiveness of each type of
incentive. Furthermore, the study provides an understanding of how the
effectiveness of these two categories of incentives relate to an individual?s
attributes such as their degree of self-control and their time preferences. The
intervention takes place among employees of a Fortune 500 company at an on-site
fitness center. Successful completion of a pilot study at this company in the
fall of 2007 aided in the design of the proposed study and demonstrated its
overall feasibility

This research will be the most comprehensive study to date on incentives and
commitments for exercise. Moreover, this research will be a useful complement to
the existing literature on incentives in environments where individuals exhibit
a lack of self-control (e.g., smoking and weight-loss). There is increasing
interest among corporations and policy makers in incentive schemes to improve
health and reduce healthcare spending. Within the academic literature, the study
of per-use incentives for exercise contributes to the broader literature on the
effect of financial incentives, including those on grades, school attainment,
teacher performance, and healthcare quality. The contrast of self-commitment
devices to the per-use incentives will make a significant addition to the
growing literature on the economics of self control and will contribute to our
understanding of the effectiveness of self-commitment devices in other settings
besides the previously-studied savings and smoking environments. While there is
a sizeable theoretical literature providing insights into self-control problems
and possible mechanisms to overcome these problems, to date only a few studies
have tested these theoretical predictions or implemented mechanisms to overcome
self-control problems in field settings.

The proposed study exploits the use of a randomized-controlled trial. In such a
setting, it can be insured that differences between groups are due to the
intervention itself. Much of the existing evidence on the effectiveness of
financial incentives for exercise is plagued by research designs where observed
differences may be due to inherent differences in comparison groups (e.g., a
contrast of voluntary participants and non-participants).

Broader Impacts: The results of the proposed research will help improve the
design of wellness plans and healthcare policies, which is extremely important
given the rapid increases in healthcare spending in the U.S. We anticipate that
corporations, insurance companies, medical professionals, and policymakers, in
addition to the academic community, will all have interest in the results of
this study. Also, the research will be useful for understanding self-control and
psychological barriers outside of the domain of exercise.

