* 0819874
* Collaborative Research: Orogeny, orography, and unsteady erosion: evolution of the Himalaya
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2014
* Bodo Bookhagen, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 07/31/2014
* USD 280,000.00

This research attempts to understand how Himalayan rates of erosion vary as a
function of space and time. Some initial data suggest that erosion rates become
much steadier at longer time scales. This research hypothesizes that spatial
variations in rainfall distributions modulate differences in erosion rates and
that specific stream power (the product of discharge and channel gradient)
provides a reliable proxy for modern erosion rates. This project will use very
high resolution remote-sensing data on rainfall along with digital topography to
predict variations in stream power. The effect on erosion rates will be
evaluated through cosmogenic nuclide (CRN)analyses of samples from catchments
with contrasting stream power. Cooling ages of various minerals from transects
in the catchments will be analyzed using thermokinematic models to create
reliable reconstructions of temporal changes in erosion rates over longer time
scales. The Himalayas are in an active tectonic region, and the proposal
presents the hypothesis that topography advects laterally in response to the
ongoing collision of tectonic plates. This advection is hypothesized to cause
major re-organization of Himalayan drainages and related topography. As
advection leads to stream capture and creation of new Transhimalayan rivers with
greatly enhanced erosive power, other trunk channels will be beheaded, thereby
losing power. Such changes in stream power should be expressed by changes in
both erosion rates and topographic relief. The project will test these ideas by
reconstructing changes in topographic relief using bedrock cooling ages both
from their relief transects and from equal-elevation transects.

This project focuses on how mountain belts grow and decay and how climatically
modulated erosion may affect where earthquakes occur within them. Recent theory
suggests that, in actively deforming mountain belts, spatially varying patterns
of rainfall cause contrasts in erosion rates and that these differences in
erosion influence where deformation occurs. The Himalayas, with their strong
monsoonal rains, large-scale topography, and rapid rates of tectonic
deformation, are an ideal setting in which to explore these proposed
interactions. Satellite data ground-based observation reveal that the amount of
rainfall changes abruptly both along the length and breadth of the Himalaya
range. By combining the rainfall data with the topography of the Himalaya, this
project's numerical models will predict where erosion should be rapid or slow.
Much of the current spatial variation in rainfall along the Himalaya appears to
result from the role of large river valleys that slice across the Himalaya: they
provide topographic conduits that guide precipitation into the mountains and,
thereby, appear to influence where erosion is more or less intense. This
proposal contends that these valleys are not permanently locked in place, but
they can shift and change drainage patterns. The field and laboratory
investigation will document changes in erosion rates through time and changes in
the topography of the Himalaya. Over 300 million people live downstream from the
Himalaya and utilize the waters that flow from it. This work will provide
insight on rainfall, snow, and water balance in remote (and currently poorly
known) areas, and it will help facilitate better forecasting of river behavior,
a significant benefit for the people of India and Nepal.