* 0819931
* Macrostratigraphy and macroevolution in North America: a test of the common cause hypothesis
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2011
* Shanan Peters, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/2011
* USD 145,095.00

Macrostratigraphy and macroevolution in North America: a test of the common
cause hypothesis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Shanan E. Peters&lt;br/&gt;University of
Wisconsin; EAR-0819931&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;The rock record
contains numerous natural resources and is the primary source of information for
much of geoscience and evolutionary biology. However, it is also a complex
spatio-temporal mosaic that has been influenced by a diverse array of tectonic,
climatic, and biological processes. Understanding and quantifying the
architecture of the rock record is important for two primary reasons. First,
doing so will reveal important information about how earth systems processes,
such as tectonics and climate, have changed over geologic time. Second,
quantifying the distribution and character of rocks will permit the possible
biasing effects of discontinuous and non-random preservation of earth?s history
to be overcome. &lt;br/&gt;This research will compile and make widely available
a large amount of under-utilized geological data, resulting in the most
comprehensive database available on the distribution and character of rocks in
North America. Although several important geologic and paleobiologic hypotheses
can and will be addressed with these data, the two principal scientific
objectives are to: 1) document the quantitative intersection of the rock record
of environments and the fossil record of life, and 2) test the relative
importance of preservation biases vs. shared forcing mechanisms in driving the
mutual correlations that have been documented between geologic and biologic
data. To do this, data for over 20,000 named rock units in North America will be
combined with tens of thousands of taxonomic occurrence data currently residing
in the Paleobiology Database (http://paleodb.org). This will yield the first
data-set ever capable of quantifying the large-scale intersection of the history
of life and physical environmental change. Because this work will aggregate
important field-based geologic data into a web-accessible database with a
powerful graphic user interface, the broader impacts of this research will
include educational benefits at the secondary through graduate levels, increased
accessibility of geological knowledge to the general public, and possible
economic benefits related to mineral and petroleum resource
exploration.&lt;br/&gt;