* 0819184
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Hippo Family Club Language Learners in Japan and the USA
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2010
* Kira Hall, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 06/30/2010
* USD 11,759.00

The goal of this dissertation research project is to expand sociolinguistic
understandings of language and globalization by studying the multilingual
practices and ideologies of members of Hippo Family Club, an international
language-study group, in Japan and the United States. Hippo Family Club is an
international organization dedicated to the motto "Anyone can speak seven
languages." Its affiliates, primarily ethnic, economic, and linguistic majority
members, describe themselves as part of a transnational "family" of multilingual
learners. This study combines participant observation in Japan and the US with
close analysis of members' discourse practices in order to describe their
ideologies of monolingualism and multilingualism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study
utilizes two primary methods: participant observation, and close analysis of
discourse. The researcher participates as a member of Hippo Family Club,
recording observations in field notes, which are then qualitatively analyzed to
describe and explain club practices. Hippo Family Club meetings will also be
video-recorded, and individual members will be interviewed regarding their
experiences with the club. The project aims to refine and expand understanding
of the tactics of intersubjectivity (Bucholtz and Hall 2004). The tactics of
intersubjectivity view individuals both as agent of their own identity
positions, and as subject to social structures beyond their control. Individuals
claim a social position through performance and habitual practice, but these
claims are subject to authentication by others. This study examines these
practices in a transnational group whose members may never meet one another in
person.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both Japan and the United States are
stereotypically viewed as monolingual nation-states, despite the presence of
considerable linguistic diversity in each area. At the same time, however,
middle class subjects in each country value multilingualism. This study examines
how club members reconcile seemingly contradictory values on monolingualism and
multilingualism.