* 0819535
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Redeeming Poisoned Spaces: Responses to Environmental Contamination and Health Research in the Mohawk Community of Akwesasne
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2008,02/28/2010
* Shepard Krech III, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 02/28/2010
* USD 9,180.00

The Akwesasne Mohawk reservation is adjacent to the General Motors Superfund
site on the NY/Canadian border. Scientists who conducted numerous health studies
on the residents concluded that Akwesasronon (people of Akwesasne) should avoid
eating local fish and gardening near the site to avoid further chemical body
burdens. This sudden shift in diet and activity has led to other health problems
and culture loss. This dissertation project investigates the effect of
environmental contamination and health research on the identity and culture of
this Mohawk community, and attempts by some community members to reclaim
traditional and agricultural activities. The research is focused on four areas:
1) the community's response to both the research process and the manner in which
health studies results were reported back to them; 2) how Akwesasronon
perceptions of their bodies changed due to the discovery of contamination, and
how this can expand the current anthropology of the body 3) how an altered
relationship with the environment has affected community identity and 4) on
current subsistence revival efforts being implemented at Akwesasne, and their
efforts to repair this altered human/ environment relationship. Semi-structured
interviews are being conducted with residents of Akwesasne who have been
involved in health studies and researchers who conducted the studies, in
addition to interviews and participant observation with subsistence revival
organizations.