* 0819662
* NSWP:  Magnetic Reconnection and Distribution of Accelerated Electrons in Solar Flares
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Haimin Wang, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Bellaire
* 12/31/2011
* USD 142,242.00

The Principal Investigator will study magnetic reconnection and the associated
flare energy release in the form of accelerated electrons, particularly in
sigmoidal solar active regions. The proposing team will carry out a
comprehensive investigation of solar flare and CME events using newly improved
hard X-ray (HXR) imaging and spectroscopy techniques. They will further examine
the association of ribbon-like HXR sources with sigmoid eruptions, while
quantitatively analyzing the spatial distribution of accelerated electrons and
its evolution in the flaring process, in order to establish the most realistic
3D magnetic reconnection scenario.

The PI plans to investigate flare ribbon dynamics, paying special attention to
the early phase of solar flare and CME eruptions. Using multi-wavelength data,
the proposers will examine the physics of interrelated flaring phenomena, such
as contracting-to-separation development and strong-to-weak shear change in
H-alpha and EUV/UV, footpoint-to-ribbon evolution in HXR, and sigmoid-to-arcade
transformation in EUV and soft X-ray (SXR). The PI will also use the HXR
spectral index as a probe to diagnose electron acceleration during flares. The
team will study the temporal and spatial relationship between the electric field
in reconnecting current sheets and the spectral index of detected HXRs, in order
to better understand the electron acceleration mechanism.

Given that sigmoidal structures are among the most important signatures for
impending space weather events, this study will contribute significantly to the
National Space Weather Program (NSWP) goal of mitigating the adverse effects of
space weather on society's technological infrastructure. The PI's status as a
beginning postdoctoral researcher constitutes this project's education and
training component.