* 0819473
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Motivation and the Social Information Search
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2009
* Anand Sokhey, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2009
* USD 7,376.00

This project tests mechanisms of social influence to build a more complete
understanding of how people engage their networks as they search social sources
for political information. Researchers have long studied how social
circumstances affect political behavior (e.g., Berelson et al. 1954), but the
current generation of scholarship has left the behavioral and motivational
assumptions of social searches for information theoretically underdeveloped and
empirically untested. There is currently limited knowledge of how and why
individuals actually use their networks to acquire and process political
information.

To fill this gap, this project considers the dynamics of individuals' engagement
with their networks, developing a theory that explains how voters seek out
information through their contacts based on the interplay of motivation,
ability, opportunity, and the demands of varied information environments. The
theory will be tested using data from a 3-wave panel mail study of registered
voters started in March and continuing in September and November in Franklin
County, Ohio. The panel study has been specifically designed around three major
political events: the Ohio presidential primary, the parties' national
conventions, and the general presidential election. This design will provide
leverage on how differently motivated voters alter the use of their networks as
they enter different stages of the electoral process.

This project is important because it makes both theoretical and empirical
contributions to the study of interpersonal networks. First, the theory takes on
fundamental assumptions of the established literature on social influence in an
attempt to resolve lingering ambiguity with respect to how individuals actually
engage their networks, and more specifically, with respect to the role of
motivation. Second, by measuring the content of political discussion in voters'
networks at various intervals, it will be among the first political science
studies to present empirical evidence concerning temporal social dynamics, while
providing an unparalleled glimpse into what the everyday political talk of
voters actually looks like. Beyond these intellectual merits, the project also
has the potential to achieve broader impacts with clear normative implications
for elections and democratic practice. A better understanding of how motivated
individuals search for socially supplied information may offer potential
remedies for an American citizenry that is often labeled apathetic and
incapable.