* 0819437
* LTREB: Fitness Consequences of Pleiotropic Androgen Effects in Free-Living Mammals
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2013
* Stephen Glickman, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 07/31/2013
* USD 450,000.00

Little is known about the effects of prenatal hormone exposure on offspring
fitness in natural populations. Therefore, the primary goal of this project is
to determine how brief exposure to varying concentrations of male hormones
(androgens) before birth influences subsequent behavior, survival and
reproduction in free-living mammals, using spotted hyenas in Kenya as model
animals. Preliminary data suggest that androgens, like testosterone, may have
opposing effects in female hyenas such that aggressiveness is enhanced while
fertility is compromised. In this study, investigators will follow into
adulthood cubs born to mothers with known concentrations of androgens during
late pregnancy, and manipulate androgen concentrations to which young hyenas are
exposed in the womb, to determine how long androgen-mediated effects endure, and
whether prenatal hormone exposure influences survival and reproduction. This
work will provide a novel and comprehensive picture of both immediate and long-
term effects of early androgen exposure as the investigators follow focal hyenas
from birth to adulthood, and closely monitor survival and reproduction in
multiple generations. The results of this study will be important, not only for
understanding the unique traits of spotted hyenas, but also for understanding
more broadly the role of prenatal hormone exposure in the generation of natural
variation in morphology and behavior, and the role of opposing androgen effects
in the evolution of mammalian life histories. This research offers unique and
highly valuable training opportunities for American students in an international
environment. The investigators will also continue training Kenyan graduate
students, supporting Masai students in rural elementary schools, working closely
with the public media, maintaining their educational website, and giving many
lectures each year to lay audiences. In addition, they will make core data from
this long-term project available to other scientists and the general public
through two web portals.