* 0819257
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Regional Political Authority Under the Vijayangara Empire, India
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2010
* Carla Sinopoli, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2010
* USD 14,268.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Carla M. Sinopoli, Elizabeth Bridges will conduct
archaeological survey at and analyze data from Keladi and Ikkeri, regional
capitals of the Vijayanagara Empire of medieval South Asia (ca. 1330s-17th c.
C.E.). These sites are located in what is today the state of Karnataka in
southern India; they were occupied as sequent capitals of a regional polity
which ruled under an imperial charter starting in 1499 C.E. Bridges' research
focuses on the systematic survey and documentation of archaeological remains
visible on surface today. Such finds include: temples, military fortifications,
structural remains of unknown function, carved stones, pre-industrial processing
areas, artifact concentrations, and water management and agricultural features.
These locations within what were larger urban and suburban contexts in the
Medieval Period are documented using GPS, photos, hand drawn maps, and written
descriptions. Artifacts, such as pottery (local earthenwares and imported
porcelains and glazewares), ground stone, metal objects, and coins, will be
collected for analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research focusing on imperial
regional capitals of the pre-modern era is important because it contributes
toward our understandings of how these large, expansionist states emerged, grew,
functioned, and collapsed. Many studies of imperial states have focused on core
capital regions at the cost of developing perspectives on the outlying areas
which underwrote the centralized prosperity for which most well-known empires
are recognized. This project contributes to the study of imperial dynamics
through documenting settlements at two regional centers which operated under the
central imperial authority. Documenting the presence, location, and variability
of features and artifacts that represent political, military, economic and
social activities at these sites will allow comparisons between the regional
settlements themselves, and between the regional settlements and the imperial
capital thus allowing for examination of change over time as well as the nature
of the relationship between empire and regional
authorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond contributing to social science research
questions, this project will have a broader impact by enhancing the
understanding of the science of archaeology in India, through both public
outreach and work within the academic community of South Asia and beyond. In the
local environs surrounding Keladi and Ikkeri, public awareness of the cultural
significance of monuments as well as smaller sites has been and continues to be
accomplished through face to face interaction, open meetings, and the sharing of
reports and publications with village assemblies. This project is also
coordinated with the Keladi Museum and Research Bureau of Kuvempu University,
Shimoga District, which curates exhibitions and assists in the sharing of
research between scholars in different disciplines. In addition to anticipated
contributions to refereed journals and professional publications in North
America and Europe, the author will make available results to the scientific
community in South Asia. Furthermore, the author has trained and will continue
to work with student and professional archaeologist volunteers in field methods
of the North American scientific tradition. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;