* 0819102
* Formal Characteristics of National Constitutions: A Cross-National Historical Dataset
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2008,05/31/2009
* Thomas Ginsburg, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Martinek
* 05/31/2009
* USD 97,245.00

What makes written constitutions effective and enduring? Despite increasing
attention to constitution-making among scholars, there is still little
systematic knowledge about constitutional texts themselves, not to mention their
consequences, relationship with de facto governance, or the factors that sustain
them over time. This project provides a resource for scholars and practitioners
to understand the content of formal texts and to assess fundamental research
questions. Having developed a chronology of constitutional documents,
replacements and amendments for all independent countries since 1789, the
investigators record a wide range of characteristics of the written
constitution, including aspects of political institutions, provisions on rights,
and formal features such as length and organization of the document. At a
descriptive level, the dataset will allow the investigators to track patterns in
global constitutional change and stability, and to develop measures of
similarity across constitutions. This will allow systematic study of
constitutional borrowing and interdependence. When combined with other datasets,
the project will also allow scholars to analyze the complex relationship between
formal constitutional rules and actual political practices across a large set of
cases. The investigators will also explore the merits and determinants of
constitutional endurance, including the crucial question of whether any features
of the constitution itself can influence its durability in a world of constant
change. The resource will make a significant contribution to basic research and
teaching, as the data will enhance our understanding of how constitutional texts
vary over time and across regions, cultures, and political systems. Perhaps most
importantly, the investigators will make a version of the dataset and associated
research available to constitutional designers with the assumption that a clear
menu of options will assist the drafting process itself.

