* 0819500
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Low-Power FM and the Paradoxes of Broadcast Localism
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Ted Magder, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Martinek
* 06/30/2009
* USD 8,950.00

PI and Co-PI: Ted Magder Cynthia Conti

New York University

Title: Doctoral Dissertation Research: Low-Power FM and the Paradoxes of
Broadcast Localism

SES - 0819500

Project Abstract

The Telecommunications Act of 1996 eliminated national ownership caps on radio
stations and relaxed ownership restrictions in local markets according to their
size, rapidly accelerating the concentration of the radio industry. Prompted by
their petitions and letters, on January 20, 2000, the FCC created the Low-Power
FM (LPFM) license as a regulatory strategy for bolstering localism in radio
broadcasting. The purpose of this research is to investigate the meanings,
rhetoric, and application of localism within U.S. broadcasting by exploring (a)
how LPFM became an acceptable strategy for restoring localism to U.S.
broadcasting, (b) LPFM stakeholders? conceptions of localism, and (c) how they
codify their conceptions in communication policy and practice. The research aims
to answer the question: how do stakeholders position and utilize LPFM to promote
and institutionalize the rhetoric of localism? The project examines FCC
documents relevant to the shaping, creation, and aftermath of the LPFM policy in
order to collect official definitions of localism and identify the Commission?s
plans for protecting and promoting the principle through LPFM service. The
project supplements textual analysis of documents with data from interviews
consisting of open-ended questions with members of the Audio Services Division.
Second, the project performs ethnographic case studies of selected LPFM
stations, collecting multiple forms of data to reveal the meaning and shape of
localism within daily LPFM broadcasting. It investigates stations varied in
geographic location and sociopolitical interests using site observations,
interviews with station managers, staff and volunteers, and textual analysis of
documents and media produced by station members. By investigating both official
documents concerning LPFM and lived realities at low-power stations, the project
explores localism as a conception that underlies the structure of policy, and a
practice evident within station operations and routines. In this way, the
project contributes to scholarship on U.S. communication policy by considering
the relationship between regulation that functions to institutionalize social
values and agents that respond by conforming to, negotiating, or resisting such
ideals. It also furthers understanding of the significance of local, community-
oriented speech in American democracy, and particularly speech by and for
marginalized communities by providing a detailed examination of small, rural
stations, which are often overlooked in popular market research and studies of
community radio. Additionally, the project serves as a source of information for
LPFM licensees by describing approaches to operating low-power stations,
including methods of generating programs and strengthening community relations.