* 0819592
* Predictive Cues and Multiple Fixation Search
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Miguel Eckstein, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Gottlob
* 08/31/2012
* USD 297,000.00

Human visual search involves scrutinizing the visual scene by making eye
movements to orient the center of the eye, the fovea, to regions of interest.
The high resolution of the fovea allows for processing of the visual world with
finer detail. In addition, visual search also involves attending to different
points in the visual scene independent of the eye position. Visual search is
also often facilitated when there are other objects (cues) that co-occur with
the target of interest. When the target object appears at unexpected locations,
people often have difficulty finding the target. Researchers have for decades
studied how such predictive cues benefit human search performance in a variety
of tasks. However, most of these studies were designed to prevent humans from
making eye movements to study the mechanisms of covert visual attention in
isolation. Little is known about the mechanisms by which cues and context aid
search in natural behavior where people are free to move their eyes. In this
proposal, the investigators seek to understand the mechanisms by which humans
use cues and context to plan eye movements and covert attention to optimize
visual search. They will develop mathematical models implemented on computers to
mimic the processes by which the human brain mediates visual search. The
research will allow for a better understanding of the mechanisms by which cues
and context aid visual search and also predict the benefits in accuracy of
perceptual judgments brought by the use of predictive cues in visual search.

Looking for a friend in a crowd, a car in a parking lot, and your house keys in
the living room are all examples of visual searches that humans do on a daily
basis. The proposed research is a necessary step to understand human visual
search in the natural environment. Visual search also include life-critical
tasks such as finding a tumor in a medical image or a potentially dangerous
object in a baggage x-ray. This research will also have the potential to provide
insights into the efficiency in life-critical search tasks. Finally, the
research can potentially contribute to better assessments of the expected
deficits of patients with attentional disorders (e.g., hemi-neglect) in
naturalistic search behavior. The work will integrate research and educational
activities at all levels (high school interns, undergraduate, and graduate)
through the development of a website that enables students and researchers
worldwide to enter experimental data through an internet browser and test the
various computer models.