* 0819857
* Using a Critical Zone Exploration Network to Quantify Controls on Earth's Regolith
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2011
* Timothy White, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2011
* USD 239,557.00

Intellectual merit. Since 2003, a group of scientists interested in
understanding the Critical Zone have stressed that we cannot predict earth
surface processes due to&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;i) the coupled nature of
biological, chemical, and physical processes,&lt;br/&gt;ii) the extreme
heterogeneity of the earth surface, and&lt;br/&gt;iii) the cross-disciplinary
nature of the prediction problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We have argued that to
advance the science will require a network of sites and scientists working
together to share data and models. The implementation of such a strategy will
necessitate considerable funding: therefore, the utility of such a large
investment must first be demonstrated. Toward that end, we propose herein to
show how a network of sites can contribute to addressing one first-order
question about the Earth:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What controls the depth and
chemistry of the Earth?s regolith?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal, we
define the regolith as the weathered mantle overlying parent bedrock or
alluvium. We discuss how the network of Critical Zone sites (Critical Zone
Exploration Network or CZEN) will be coordinated, and how this research effort
will explore the dependence of regolith depth on lithology and climate. We
address the coordination, implementation, and growth of the CZEN previously
identified at a community workshop at the University of Delaware. To further the
work started on the network, we request $20k for new activities at one site (U
Penn.: Puerto Rico). Within this proposal we also request $20k for each of three
new teams and sites (Colorado State Univ.: Central Plains; Colgate: Adirondacks;
Duke: Calhoun, NC). All teams propose to share data on regolith depth,
chemistry, and exposure or residence time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the end of
our proposed two-year funding period, the PIs of at least these sites will draft
paper(s) describing the first cross-comparison of regolith depth, composition,
and formation rates for shale, basalt, granite, and arkosic alluvium across
climatologic gradients. While significant observations about regolith as a
function of climate and time are available for some of the sites already, the
integration of data across lithology is in its
infancy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. The proposed work will expand the
site network, involve more personnel, and put data online (czen.org). In
addition to the elucidation of regolith development across climate and
lithology, both a real and a virtual CZEN will be established on four
lithologies (shale, basalt, granite, arkosic alluvium) across climate gradients.
This network will entice workers to investigate other questions across these
sites and will thus transform our understanding of how to answer Earth science
questions for the Critical Zone. As such, the network will act as an
advertisement for collaborative researchers to focus on the Critical Zone using
networks of sites, people, and data.&lt;br/&gt;