* 0819004
* Resistivity Probe Deployments at the Endeavour ISS
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Marvin Lilley, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 08/31/2012
* USD 109,683.00

Intellectual Merit: The concentration of chloride ion is a master variable in
controlling the chemical composition of high temperature hydrothermal fluids.
Chloride concentration affects this control via its importance in determining
mineral solubility. It has become apparent in recent years that the chloride
concentration in hydrothermal fluids is controlled primarily by phase
separation. Phase separation is, in turn controlled by the nature of the heat
source. Short term and very dramatic temporal changes in the nature and degree
of phase separation and the resultant changes in chloride concentration in
hydrothermal fluids as a result of magmatic diking and eruptive events have been
observed in recent years. Tectonic cracking events have also been seen to cause
temporal changes in both temperature and chloride concentration. Most of these
events have been observed and documented by infrequent ship-based sampling
efforts and the temporal nature of the events is poorly defined. We have
developed an in-situ instrument that is capable of measuring temperature and
fluid resistivity as a proxy for chloride concentration. This instrument has so
far been deployed at two RIDGE 2000 Program Integrated Study Sites (Endeavour
and 9ÂºN) for periods of several months, with excellent results. These data
records indicate short term changes in chloride concentration on a temporal
scale which was unexpected and that we have not had the ability to observe
previously. In this project we will evaluate existing data sets of temperature
and vent fluid resistivity in the context of the Endeavour seismic data set.
Under support of this project, we will deploy these instruments at the High Rise
vent field to augment data that will be collected at the Main Endeavour and
Mothra vent fields by instruments connected to the NEPTUNE Canada fiber optic
cable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: In-situ sensors are becoming
increasingly important as we shift toward trying to better understand the
temporal nature of processes working in hydrothermal systems as well as
oceanography in general. The insights gained during the development of sensors
capable of operating in the hostile environment of hydrothermal vents is likely
to be useful in many fields, in particular the efforts to develop seafloor
observatories in hydrothermal environments will be greatly aided by the
successful continued deployment of this sensor.&lt;br/&gt;