* 0819954
* Beyond the Monod Equation: Developing a New Theory of Geomicrobial Kinetics
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Brendan Bohannan, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

Intellectual Merit: The primary objective of this proposal is to develop a new
rate law for the kinetics of microbial metabolisms in geological environments.
The new rate law will advance the study of geobiology and biogeochemistry by
accounting for how available energy and microbial diversity control the progress
of microbial metabolisms in geological environments. &lt;br/&gt;Investigators
will develop the new rate law based on: (1) a theoretical model for
thermodynamic control of microbial metabolisms; (2) limits to microbial kinetic
parameters derived from collision theory and the minimum requirements for
microbial growth; and (3) the diversity and abundance of microbial taxonomic
groups in the environment. These three bases of the new rate law lead to three
primary research tasks: (1) quantifying the significance of thermodynamic
control on microbial metabolisms in geological environments; (2) developing a
theoretical approach that integrates microbial diversity into kinetic rate laws;
and (3) comparing the performance of the new model to traditional kinetic models
(i.e., the Monod equation) by comparing the output of both models to in situ
rates of methanogenesis as a test case. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;They will develop
the new rate law and apply it to predicting the seasonal rates of methanogenesis
in the sediments of Upper Klamath Lake in southcentral Oregon. Their preliminary
results demonstrate modest methanogen diversity but significant rates of
methanogenesis. Seasonal variation in organic matter loading into these
sediments leads to a wide range in electron donor concentrations, offering a
natural experiment for developing our new theory of geomicrobial kinetics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new rate law developed in this proposal accounts for
two critical, yet largely neglected, controlling factors on biogeochemical
processes in the environment, i.e., the availability of chemical energy and the
diversity of microorganisms. The new rate law therefore bridges the gap between
empirical rate laws (e.g., the Monod equation) applicable for pure-cultures
under energy-rich conditions and the kinetics of diverse microorganisms in
geological environments. The new theory integrates geochemistry and microbial
diversity into geomicrobial kinetics and, therefore, advances ongoing research
efforts that seek to understand geological environments as habitats for diverse
microorganisms. The new theory can be applied to the prediction of microbial
activities in both natural environments and polluted areas, or in remote sites
where direct sampling is not feasible. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
The proposed research addresses a compelling question in geobiology and
biogeochemistry &amp;#8722; how to predict the activities of diverse
microorganisms in geological environments? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigators
will use our multidisciplinary approach to provide learning opportunities at all
levels from K-12 to postgraduate. They will collaborate with science instructors
at a high school near the field site to develop a sustainable and replicable
classroom unit on the kinetics of methanogenesis and the carbon cycle. This unit
will be inquiry-based and will introduce students to environmental science via a
series of hands-on field and laboratory experiences centered on a common theme ?
the cycling of carbon in Oregon lakes. The unit will be distributed to all
Oregon K-12 educators, and it will be designed to meet a new requirement of the
Oregon State Board of Education for additional inquiry-based science instruction
in Oregon public schools. The proposed project will support two Ph.D. students.
PIs will also recruit three to four undergraduate students into our research
program via the support of the NSF-funded Undergraduate Catalytic Outreach and
Research Experiences program and the Summer Program for Undergraduate Research
at the University of Oregon.&lt;br/&gt;