* 0819263
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: What Determines Attitudes towards Income Inequality during Economic Development?
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Kenneth Scheve, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2010
* USD 12,000.00

Income inequality has been hypothesized to explain redistributive policies and
the form of government around the world. According to the classic literature on
the political economy of redistribution, one would expect that greater income
inequality leads to greater redistribution, and the failure to meet the
redistribution demand leads to social turmoil and even regime changes. The
empirical evidence, however, shows that more equal societies have greater
redistribution, and there is a significant unexplained variation in the effects
of inequality within non-democratic regimes. One potential explanation of the
mixed evidence is that there is variation in attitude toward inequality across
societies, time and individuals. To further our understanding of inequality,
this study proposes a theoretical framework for the variation in inequality
aversion and examines the question empirically in contemporary China. As a
result of this work, social scientists will be able to draw more precise causal
inferences about the relationships between inequality and individual prferences
and their consequent political behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To extend current
theories, this project seeks to answer the following question: what explains the
variation in individuals' sentiments toward income inequality during economic
development? The theoretical explanation for this variation emphasizes two
factors. First, the prospect of upward mobility leads to a positive view on
inequality, which is largely in line with previous literature. Second,
individuals use equality of opportunity as a principle of fairness to form their
attitudes toward income inequality. That is, individuals' opinions rely of
whether they think the poor should be responsible for their own deprivation.
This approach combines both the rational choice account and recent theories from
behavioral studies. In particular, this argument analyzes an often overlooked
factor in previous studies, that is, the role government in distributing unequal
economic opportunities across individuals. Empirically, China was chosen as the
case to be examined because inequality of opportunity is the key source of
income inequality there. A national survey is used to explore the subnational
variation. Limitations of previous studies are overcome by using objective
meaures of both individual upward mobility and inequality of opportunity as my
key explanatory variables. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project not only makes a
contribution to the social sciences in general, but it also can shed some light
on the trajectory of Chinese society. Economic development is the most salient
change in Chinese society in the last three decades. Rising inequality,
accompanied by economic development, has been drawing greater attention within
Chinese society. The results of this project helps us understand it consequences
for social, economic, and policy stability in China. Hence, this project
generates some valuable insights for social scientists and policymakers with an
interest in social, economic, and political development in China as well as
other developing countries.