* 0819310
* Doctoral Dissertation Research - Imagining "difference": Preserving culture and practicing science in Ayurvedic research in India
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Jean Langford, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Kelly A. Joyce
* 12/31/2009
* USD 7,930.00

This doctoral dissertation research, supported by the Science, Technology &amp;
Society program at NSF, examines the project of preserving India's traditional
medical system. This preservation project has resulted in inter-cultural medical
research, but sets modern biomedical parameters for confirming the authority of
indigenous (Ayurvedic) medical practice. The National Policy on Indian Systems
of Medicine framed by the Government of India in 2001 produces new terms of
legitimacy for Ayurveda at the international level. The policy adapts and
appropriates Ayurvedic science in response to demands for international
accountability in medical science research, with a simultaneous consciousness to
national positioning of the Ayurvedic medical system. This research brings
together tools and concepts from science and technology studies and
anthropologies of globalization to investigate three questions. First, how does
the state narrative of "preserving culture" interface with enforcement of
international standards of scientific research protocol (e.g., to validate
Complementary and Alternative Medicine research in the US)? Secondly, how do two
collaborating groups of scientists (biomedical and Ayurvedic) negotiate diverse
epistemologies to develop a "modern" Ayurvedic pharmacopoeia? Finally, how do
Ayervedic scientists understand "inter-cultural" medical research as they seek
to emerge as members of the global scientific medical community and full-fledged
members of the Indian health care community at the same time? The use of textual
and ethnographic methods to explore scientific work in this research permits a
focus on a unique stage in medical encounters in a postcolonial society. This
research shifts the focus beyond the incorporation of biomedical knowledge in
Ayurvedic clinics to the collaborative development of Ayurvedic knowledge with
biomedical scientists in pharmacological laboratories. This dissertation
research will add to the few sustained studies investigating the micro-level
encounter between two major systems of medical knowledge in India by identifying
the laboratory as the formative locus of this encounter. Additionally, this
research will situate the evolution of Ayurvedic knowledge as a unique moment in
the history of the institutionalization of traditional medical knowledges that
"preserves" by collaborating across national and global margins. The close
observation, participation and description that an ethnographic mode of inquiry
brings to this project will analyze not only discourses, but also the scientific
practices that may transform Ayurveda's own approach to the body, disease,
health and healing.