* 0819914
* NSWP:  Improving Quantitative Modeling of High-latitude Electrojet Conductivities during Magnetic Storm and Substorm Time
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2011
* Yakov Dimant, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Farzad Kamalabadi
* 07/31/2011
* USD 241,922.00

The project aims to improve space weather prediction capabilities by developing
an accurate model of electrojet conductivity under disturbed conditions. During
periods of intense geomagnetic activity, large currents along the magnetic field
lines can induce the formation of strong electrojets, plasma instabilities, and
turbulence. This turbulence gives rise to intense anomalous electron heating and
nonlinear transport which significantly affects the E-region conductivity.
Existing ionospheric models do not include these effects. This limits their
ability to accurately model magnetic storms and substorms essential for space
weather predictions. Accordingly, the objective of this project is to develop an
ionospheric-conductance module which will predict nonlinear currents and
anomalous electron heating during magnetic storms and substorms. This module
will consist of a look-up table and/or analytic expressions which will return
the E-region conductivity matrix for a range of altitudes, latitudes, driving
electric fields, and plasma and neutral atmospheric conditions. The project will
undertake three tasks: (1) quantitative modeling of anomalous electron heating
and nonlinear currents; (2) creation of a conductivity database which accounts
for turbulent effects; and (3) testing the modified conductivities in existing
magnetosphere and ionosphere simulation codes and models. Supercomputer
simulations of 3D E-region turbulence combined with modern theoretical analyses
will be applied to determine the heating and conductivities. The predictions of
electron heating will be validated using incoherent scatter radar and rocket
data, while the predicted ionospheric fields and currents will be tested against
magnetometer and SuperDarn data. In order to make the results useful and
available, they will be incorporated into the Lyon-Fedder-Mobary (LFM)
magnetosphere simulation code and the magnetosphere-ionosphere-thermosphere
model (CMIT), two codes that are widely used by the magnetosphere/ionosphere
community. The results of the upgraded LFM and CMIT will be tested against the
unmodified codes and observations. Particular science questions to be addressed
are: What is the nonlinear response of the high-latitude ionosphere to strong
convection electric fields? Why is the observed storm-time cross-polar-cap
potential often smaller than that predicted by existing models? Do the
turbulence generated changes in conductivities mostly or fully account for the
reason that models fail to account for observations?