* 0819440
* Collaborative Research: NSWP--Improvement and Real-time Updating of the International Reference Ionosphere with the Contribution of Auroral Electrons
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2008,10/31/2013
* Dieter Bilitza, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Therese Moretto Jorgensen
* 10/31/2013
* USD 123,736.00

The project has two main objectives: (1) Improve the International Reference
Ionosphere (IRI) model by including the contributions from precipitating
electrons to the model; this will result in better specification of the auroral
E region in the model; and (2) Develop, implement, test, and validate an auroral
boundary and/or Kp driven ability for nowcasting and forecasting of the polar
E-region ionosphere. The IRI is an empirical model which is one of the most
widely used by the upper atmosphere community to simulate the ionosphere for
given conditions. However, its representation of the auroral region has been
known to be somewhat compromised due to a lack of information on and
observations for the polar region. One of the processes not well parameterized
is that due to precipitating electrons, one of the major drivers of space
weather in the ionosphere and thermosphere. The precipitation not only creates
extra ionization in the high latitude ionosphere which leads to absorption and
disturbances in radio communication, but also enhances the Joule heating which
alters the thermospheric convection and composition. The altered thermospheric
convection brings composition changes induced by Joule heating from high
latitudes down to middle and low latitudes, even to the opposite hemisphere, and
can cause global ionospheric disturbances. The precipitating electrons will be
specified in the new IRI model by using a new Kp-dependent global auroral model
that was developed with FUV image data obtained by the GUVI instrument on the
TIMED satellite. The auroral model provides the global distribution of mean
energy and energy flux of precipitating electrons. With these, one can then
determine two key auroral E-layer parameters: the peak E-layer density (NmE) and
the E layer height (hmE). The new NmE and hmE values will provide the data base
for modifying the IRI E-region model to include the contribution from
precipitating electrons. The FUV-based global auroral model will also enable
better representation of the real time auroral oval conditions by providing
information on the boundaries of the auroral oval and the location of the peak
electron energy fluxes in different magnetic local time sectors. These will be
represented as a statistical model for inclusion in the IRI. The auroral E-layer
representation and the auroral boundaries in the improved IRI will be validated
with electron density profile data from incoherent scatter radars such as
Sondrestrom, EISCAT, and NSF's new Poker Flat Incoherent Scatter Radar, and with
precipitating electron data from the DMSP F13-F17 particle detectors.