* 0819739
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:Documenting Linguistic History in Bhutan: a Kurtoep/English/Dzongkha Dictionary [ISO 639 xkz; dzo]
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2010
* Gwendolyn Hyslop, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 06/30/2010
* USD 10,818.00

Kurtöp is a Tibeto-Burman language spoken by approximately 10,000 people in the
Kurtö region of northeastern Bhutan. Younger speakers exhibit a preference for
speaking Dzongkha, the national language, and English, leading to fears for the
long-term survival of the language. Community members estimate the current
generation of young adults will be the last generation to speak the language
fluently, making the present time crucial for the documentation of Kurtöp. In
this doctoral dissertation project, co-PI Gwendolyn M. Lowes of the University
of Oregon will undertake a significant onsite work with the language. Natural
language data in the form of conversations, folklore, songs and other forms of
discourse will be recorded. These oral texts, in conjunction with word-by-word
elicitation, will contribute vocabulary to a Kurtöp/English/Dzongkha dictionary.

By including Dzongkha glosses (in traditional 'Ucen and modern Roman
orthographies) the proposed dictionary will also be of interest to Bhutanese
scholars and Tibetologists interested in the development of Dzongkha from
Classical Tibetan and the relationship of these languages to Kurtöp. The
proposed dictionary will be of use to the community of Kurtöp speakers who
lament the impending loss of their language and wish to have a record of their
lexicon for posterity and/or language revitalization programs. By working in
collaboration with the community of Kurtöp speakers and the Dzongkha Development
Commission in Bhutan, the proposed project aims to effectively produce a
dictionary that will meet the needs of these two groups as well as those of the
academic community.