* 0819596
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Doing Being Hawaiian: Identity, Ideology, and Hawaiian Language Education Programs
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2010
* Alicia Snyder-Frey, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 07/31/2010
* USD 14,945.00

Graduate student Alicia Snyder-Frey, under the direction of Dr. Kathryn A.
Woolard, will undertake research on how efforts to revitalize the Hawaiian
language have affected Native Hawaiian speech and identity. She will focus her
research on the relationship between language revitalization, the pan-ethnic
social category known as "Local," and the linguistic expression of Local
identity through Hawaii Creole English. Hawaiian, viewed as a dying language for
most of the past century, has experienced a resurgence in the past twenty years.
However, it remains unclear what the consequences of Hawaiian language
revitalization efforts have been for shared conceptions of what it means to be
Hawaiian. The term, Local, refers to a social category that includes Native
Hawaiians and those minority immigrant groups who have a long history on the
islands, in contrast to the haole (Anglo-American) population, whose separation
is indexed by speaking Standard English. Local and Native Hawaiian identities
have long been linguistically indistinguishable, given that both are associated
with Hawaii Creole English. This may be changed by the revitalization
movement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher will undertake twelve months of
mixed methods, ethnographic field work in Oahu to assess the broader
consequences of Hawaiian language revitalization. She will employ participant
observation in and out of Hawaiian-language classrooms, semi-structured
interviews, questionnaires, and matched guise language attitude tests. Data will
be collected on the relationship between the overlapping social categories of
Native and Local for participants and non-participants in the Hawaiian language
programs, and on the ways in which community members link these identities to
the two linguistic codes distinctive of Hawaii. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Language
endangerment is a worldwide problem to which the response is frequently language
revitalization. This research project is significant because it will contribute
significantly to scholarly understanding of both the linguistic and social
consequencess of revitalization. In addition, the findings will be useful to to
local community members, such as teachers and language preservationists. The
research also will contribute to the education of a social scientist.