* 0819591
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Testing Group-Level Differences in Political Decision-Making
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Dana Adams, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 06/30/2009
* USD 10,105.00

Citizens entrust elected officials with the power to make important decisions.
Elected officials are supposed to lead as well as to represent their
constituents in part because direct democracy is impractical for a large
country. What are the consequences of indirect representation? If ordinary
citizens made policies, would their decision making processes and choices differ
from elected officials' processes and choices? Through an innovative
experimental design, this project tests the extent to which elected officials
and everyday citizens differ in their decision-making. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The contexts or situations of decision-making for elected officials
and everyday citizens are distinct, but in general, their decision-making
abilities should not differ. Thus, the question is whether elected officials and
everyday citizens are equally affected in their decision-making by the same
contexts. This project focuses on two contexts familiar to elected officials:
accountability for one's decisions and situations with high stakes and
consequences. The project tests the proposition that individuals who experience
lower levels of anxiety in contexts of accountability and high stakes are best
able to learn from new information. To this end, the project examines the
effects of anxiety on the quality of decision-making among both elected
officials and ordinary citizens. The main hypothesis is that elected officials'
experience with decision-making to lead to lower average levels of experienced
anxiety. Thus, elected officials' patterns of information-seeking and learning
from information should be less affected by contexts of accountability and high
stakes, as compared to everyday citizens' patterns of information search and
learning in the same contexts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To test these hypotheses,
the project uses a computerized information board, which describes a series of
hypothetical public policy problems and lists potential options that could solve
them. A total of 400 participants are sampled equally from two groups, everyday
citizens sampled from the general adult populations of Minnesota and elected
officials serving in Minnesota at the state and local level and are asked to
role-play the part of an elected official during the decision scenarios.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study is the first research in political science to
compare directly elected officials' and everyday citizens' political decision-
making. An important debate revolves around the idea of whether elected
officials are "trustees" who use insight and information to make decisions on
our behalf or "delegates" who merely act as stand-ins for constituents. Either
way, citizens implicitly trust elected officials to make decisions that are at
least as good, if not better than what they themselves might do. Because we know
little about the similarities and differences in individuals' political
decision-making, we can only speculate what a more direct form of democracy
would look like compared to our present system of indirect democracy. This
project contributes to this important goal of determining the best way for
citizens to have their preferences reflected in public policy.