* 0819678
* The Vertebrate Paleontology of Cement Creek Cave, Colorado
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2008,01/31/2012
* Wm David Webster, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Boush
* 01/31/2012
* USD 78,177.00

THE VERTEBRATE PALEONTOLOGY OF CEMENT CREEK CAVE,
COLORADO&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Steven D. Emslie, David Meltzer, and David
Webster&lt;br/&gt;NSF Proposal #0819678&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this study, we
will complete detailed systematic identification and analysis (radiocarbon,
stable isotope) of vertebrate fossils recovered from Cement Creek Cave, an
important late Pleistocene locality in the Upper Gunnison Basin, Colorado.
Preliminary work at this site in 1998 revealed an extremely rich paleontological
record with abundant vertebrate and plant remains dating from before the last
Ice Age, over 45,000 years ago, to more recent periods within the past 2000
years. The fossils from this cave are quite significant: no other high-elevation
site in North America has produced a near-continuous record of fossil
vertebrates that date before and after the last Ice Age (that peaked at about
20,000-18,000 years ago). Analysis of fossil shrews (Sorex spp.) and other taxa
recovered in the 1998 excavations, including some species no longer found in
Colorado or the Upper Gunnison Basin, indicate there were significant changes in
the environment surrounding the cave over time ranging from tundra to subalpine
forest to mixed sagebrush steppe environments. However, radiocarbon analyses
also reveal there are large gaps in the cave fossil sequence, which seemingly
correlate with episodes in glacial history. Whether those gaps are real is
uncertain; so too are the questions of how far back the Cement Creek record
might extend, and whether a more precise ecological and climatic sequence can be
derived from this rich fossil locality. Consequently, in summer 2007 we reopened
the area excavated in 1998 and expanded the original 1998 test pit to 1 x 1.5 m
and excavated to a depth of 2.2 m in 5-cm levels. These more extensive
excavations doubled the depth of the stratigraphic profile in the cave and added
thousands more vertebrate fossils to the collections. This expansion also
provided a richer assemblage of fossil material for additional analyses proposed
here to explore and test hypotheses on climate change and small-mammal community
structure and diet in the later Pleistocene and Holocene. Here, the fossils
recovered from this new excavation will be sorted and detailed identification
will be completed. Analysis of remaining unidentified material from the 1998
excavation also will be completed to provide a more thorough reconstruction of
vertebrate communities and environmental change in the Upper Gunnison Basin
since the Wisconsin Period. This research will be conducted with the assistance
of three undergraduate students at the University of North Carolina, Wilmington,
and one graduate student at Southern Methodist University. These students will
be involved in field and laboratory research and will develop independent
studies of the cave fossils using the scientific method and hypothesis testing.
The students will benefit from advanced research experiences and training, will
participate in museum visits for detailed analyses of fossil specimens, and will
develop their skills at scientific investigation and writing. Matching funds
from SMU will be used to involve the graduate student from that institution in
this research and how it applies to the paleoindian record in the Upper Gunnison
Basin. Public presentations, a web site, and exhibits of data from this project
will advance public understanding on the value and importance of protecting
archaeological and paleontological resources. The value of cave resources also
will be stressed in these presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;