* 0819761
* Testing with Weakly Identified Parameters and Estimation with Large Numbers of Parameters
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2013
* Marcelo Moreira, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2013
* USD 217,371.00

The proposed research agenda is divided into two related parts. The first part
proposes new inference methods with non-experimental data. Identification of
some important parameters is achieved by finding instruments that are correlated
with the endogenous variables. Since data often do not result from a controlled
experiment and most methods are not reliable for weak instruments, there is a
need for new econometric tools in most applied fields, such as labor economics
and macroeconomics. The second part develops reliable methods to conduct
inference in panel data models. Industrial organization and labor economics
models often have unobserved firm and individual characteristics. Commonly used
econometric methods are either not robust or dismiss relevant information in the
data. Developing more reliable methods when some characteristics are unobserved
offers a direct contribution to those fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both parts
propose new econometric procedures that are more reliable in practice when the
usual approximations to the distribution of commonly used statistics fail. To
achieve the research goals, finite-sample results from classical statistical
literature are extended to overcome limitations in the currently used
econometric procedures. This interdisciplinary theoretical work is buttressed by
extensive computer-generated simulations, which help assess the overall
properties of each procedure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This
proposal is motivated by situations in which standard asymptotic theory provides
poor approximations, such as when the number of parameters is large or when the
parameters are weakly identified. Obtaining reliable econometric procedures can
benefit related academic fields and impact policy making. For example,
educational reformers depend on accurate statistical methods to judge
alternative schooling policies. Policy makers employ models with large numbers
of parameters. The econometric methods in the current proposal, together with
computational tools to be developed, can help support the decision-making
process in each of these areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will
be shared with a broader public in several important ways, not only by teaching
and mentoring, giving seminars at academic and governmental institutions, and
publishing papers in widely-read journals, but also by developing computer code.
This critical aspect of the proposal will enable others to implement procedures
related to each of the two projects outlined above. The code will help
disseminate these new ideas, and will foster interdisciplinary research and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educational objectives related to this work
involve training and mentoring undergraduate and graduate students, and
including them in the research projects of the investigator. All courses taught
by the investigator encourage students to actively participate in research and
utilize improved econometric methods. As each new course is developed and
refined, it also stimulates new directions in research.