* 0819554
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Interactions Between Risk, Cooperative Experience, and Distribution Preferences
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Michael Munger, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2011
* USD 8,485.00

Experimental games have become a powerful tool in social science. The underlying
idea is simple: they aim to translate the salient features of real world
situations into controllable laboratory environments. Behavior in the laboratory
can provide insights into how things will play out in the real world by
showcasing what people value and how they reason. Moreover, a laboratory
environment enables investigators to tailor experiments, examining hypotheses
for which the real world offers little data and manipulating unique parameters
relevant to decision making. For a government agency in charge of auctioning off
broadband licenses or for a business like Ebay it is obviously valuable to know,
for example, if certain auction rules tend to benefit buyers or sellers.
Laboratory games are clearly useful for developing such
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;However, what makes a laboratory game sufficiently similar
to the real world, such that one is entitled to think that results obtained in
the former have any relevance to the latter? This is the subject of a serious
debate within the social science community. Two recent findings have highlighted
the complexity of the issues involved. One experiment showed that individuals
played economic games in systematically different ways based on whether or not
they thought the other players in the game were acting voluntarily. This is one
of many findings that suggest that "intentional contexts," which are difficult
to control for in conventional game structure, may nonetheless exert enormous
influence on behavior. Another experiment showed that people's preference for
"risk," which is an extremely important concept in politics and economics,
differed across various auction institutions. This suggests that people?s
preferences may depend on the institutions that elicit them - another finding
that would severely qualify the applicability of many experimental results to
real world issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study proposed here uses a novel
experimental protocol to examine a question of substantial public concern: what
is the nature of preferences for wealth distribution? The political philosopher
John Rawls famously made such preferences a cornerstone of his theory of
justice. However, experiments aimed at understanding these preferences have come
up with various conflicting results, not only cross culturally and cross subject
pool, but also within subjects over time. In addition to presenting a behavioral
puzzle, this raises serious questions about the democratic nature of any program
of distributive justice. Building on the recent findings mentioned above, the
present study employs unique controls for both risk preference and cooperative
intentionality in order to better understand wealth sharing preferences.
Moreover, these controls promise to grant new insight into the relevance of
intentional and institutional contexts for experimental games, which would be a
significant methodological advance in itself. Most importantly, the results may
illuminate the nature and role of normative ideals in economic behavior and pose
further questions about possibility of persuasively transforming
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this experiment, two independent groups first
participate in iterations of an identical, noncompetitive lottery-auction game
for individual rewards. The first group proceeds to play iterations of two
competitive auction games, also for individual rewards. The second group,
however, plays the noncompetitive game again, and in each iteration all players
receive the highest payoff achieved by any individual player. This both
encourages riskier individual play and gives subjects the experience of
increased earnings through the collective bearing of risk, whereas in the first
pool smaller rewards are earned in competition with others. Finally, members of
each group are&lt;br/&gt;presented with lottery tickets and, before they
"scratch" them, are asked to vote on whether they want the winnings to be
divided equally amongst the group members (the "Rawlsian option"), or retained
by the individuals who get lucky.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This experimental design
enables the investigation of three questions, viz: 1) Are earlier findings about
the institutional effects on risk preference replicated for larger sized groups,
2) On an individual level do risk preferences elicited by particular auctions
predict preferences for sharing the final lottery, 3) Does the experience of
cooperative earnings and risk sharing dispose members of the second group to
prefer sharing the final lottery more than the first? Answering the first
question will establish in more general terms the remarkable finding that
certain preferences depend on the institutions that elicit them. If institutions
matter in this way, game theorist must be much more cautious about extrapolating
from preferences derived in laboratory settings to various real world
environments. Answers to the second question will suggest whether there are
distinct classes of risk preference as well as whether general risk aversion is
a good way of explaining "Rawlsian" preferences. Answers to the third question
will not only suggest whether past intentional/institutional experiences can
shape preferences for wealth distribution, but also establish the relevance of
intentional/institutional contexts for behavior more generally. This
investigation thus promises to further understanding both of preferences related
to distributive justice as well as the relevance of intentional and
institutional contexts for economic behavior at large.