* 0819416
* Collaborative Research: Spatio-Temporal (4D) Atmospheric Environments of Jet Contrail Outbreaks for Potential Mitigation of Their Climatic Impacts
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2013
* Andrew Carleton, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2013
* USD 110,000.00

Aircraft-generated contrails and their resulting cirrus clouds may exacerbate
climate warming in those areas characterized by frequent commercial flights. For
the United States, the majority of persisting contrails occur as clusters, or
"outbreaks", which can persist over relatively large regions (i.e. U.S. Midwest)
for many hours. In particular, contrail outbreaks occurring in otherwise mostly
clear skies significantly modify radiation and energy budgets, and help reduce
the range of temperature in the lower atmosphere between day and night. Their
study would allow for evaluating human influences on climatic factors. Recently,
some airline companies and foreign governments have expressed a desire to reduce
aviation impacts on the environment and climate, including those related to
contrails. Realization of this goal requires both a fuller understanding of the
space and time-scale characteristics of outbreaks, and an ability to forecast
their occurrence in a timely manner, thus potentially permitting horizontal or
vertical diversion of high-altitude flights around such areas. This research
will determine the geographical and meteorological space and time scales of
clear-sky contrail outbreaks through analysis of high resolution satellite
imagery with data from composites of key meteorological variables near aircraft
cruising altitudes stratified by season and by U.S. sub-regions. These analyses
will form the basis for predictive (statistical) models of outbreaks with an eye
towards their eventual use in operational forecasting. Geographic Information
Systems will be used for both statistical model development---using conventional
meteorological data, satellite cloud and moisture retrievals, and aviation data
---and for validation of outbreak events conducted on independent data and time
periods. Advanced geostatistical techniques will be applied to the imagery
containing the outbreaks to simulate their removal and estimate resulting
impacts on the radiation and energy budgets and surface temperature. The
research also will further clarify the impacts of contrails on Earth surface
temperatures and will demonstrate the potential value of implementing the models
by focusing on an optimal subset of outbreaks for case study investigation.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;