* 0819392
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Effects of Pre-and Post Venire Publicity on Juror Decision Making
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2009
* Steven Penrod, CUNY John Jay College of Criminal Justice
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Martinek
* 05/31/2009
* USD 12,000.00

PI and Co-PI: Steven D. Penrod and Tarika Daftary

Title: Doctoral Dissertation Research: Effects of Pre-and Post Venire Publicity
on Juror Decision Making

0819392

Project Abstract

The proposed research is designed to investigate the influence of pre-trial
publicity (PTP) as well as post-venire publicity (PVP) on juror decision making
using a novel research methodology. Concern has long been expressed about the
possibility that pretrial publicity could compromise the rights of parties to a
fair trial and research to date has focused entirely on the effects of PTP.
Another factor that could potentially bias jurors is post-venire publicity
(PVP). PVP refers to publicity related to a trial that seated jurors may be
exposed to, wittingly or unwittingly. PVP has been a concern in the courts and
the basis for a number of appellate rulings. The proposed study will examine the
influence of PTP/PVP within the theoretical frameworks of ?framing? research and
?predecisional distortion.? It is proposed that depending on the media frame
jurors are exposed to ? a pro-prosecution frame, or a pro-defense frame, their
perceptions and inferences will be distorted in direction of the favored party.
This has significant legal implications as many news media sources are
substantially biased in one direction or the other and exposure could influence
decision making. The study will also examine the medium (print versus video) via
which the information is disseminated, as well as the amount of PTP. The study
will employ a shadow juror methodology where participants acting as mock jurors
will be exposed to trial evidence as it emerges from an actual trial. It will be
conducted online with participants in the venue in which the trial is to take
place as well as participants in a remote, potential change-of-venue location.
The study will be conducted in 6 sessions. Session 1 will be the exposure to the
PTP, session 2 will be vior dire questions and opening statements, session 3
will be prosecution testimony, session 4 will be prosecution and defense
testimony, session 5 will be defense testimony, and session 6 will be closing
arguments, and judge?s instructions. Participants will be sent condensed trial
testimony and asked to render opinions at multiple points along the way as well
as ultimate judgments. This study has a number of implications for the legal
system. With a better understanding of how external publicity operates,
traditional safeguards such as continuances, extended voir dire, jury
deliberations, and judicial instructions, which have been found ineffective in
the past, may be bolstered. The enhanced external validity of this study could
lead to greater acceptance of psycho-legal research in the courtroom. If jurors
are indeed influenced by the information they are exposed to during their
decision-making process, then a policy case could be made for procedural changes
in the court room, including, but not limited to, extended voir dire regarding
publicity exposure, granting of change of venue requests in appropriate
situations, and the need for enhanced sequestering of juries in high profile
cases. The study will engage a number of undergraduate and gradate level
research assistants and provide them with a research opportunity. The primary
site for the research is John Jay College-CUNY which has an extremely diverse
and ethnic student body. The results of this study will be presented at National
Conferences such as the annual meeting of the American Psychology-Law Society.
Additionally, they will be submitted for publication at leading journals in the
field.