* 0819049
* PASI:   Commutative Algebra and its Connections to Geometry; Olinda, Brazil, Summer 2009
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Claudia Polini, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 12/31/2009
* USD 100,000.00

This Pan-American Advanced Studies Institutes (PASI) award, jointly supported by
the NSF and the Department of Energy (DOE), will take place during the summer of
2009 at the Universidade Federal de Pernambuco in Olinda, Brazil. Organized by
Bernd Ulrich of Purdue University, the PASI will address recent developments in
commutative algebra and their connections to geometry. The activities will focus
on the following clusters of topics central to modern commutative algebra: the
homological conjectures, problems in positive and mixed characteristic, tight
closure and its interaction with birational geometry, integral dependence and
blowup algebras, combinatorial commutative algebra, Gr√∂bner bases, and
computational algebra, among others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activity will
promote collaborative interactions among algebraists and geometers mostly of the
Western Hemisphere. The program will bring together an ideal mix of participants
from graduate students to post-docs to junior and senior faculty. Expected
outcomes in this PASI will include: the opportunity to forge strong and lasting
ties among researchers at different stages of their careers and with diverse
mathematical tastes and backgrounds. Recruitment will be done through a web-site
developed for the PASI, newsletters of professional societies, and e-mail lists.
Results from the PASI will be disseminated through the PASI website and a volume
of proceedings of the school as a reference on which to build future activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;