* 0819200
* Collaborative Research on the Nature of Electoral Accountability
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2008,11/30/2008
* Amanda Friedenberg, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Humes
* 11/30/2008
* USD 55,463.00

A fundamental question in the analysis of democratic governance is how the
performance of politicians is linked to voters' decisions. This proposal
requests support for theoretical and experimental research on such electoral
accountability. In particular, the project will examine two mechanisms,
learning, where voters use past performance as an indication of politicians'
underlying characteristics, and sanctioning, where voters reward politicians for
good performance and punish them for poor performance, by which accountability
can be achieved. Each of these views leads to distinct conclusions about how
institutions affect accountability. As such, understanding each mechanism's
distinct role and their interaction has important implications both for the
scholarly study of democratic governance and for the design of institutions to
improve accountability.

The theoretical analysis will show that the standard view of sanctioning is
incomplete-in an important sense, it mischaracterizes how sanctioning works.
Given this, the experiments will test the hypothesis that in a wide variety of
natural models of accountability, sanctioning and learning operate
simultaneously and that learning can dominate sanctioning. The project
characterizes how and when that occurs.

This project has important broader impacts for political science and for policy
makers. There are a number of areas, such as term limits, district magnitude,
and transparency of policy-making, where the policy implications of models of
political accountability depend on whether one focuses on sanctioning or
learning. If both mechanisms are actually operative, existing policy conclusions
may be incorrect or incomplete. This research also provides opportunities to
enhance the training of graduate students through involvement in the
construction, design, implementation, and analysis of experiments. Finally, the
experimental data collected will be made publicly available so that other
researchers can explore further questions related to electoral accountability.