* 0819860
* Princeton Center for Complex Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2015
* Nai Phuan Ong, Princeton University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Daniele Finotello
* 08/31/2015
* USD 20,100,000.00

The Princeton Center for Complex Materials (PCCM), a Materials Research Science
and Engineering Center at Princeton University, brings together researchers from
five science and engineering departments to address pressing questions in
interdisciplinary materials research. PCCM employs an integrated team approach
in which experiment, theory, and simulation combine to underpin every
interdisciplinary research group (IRG); each IRG is further enhanced by
substantial industrial and international collaborations. The Center is committed
to the integration of its forefront research with science and engineering
education, extending from the postdoctoral and graduate levels, through its
Partnership for Research and Education in Materials with California State
University at Northridge and a vibrant Research Experience for Undergraduates
(REU) program, to serving as a regional resource for K-12 education in
materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center has four interdisciplinary research
groups. IRG A investigates two groups of unusual electronic materials, both of
which show superior thermoelectric performance at low temperatures and suggest
novel electronics applications. The first group includes a broad range of
conducting oxides with a triangular-lattice structure, motivated by findings on
sodium cobaltate revealing a rich array of electronic states. The second group
includes "Dirac materials," such as graphene and bismuth-antimony alloys, which
will allow direct examination of a theorized quantum state of matter, the
topological insulator. IRG B executes a multidisciplinary investigation of
molecular interfaces formed by non-traditional methods, such as stamping,
printing, lamination, and laser-induced deposition. These fabrication techniques
are moving towards applications in large-area and disposable electronic, light
emission, and energy conversion and storage devices based on organic materials,
yet very little is presently known of the interfaces they produce. IRG C focuses
on integrating self-assembling nanoscale building blocks, such as large organic
molecules, inorganic nanoparticles, and block copolymer nanodomains, into
defined structures of macroscopic dimensions for applications as diverse as
electron emitter arrays and photovoltaic cells. Self-assembly is an economical
and rapid fabrication approach, and integrating self-assembled nanostructures
into larger-scale units offers fundamental scientific challenges to accompany
these technological opportunities. IRG D aims to create new materials systems
with functionality derived from control of quantum degrees of freedom, such as
the interaction of carriers with surfaces and defects, coherent charge and spin
transport, and processes which limit the efficiency of coherent light emission.
By integrating nanostructure fabrication capabilities, novel high-frequency and
nanoscale characterization tools, and low-dimensional semiconductor theory,
researchers will significantly advance understanding of, and ability to control,
quantum phenomena for applications ranging from spin electronics, quantum
electronics, and quantum cascade lasers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In materials
education, PCCM's goals are threefold: 1) to educate a diverse group of agile
Ph.D. graduates and postdoctoral researchers, who will form the next generation
of materials faculty and industrial researchers, 2) to provide REU experiences
for a broad set of non-Princeton undergraduates, especially students from non-
Ph.D.-granting institutions, women, and underrepresented minority groups, and 3)
to serve as a regional resource for K-12 materials education, leveraged via
partnerships with other New Jersey organizations. Impact evaluation is a key
aspect of all educational programs. Technology transfer to industry is
facilitated through workshops and through the research collaborations with
industrial researchers that are part of each IRG, and through an early-stage
technologies program to develop Princeton inventions prior to transfer. The
open-access shared experimental facilities established and supported by PCCM
serve as a vital research resource for the region, with a broad user base
spanning academic, nonprofit, and industrial laboratories.