* 0819326
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: "We, the People of Eire" : Refugees, Asylum Seekers, and the End of Birthright Citizenship in Ireland
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Erin Moran, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Martinek
* 06/30/2009
* USD 11,920.00

This project examines the impact of the 27th Amendment to the Constitution of
Ireland on refugees and asylum-seeking women living in Ireland. Passed by
referendum in June of 2004 with a noteworthy 79 percent of voters in favor
(DEHLG 2005), Ireland became one of just a few European nations to abolish
birthright citizenship (jus soli). As a result, Irish citizenship is no longer
acquired by virtue of birth in Ireland, but is now restricted to blood-right
(jus sanguinis) or naturalization. Refugee and asylum-seeking women emerged at
the center of the debates over the Amendment when the state accused them of
coming to Ireland in the late stages of pregnancy to avail themselves of Irish
welfare and an EU passport. Given these events, the project employs ethnographic
and archival methods to understand the consequences of social and legal stuggles
over the boundaries of Irish citizenship for the everyday life experience and
possibilities of refugee and asylum-seeking women living in Ireland.The main
objectives are 1) to understand the impact of the amendment in the daily lives
of the women and their families, 2) to identify the discursive constructs about
the women that gave currency to the Amendment, and 3) to discern the ways in
which these meanings are being contested and negotiated by the women. Ireland's
abolition of jus soli may mark a major rethinking of traditional notions of
liberal democratic citizenship among modern nation-states as they grapple with
the human effects of globalization. In light of this, the study illuminates the
ways in which issues of race, kinship, and gender are all implicated in how
societies re-evaluate what constitutes membership, how these boundaries are
negotiated, policed, or contested, and how these struggles over meaning are
experienced in the everyday lives of subjects of socio-legal discourse.