* 0819081
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Development of Dialectal Variation in African American English
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2010
* Jessica White, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2010
* USD 11,358.00

African American English (AAE) differs from mainstream American English (MAE)
syntactically, semantically, and phonologically, but the development of these
systems in AAE has received little attention in the literature. For example,
both AAE- and MAE-speaking young children use question forms like (1) "What time
it is?" and negative statement forms like (2) "I don't want no drink" alongside
the MAE forms (1') "What time is it?" and (2') "I don't want a drink". However,
whereas MAE-speaking children discontinue use of forms like (1) and (2) as they
gain adult competence in MAE, AAE-speaking children continue using them after
the MAE-speaking children have stopped doing so. Moreover, since adult AAE
employs both (1) and (1') and (2) and (2'), at some point the continued use of
the (1) and (2) by AAE-speaking children is not an acquisition error, but adult
proficiency in their dialect. That is, child AAE speakers must be able to
acquire variation between (1) and (1') and (2) and (2') as part of their
linguistic repertoire.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award supports comparative research on the development of questions
and negations in the dialects of AAE and MAE spoken in New Orleans, Louisiana.
Using spontaneous speech and data gathered through experimental task from 5, 6,
and 7 year-old participants, this project will shed new light on appropriate
developmental stages for AAE, and it will help distinguish variation in child
AAE that is developmental from variation that signals successful acquisition of
adult question formation and negation. More generally, this research will
contribute to understanding the limits of variation across varieties of English
at different stages of language development. &lt;br/&gt;