* 0819717
* Collaborative Research ETBC: Peatlands as Carbon and Water Sinks under Warm Climates in the Susitna Basin, South-Central Alaska
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Zicheng Yu, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 09/30/2014
* USD 442,019.00

Collaborative Research ETBC: Peatlands as Carbon and Water Sinks under Warm
Climates in the Susitna Basin, South-Central Alaska

Intellectual Merits. Glaciers in Alaska and elsewhere are melting, and glacier
meltwater likely induces profound changes in hydrology and the functions of
peatland ecosystems. However, we don?t know the magnitude and mechanisms of
meltwater impacts at a regional scale nor potential feedbacks from the resulting
changes in peatland carbon and water storage. This proposal intends to evaluate
the hypothesis that climate-induced glacier melting has accelerated the lateral
expansion and vertical growth of peatlands in the Susitna Valley of south-
central Alaska.

This interdisciplinary project will document temporal and spatial changes in
peatlands at a regional scale over the last 1000 years using field monitoring
(interannual resolution), remote sensing (decadal resolution) and
paleoecological (decadal to centennial resolution) techniques in paired
glacierized and non-glacierized watersheds of the Susitna Basin. We will use
modern ecological and hydrological monitoring and geochemical tracers to
understand the connection between peatland dynamics and ongoing changes in
climate and hydrology. We will reconstruct peatland moisture and C accumulation
history to evaluate peatland responses to the Little Ice Age and Medieval Warm
Period (past glacier advance and retreat events).

Broader Impacts. This project will bring together 4 junior researchers from
diverse fields of ecology and paleoecology, hydroclimatology and low-temperature
geochemistry, and remote sensing and ice/snow science to study both long-term
ecosystem development and contemporary ecological and hydrologic dynamics. The
project will initiate collaboration and interactions among them to bring fresh
ideas and multidisciplinary tools together to conduct global change science in
high latitudes and high altitudes. The project will include interdisciplinary
training of graduate students and research experience for undergraduate students
at Lehigh and Ohio State Universities. An educational specialist at the Byrd
Polar Research Center at OSU will use the results from this project to develop
an innovative outreach program to improve the delivery of climate change
information to middle and high school teachers. Also, the project will
contribute materials to a new Polar Frontier exhibit (featuring Frontier Alaska)
in the Columbus Zoo.

The results from this study will provide valuable insights into understanding
the connections of climate change, glacier dynamics, hydrology, and ecosystems
in a changing world. The project will contribute to disciplinary areas in
hydrologic sciences, ecosystem studies, and geobiology and low-temperature
geochemistry. Furthermore, the project has merited the support by ETBC (Emerging
Topics in Biogeochemical Cycles) because it exemplifies interdisciplinary
research focused on the tandem investigation of climate-water-carbon dynamics
and physical-chemical-biological processes over a range of temporal and spatial
scales.