* 0819022
* Imaging the Spatio-temporal Dynamics of mRNA Transport and Translation in Response to Synaptic Activity
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2010
* Jason Dictenberg, CUNY Hunter College
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 07/31/2010
* USD 175,000.00

Intellectual Merit: Neuronal function requires the precise spatio-temporal
control of mRNA translation in dendrites in response to electrical and chemical
signaling events between cells. In addition, certain forms of synaptic
plasticity, which may be molecular correlates of learning and memory, are
mediated by protein-synthesis dependent changes within dendrites. It is known
that various mRNAs encoding proteins critical to synapse function are
transported into dendrites, where subsequent synapse activity regulates their
translation, but the timing and location between synapse activity and these
events remains unclear. This project aims to test the hypothesis that localized
synaptic stimulation results in the subsequent capture and translation of mRNAs
involved in the modification of activated synapses very rapidly, and that their
translation rates will be exponentially increased for a brief but significant
time after stimulation. Using molecular approaches including live imaging of
single mRNA particle movements and translation events in living dendrites, these
activities will be quantified in response to spatially restricted activation at
synapses of hippocampal neurons. mRNAs known to be critical for changes in
synaptic efficacy and localized in response to synaptic stimulation will be used
as markers for these transport and translation activities. These approaches
represent a significant departure from previous experiments that have used
biochemical fractions of subcellular components to assess changes in dendritic
mRNA abundance and translation rates since these are often not pure and do not
give spatial information about these processes in vivo. Establishment of live
cell assays for mRNA transport and translation in neurons will be an important
advance for the assessment of gene expression studies in response to localized
subcellular activation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This project is
attractive and well suited to training of students interested in pursuing
careers in the neurosciences. It is fundamentally intuitive since the
experiments are based in live cell imaging and therefore, the highly complex
processes of neuronal function can be visualized directly. In addition, the
techniques are based in digital fluorescence microscopy, which represents a
major new component to biological education at many levels of future curriculum
development in the biological sciences. Hunter College is one of the largest
public institutions in the United States that serves an underrepresented
population of ethnic undergraduate students that originates from around the
world. Students will be able to simultaneously take classes in related
neurobiological topics while applying them in the laboratory, where they will
learn basic molecular techniques coupled to modern cell biological approaches to
complex neurobiological problems, such as the molecular regulation of learning
and memory function.