* 0819448
* Alhacen's Optics: A Translation and Annotation of an Important Work of 13th C. Islamic Science
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2009
* A Smith, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 12/31/2009
* USD 60,567.00

Introduction: The PI plans to collate, edit, translate, and annotate the final
book, Book 7, of the Latin version of Alhacen's Opticsis, thereby offering to
make available a complete edition of a critical scientific work from the 13th
century. Some of the most important and interesting work currently being done in
medieval and early modern European history concerns the history of vision and
visuality. For this work to continue and flourish, access to good editions of
primary source material is essential. Alhacen's optical treatise is one such
source, in many ways, an essential source. Within decades of its appearance in
Europe in the 13th century, Alhacen's theory of vision had come to shape a
theological and scientific attitudes about vision, epistemology and cognition.
Traces of Alhacen's ideas can be found not only in all manner of scholastic
writings, but even in religious works, in preaching handbooks and devotional
treatises. Finally, there seems little doubt that Alhacen's ideas directly or
through scholastic thinkers who summarized his ideas, influenced attitudes about
art and artistic production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This early
13th century work is very important for understanding Islamic science, as well
as the extent to which European natural philosophy owed some of its innovative
ideas to these Islamic sources. It will be an invaluable resource,
internationally, and for many years to come.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: Although this is a very erudite scholarly production, it nevertheless
will prove to be invaluable to the international history of science, Islamic
science, and medieval studies communities; so, it does have a relatively broad
(given the context) scholarly impact.&lt;br/&gt;