* 0819714
* Improving the Accuracy of U-Th Coral Dating: A Test of Diagenetic Pathways, Models, and Effects
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2009,02/29/2012
* William Thompson, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 02/29/2012
* USD 420,000.00

This grant will attempt to answer three key questions regarding the apparent
mobility of uranium and thorium isotopes that severely compromises the accuracy
of uranium-thorium dating performed on fossil corals:&lt;br/&gt;1) To what
extent are the isotopes produced by uranium decay mobilized by the energy of
alpha decay?&lt;br/&gt;2) Are excess uranium decay products, which are
frequently observed in fossil corals, adsorbed onto the crystal
surfaces?&lt;br/&gt;3) Can exchange of uranium between corals and water alter
the isotopic composition of the coral with no change to the coral?s uranium
concentration?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: In light of current
concerns over the impacts of rising sea levels on human welfare, understanding
potential magnitudes and rates of future sea level change is crucial. A well-
dated and detailed history of past sea level change would provide important
information in this regard. One of the premier methods for reconstructing the
history of sea level is the dating of fossil corals that once grew near the sea
surface. The advantages of this approach include the wide spread distribution of
fossil corals, improvements in mass spectrometry allowing precise dating as far
back as 600,000 years, and detailed stratigraphic correlations that can be used
to determine abrupt, sub-meter scale sea-level changes. Unfortunately, these
potential advantages are largely unrealized due to the widely recognized but
poorly understood mobility of the uranium and thorium isotopes used for dating.
Observations of systematic alteration trends in fossil corals and the idea that
these trends might be explained by the systematic addition of recoil-mobilized
uranium decay products have reinvigorated interest in coral diagenesis. Several
models have been proposed to correct U-Th coral ages for such daughter addition,
and have been shown to improve the age agreement of corals from the same fossil
reef. However, the accuracy of such corrected ages remains controversial, in
part because the physical mechanisms assumed by the models have not been tested
directly. There is an urgent need to better understand these mechanisms, so that
we might improve our understanding of past and future sea level change. This
grant will undertake a series of experiments designed to test these critical
assumptions.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The data that collected will provide
fundamental information for scientists studying a broad variety of fields:
carbonate chemistry, mineral-fluid interactions, paleoceanography,
geochronology, and paleoclimate. Results and methods will be made available to
the scientific community through publications in peer-reviewed journals and
presentations at international conferences. Results and implications will be
communicated to the public through interviews and talks. The team will use
small-scale projects related to this research to introduce undergraduate
students to laboratory techniques and the theory and practice of U-Th dating.
Internships will take place through the WHOI Summer Student Fellowship Program.
In addition, this proposal will support the careers of two junior scientists
engaging in collaboration as a way of amplifying the impact of their combined
scientific insights.