* 0819246
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Indian English Ownership, Lay-Attitudes and Variation
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2010
* Vineeta Chand, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2010
* USD 5,941.00

Language is important for communicating ideas, but is equally critical as a
means of creating and presenting social identity. Postcolonial nations with
bilingual populations offer an opportunity to examine how colonially introduced
languages are incorporated within modern identities, what long term effects
colonialism may have on postcolonial English status, and the social status of
these English speakers. Among the nexuses of English appropriation, India stands
out worldwide as the largest English speaking nation, with the nativized English
variety of India, IE, intertwined with the recent growth of India's economy,
increased job outsourcing to India and valorization of Western culture. There
are several disturbing trends for English speakers in the postcolonial setting
related to the quality and "correctness" of such varieties as compared to
"traditional" English dialects. Indians are increasingly "allowed" to be
considered native English speakers; however, their dialectal features, often
termed "Indianisms," continue to be viewed as "wrong" or "needing fixing,"
denigrating IE as an incorrect, non-standard code. This conflict raises
important theoretical questions central to socio-cultural and linguistic theory
about the relationship between language change and changes in how people
understand and use languages in the local setting. This project thus explores
how globalization is affecting IE: urban 21st century India is rife with
outsourcing, flooded with western media, and has a blossoming middle class.

Within this context, IE, as a case study, illuminates how globalization
interacts with IE, both structurally and socially. This research documents and
theorizes changes in the post-colonial setting, by focusing on IE speakers as
social agents who, through their language practices and beliefs, support and
challenge local and external social ideologies to create a local, nativized
modern English identity. Under the direction of Dr. Janet Shibamoto Smith,
Vineeta Chand will address these relationships through interviews with four
generations of IE speakers in New Delhi, India in order to understand how people
feel about and where they use IE, life goals, and language plans, and how these
link to both the development of IE as a distinct English variety with unique
properties, and the development of a modern, local IE identity.