* 0819612
* Collaborative Research:  Application of Control Function Approach in Econometrics
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Geert Ridder, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2011
* USD 88,020.00

This project studies identification and estimation in models with independent
variables correlated with nonseparable errors if an instrumental variable is
available. The first part compares two identification methods of the average
structural function (ASF), used in the recent nonparametric simultaneous
equations literature. The first uses the conditional moment restriction (CMR)
and identifies the ASF only if the model is structurally separable. The second
uses the error of a first stage, the control variate, to identify the ASF.
Extensions include investigation of the structural model, i.e. invariant in the
first stage, the nature of other identification methods as local instrumental
variables and other estimands as the quantile structural function. Preliminary
analysis indicates that the conditional moment restriction approach does not
identify anything structural, thereby clarifying the role of control function in
the identification of causal relationships. In the second part, the theory
developed in the first part is applied to the nonlinear regression model with
nonclassical measurement error and practical estimators are developed for its
parameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both applications look at the existing
difficult problem in the literature from a completely different perspective. The
first application clarifies the relationship between the CMR and causal
analysis. The existing literature has used the CMR without realizing the nature
of its identified object. The second application tackles the nonclassical
measurement error problem, which has not been satisfactorily addressed in the
literature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad Impact: The first application is expected
to decrease the prominence of CMR in the literature. The second application is
expected to have an immediate impact on empirical practice.&lt;br/&gt;