* 0819759
* Collaborative Research: Neoproterozoic Rifting of Utah: Geochronology, Tectonics, Sequence Stratigraphy
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Carol Dehler, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 07/31/2012
* USD 88,931.00

Various plate reconstructions have been proposed for break up of Rodinia and for
the associated rifting history of western Laurentia, but models remain
controversial. To address this problem, a research team from Idaho State
University, Utah State University, and Weber State University is investigating
Neoproterozoic (between 1,100 and 542 million years ago) deposits in Utah and
southern Idaho in order to test different models for rift initiation and
development: 1) protracted rifting at approximately 750 million years ago
associated with an initial breakout of a magmatic plume; 2) continental
separation between 720 and 670 million years ago; or 3) rift initiation near the
beginning of the Cambrian (about 540 million years ago). The team will employ an
integrated field, stratigraphic, structural, zircon provenance, and
geochronologic study of Neoproterozoic strata. Specific approaches include:
detailed sequence stratigraphic, sedimentologic, and petrologic studies of
critical sections; geochemical trace-element analysis of associated volcanic
rocks to determine tectono-magmatic setting; U-Pb dating of primary volcanic and
detrital zircons using a combination of laser ablation-multicollector-
inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry, sensitive high-resolution ion
microprobe, and thermal ion mass spectrometry methods; Ar-Ar dating of
hornblende from basalt flows; Hf isotopic analysis of zircons; and modeling of
regional subsidence histories. U-Pb dating and Hf isotopic analysis of detrital
zircon populations will shed light on source areas and paleogeography, with ages
of youngest reworked volcanic zircons providing important brackets for maximum
depositional ages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Neoproterozoic marks some of the
most profound geologic changes in Earth history, including break up of the
supercontinent Rodinia, extreme climate changes, and rapid biologic
diversification. Various plate reconstructions have been proposed for break up
of Rodinia and for the associated rifting history of western Laurentia, but
models remain controversial. Evidence important for the resolution of this
controversy lies in the Neoproterozoic strata of Utah and southeastern Idaho.
These strata form a critical, but incompletely understood part of the rifted
western margin of Laurentia and subsequent Cordilleran orogenic belt. This
research project will make important strides in understanding the history of
these beds and lead to discrimination between opposing models for the early
tectonic development of the western United States.