* 0819122
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: The Aggregation of Local Preferences: Local Social Policy in China After 1994
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2009
* Tai-Wei Liu, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2009
* USD 12,000.00

Despite rapid economic growth, many people in China still cannot afford to
provide for their basic needs such as health and education. The Communist Party
leadership in Beijing ("the Center") believes that this problem stems not just
from poverty but also from local governments' failure to provide adequate social
goods. Local governments in China are responsible for expenditures on all social
goods including pensions, health care, and unemployment insurance. Beginning in
the 1990s, the Center has pushed for a series of national standards calling for
higher social spending at local levels; but its effort has been unsuccessful.
Since 1994, when the Center consolidated its political and fiscal control and
increased its revenues, the nation?s total social spending has declined and
variation in social spending by local governments has increased. Why? The Center
may bear some responsibility for these disappointing outcomes by its decision to
grant some local governments the right to deviate from the national standard,
but not others. After 1994 why did the Center delegate social policymaking
authority instead of enforcing uniform levels of high social spending in all
localities? More importantly, when local governments were given authority, why
did some spend more and others less?&lt;br/&gt;Both questions are approached
through a model of strategic interaction between the Center and localities. The
Center pushes local governments for higher social spending to head off potential
social unrests and maintain regime stability; but local officials seek private
rents by focusing on economic projects rather than social goods. In this model,
the Center?s delegation decision may be influenced by the monitoring costs
originated from the hidden information in a locale about what level of spending
it will adopt. Specifically, the Center would delegate in cases where the
budgetary decisions are decentralized to the county level rather than being made
at the provincial level because it is more costly for the Center to learn the
hidden information from county-units, and local governments have a substantial
information advantage. As for why localities would spend differently, the model
suggests that the career incentive of local officials plays a role. In cases
where local leaders are more interested in advancing their political careers
rather than predating short-term revenues, they would spend more on social goods
in order to impress the Center, which holds the ultimate personnel appointment
power.&lt;br/&gt;The model is tested using a new dataset on the development of
China?s local social policy based on local policy yearbooks across all provinces
and lower levels of government. In-person interviews with government officials
supplement this information. In addition, detailed case studies comparing four
provinces provide more information concerning the questions being
examined.&lt;br/&gt;This study enriches our understanding of China?s opaque
political system and the logic of social welfare provisions in non-democracies.
The analysis sheds light on why current practice conflicts with the dominant
view in the political science literature, which would predict that social
spending would be low in non-democracies.