* 0819060
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science:  The Fifth Source and the Ballot Box:  Public Money, Candidate Time and Changing American Elections
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2009
* Theodore Lowi, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2009
* USD 10,864.00

Nearly half of the American states spend millions of dollars on some form of
public election financing. In state legislative elections, there is a growing
tendency for states to directly subsidize candidates who agree to abide by pre-
set spending limits. Despite the growing ubiquity of large subsidies and well-
defined spending limits, political scientists have not fully considered the
impact of these systems on campaign dynamics. Much previous analysis of public
funding has assumed that the infusion of money holds the potential to create
more competitive elections, but little has been discovered regarding the causal
chain between subsidy and competition.

This project focuses on the relationship between public money and how candidates
spend their time engaging voters, and on whether altered campaign dynamics
translate to changes in voter behavior. Using survey and interview data from
candidates in twelve states, a theory of voter mobilization in publicly funded
elections is developed and tested. The theory posits that publicly-funded
candidates spend more time engaging voters. At the same time, it predicts that
interest groups unable to influence elections monetarily will directly support
mobilization efforts. In short, voters in publicly-funded elections are more
likely to be mobilized, leading to higher levels of efficacy, knowledge, and
participation.

Survey data will be supplemented with election returns, turnout statistics, and
campaign finance disclosures. Various statistical models will be used to analyze
the effect public money has upon candidate entry, time allocations, and voter
mobilization. Quantitative findings will be supported with qualitative candidate
interviews.

This research will advance political scientists? understanding of the manner in
which public election financing changes campaign dynamics. First, the analysis
transcends election statistics, incorporating the strategic and emotional
concerns of candidates. Second, the project considers the affects of this
altered strategic environment on political elites, groups, and the electorate at
large. Suggesting that public election financing changes strategy and emotion
system-wide, the theory broadens the criteria with which public financing will
be evaluated. The project also extends current research methodologically,
employing a mixed methods approach focused on political actors in publicly-
funded systems.

Finally, this research supports the broader academic and policy communities.
Several states are seriously considering the implementation of public funding
for future elections. Understanding the manner in which public financing changes
election strategy and voter mobilization is of paramount importance as these
deliberations continue. The project will provide the most complete picture to
date of how political actors and voters respond to the availability of public
election subsidies.