* 0819507
* Power Sharing, Agency and Civil Conflict
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2008,12/31/2011
* Kaare Strom, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Humes
* 12/31/2011
* USD 356,611.00

In order to prevent the occurrence or recurrence of armed conflict in societies
at risk, scholars and practitioners commonly recommend power-sharing
arrangements that include all previous parties to the conflict and any potential
spoilers. Power-sharing institutions include grand coalitions, federal
institutions, and proportional allocations of government positions and benefits.
Existing scholarship on power-sharing institutions, including cross-national
quantitative studies as well as historical case studies, recognize that power-
sharing comes in many forms, but argue that such institutions generically have
beneficial effects. Yet, existing studies of power-sharing have tended to use
fairly simple institutional measures and not to differentiate between
arrangements that serve to include factional representatives in government
(power-sharing institutions) and those that exclude them (power-dividing
institutions). Moreover, there has been little rigorous theoretical recognition
of the ways in which power-sharing may affect government decision making or the
relationships between politicians and their constituents. Finally, the empirical
literature on power-sharing has suffered from selection bias, as studies have
focused much more on societies that have actually experienced civil conflict
than on societies that have faced similar challenges but avoided overt conflict.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project lies in the fact
that it addresses each of these issues. It improves the theoretical
understanding of both power-sharing and power-dividing institutions by
identifying and distinguishing their most important features. It develops game-
theoretic models to examine the short- and longer-term effects of these
institutions on conflict and public goods provision. The project will create a
quantitative data set that covers all major states from 1946 to the present and
reports specifically on the mandate and implementation of power-sharing and
power-dividing institutions. The data set will include both societies that have
undergone civil conflict and societies with no such history but having
characteristics that put them at risk for civil war. Such data help avoid the
selection bias of many previous studies and help determine whether post-conflict
situations are in fact more difficult than other situations in which there is a
credible threat of internal violence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact
of this project is that it will give scholars and policy makers a better
understanding of the strengths and weaknesses of different institutional
strategies for reducing the civil conflict. Civil conflict is by far the most
common type of armed conflict in the world today, and it is responsible for the
great majority of military and civilian casualties. The project will assess the
performance of political institutions often adopted in societies that have
undergone civil conflict, and it will for the first time allow us to compare the
performance of such societies with others that are at risk of war but have not
yet experienced civil conflict. Finally, the project will generate an extensive
data base on transitional aspects of political institutions, data that are
currently unavailable and that will provide substantial benefit to other
researchers in this very important field of study.