* 0819266
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: A Social Science Investigation of Violence along the Migrant Trail in Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2011
* Linda Green, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 02/28/2011
* USD 8,711.00

University of Arizona graduate student Wendy Vogt, advised by Dr. Linda B.
Green, will undertake research on the violence experienced by Central American
migrants travelling through Mexico to the United States. Mexico has become a
major transit country for Central American migrants hoping to reach the United
States. Increasingly, these migrants have violent encounters, particularly
between Guatemala and Mexico City. Vogt's research will be focused on what
produces this violence and why it has increased in recent
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vogt will employ a multi-methods approach. She will
use archival records in southern Mexico and Mexico City to document changes in
government policies towards immigrants as well as recent changes in economic
patterns in the communities through which the migrants pass. In addition to the
archival component, Vogt will identify three key communites along the migrant
trail. In each of these communities she will employ ethnographic methods such as
participant observation, structured and semi-structured interviews, and oral
history elicitation. These data will allow Vogt to link local experiences with
larger national and international processes, on the one hand, and, on the other
hand, to determine at how these external factors are mediated locally through
everyday social relations between and among Central American migrants and local
Mexican residents. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is important in that it
will contribute to social science theory about how changes in national and
international processes connect with regional and local lives. The research also
may contribute to developing policies for protecting both migrants and the
communities through which they pass from escalating violence. Finally, the
research will contribute to the education of a social
scientist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An anthropological focus on the journey will
contribute to a more complete understanding of how migration processes and
violence impact not only migrants, but reshape the lives of multiple actors in
meaningful and material ways.