* 0819657
* Communities in Crisis: Kayenta Diaspora and Salado Coalescence in Southwestern New Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* J. Brett Hill, Archaeology Southwest
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2012
* USD 203,523.00

Past human responses to environmental and social crises have current relevance.
Two common responses are migration and aggregation, movements that can generate
both multi-ethnic communities and communities in diaspora. A multi-ethnic
community shares a place, but is separated by culture. A community in diaspora
shares a culture, but is spatially dispersed. Both are challenging to sustain.

With National Science Foundation support, the Center for Desert Archaeology will
examine evidence for both community types in southwestern New Mexico during the
late prehistoric period, an interval of environmental change, social upheaval,
and demographic collapse. In the late 13th century Kayenta groups from drought-
stricken northeastern Arizona walked over 300 kilometers to the river valleys of
southern Arizona and southwestern New Mexico. Southern Arizona valleys were
already occupied by established Hohokam irrigation communities whose residents
were culturally distinct from the Kayenta migrants. Results of a previous NSF
grant (No. 0342661) indicate prolonged conflict between Kayenta and Hohokam in
some regions. Elsewhere, integrative religious and cultural institutions
developed within two generations resulting in a mixed Hohokam-Kayenta identity.
In addition, a Kayenta community in diaspora that linked the scattered migrants
and their descendants can be traced for at least three generations. Valuable
goods (particularly obsidian for weapons) and information regarding ceramic
style (with ritual significance) was circulated by this spatially dispersed, but
culturally connected, community.

When the population of southern Arizona plummeted in the late 14th century,
limited evidence suggests some of the mixed Kayenta-Hohokam groups migrated into
southwestern New Mexico where they joined small Kayenta populations living in a
relatively isolated frontier. This second migration resulted in the formation of
a number of villages along the Upper Gila River tributaries and in the Mimbres
Valley. The current project will test this basic premise with a much larger data
set and examine how these 14th century communities were organized. Did many of
these villages belong to a revitalized Kayenta community that had found a new
homeland? Alternatively, did Hohokam-Kayenta mixing and a century of dispersal
render Kayenta identity meaningless? If so, was each village an independent
community with only weak ties to other villages?

Research objectives will be achieved by 1) demographic reconstruction at 50-year
resolution based on a recently refined ceramic chronology, 2) source, frequency,
and stylistic analyses of relevant decorated ceramics, and 3) source, frequency,
and technological analyses of obsidian artifacts and samples. Use of existing,
unanalyzed collections from sites in and around the project area will be
emphasized. These collections are curated in various Arizona, New Mexico,
Colorado, and Ohio repositories. In addition, ceramic and obsidian artifacts
will be obtained from several unsampled sites with minimal impact, either by
surface collection or small excavation units in trash mounds. Of particular
interest is the only known village near the primary obsidian source used by
Kayenta migrants in southern Arizona. This important site will be tested by a
field school for undergraduate students from Hendrix College, Arkansas and
staffed by University of Arizona graduate students, giving valuable training to
both.

This study will enhance understanding of migration and community formation
during intervals of severe stress and demographic collapse. It will also provide
a perspective on diasporas from the vantage point of traditional societies where
pedestrian travel was the only means of transportation. Previous diaspora
studies have emphasized modern and ancient state contexts with more developed
transportation and communication technologies.