* 0819562
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Regulated, Supervised and Assisted Subjects: Examining How Individuals Navigate Parole
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2008,04/30/2010
* Robert Werth, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Christian A. Meissner
* 04/30/2010
* USD 11,996.00

Parole, a type of punishment involving State custody over felony offenders,
refers to the period of supervision in the community following release from
prison. In California, the site of this research project, virtually everyone
coming out of State prison is subject to parole supervision. As framed by the
State of California, parole is oriented toward the twin goals of ensuring public
safety and aiding former prisoners in the process of transitioning from prison
to the community (referred to as prisoner reentry). Thus, parole lies at the
intersection of two general and contradictory trends: risk management and
rehabilitation. In theory, the multiple goals and elements of parole are
designed to work in concert. While the twin goals of regulation and
rehabilitation appear as plausible policy objectives, under closer examination
they present multiple contradictions and paradoxes that decrease the likelihood
that individuals will successfully complete and discharge parole.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research examines how individuals experience and
respond to parole, including the regimes of regulation, supervision and
rehabilitation within parole and the contradictions these produce. It also
investigates the ways in which the (re)emergence of rehabilitation and prisoner
reentry as central goals are re-shaping parole. Specifically, this research
examines the following research questions: (1) How do individuals on parole
perceive and enact the rules/regulations of parole? (2) How do individuals make
sense of and navigate the surveillance requirements (e.g, meetings with agents,
drug testing, and curfews) of parole? And finally, (3) how do individuals
perceive and utilize parole's reentry services and efforts to assist
them?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research is conducted with both parolees and parole
personnel (e.g., parole agents and supervisors) throughout the State of
California. Data are collected through a combination of: (1) focus groups, (2)
archival/document analysis (e.g., examining legislative documents, parole
training materials, and court cases related to parole), (3) semi-structured
interviews, and (4) participant observation (i.e., direct interaction and
observation with individuals over a sustained period).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
results of this research will contribute to a better understanding and
theorizing of how individuals on parole respond to the parole agency's efforts
to regulate, supervise and govern their conduct. The recent increase in the
population of parolees has coincided with a decrease in funding and resources
for parole services. At the same time, the rate of individuals who successfully
complete parole has declined and parole revocations account for a greater
proportion of prison admissions. Given this situation, an understanding of how
parole functions from the perspective of parolees can provide invaluable
insights to be incorporated into correctional, as well as parole, policy that
seeks to improve public safety and reduce parolee recidivism. This research has
the potential of providing concrete insights into how parole contributes to
public safety, and if increased regulation and surveillance are effective uses
of parole resources.