* 0819625
* Muslim Integration into EU Societies: Comparative Perspectives
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* David Laitin, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2010
* USD 344,320.00

The issue of immigration into the advanced industrial states is of fundamental
importance to our futures as democracies. The forces of the global economy have
over the past generation given opportunities to ambitious and sometimes
destitute people of poor countries to improve their life chances in the West.
Yet these waves of immigration have been challenging to the native populations,
many of whom see the immigrants as cultural and economic threats. Perhaps the
most challenging situation for the incorporation of immigrants, especially in
Europe, is that of Muslim migrants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In light of this
social and political concern, this research project seeks to measure whether
there is a Muslim disadvantage in economic mobility and socio-political
integration for immigrant families into Europe; and if there is such a
disadvantage, to determine its cause. That the social and political relations
between Europe and the Muslim world are politically fractious underlines the
importance of this project. It will focus on France, the European country with
the largest population of people of Muslim origin (estimated to be about five
million). More specifically, the project raises two research questions: Do
Muslim immigrants and their descendants face greater hurdles integrating into
European societies than they would have faced were they alike on all other
factors but were non-Muslim? If they do face greater hurdles, what causes the
differences and what sustains them?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To answer these
questions, the project addresses one fundamental methodological problem that has
held back past researchers from answering these questions convincingly, and then
employs three distinct research tools to provide answers to these questions. The
methodological problem is that it is hard to isolate a "Muslim" effect when (in
France) nearly all Muslims are North Africans. To overcome this, the project
focuses on two immigrant groups from Senegal, each of which is split between
Catholics and Muslims. The only difference between these immigrant groups is
religion, allowing the project to infer that systematic differences between
these sub-groups in economic or social advancement in France can only be
explained by their religious differences. The project will employ ethnographic
immersion, targeted public opinion surveys, and a range of field experiments to
measure any "Muslim" effect and to determine whether the effect is due to in-
group processes (such as treatment of women) or out-group
discrimination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Attacks in Madrid (March 2004) and London
(July 2005), and the riots in suburban Paris in November 2005 and November 2007,
have all been attributed to "Muslims," and political parties in Europe have
mobilized opinion against a Muslim threat to Europe. Relations between the
countries of the European Union and the Muslim world have therefore become
politically consequential-foreign policy in regard to the Middle East; new
membership into the EU; and the vast migration of Muslim populations into EU
states. This research project allows for an assessment of a discernible
difficulty for Muslim migrants integrating into European society with a
perspective that can improve public policy in regard to these immigrants, easing
their incorporation.