* 0819837
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: HOW DID THE GRASSLAND BIOME EVOLVE IN SOUTH AMERICA?: INTEGRATING CENOZOIC CLIMATE, FLORAL AND FAUNAL RECORDS FROM PATAGONIA, ARGENTINA
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Matthew Kohn, Boise State University
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Boush
* 07/31/2012
* USD 119,911.00

COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: HOW DID THE GRASSLAND BIOME EVOLVE IN SOUTH AMERICA?:
INTEGRATING CENOZOIC CLIMATE, FLORAL AND FAUNAL RECORDS FROM PATAGONIA,
ARGENTINA&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;STROMBERG, KOHN AND MADDEN
PIS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Grasslands, which today form ~1/4 of Earth?s vegetative
cover, are thought to have developed earlier in South America than on other
continents, based on floral, faunal, and sedimentological evidence at Gran
Barranca, Argentina, and nearby. However, the timing and rate of change remain
unclear, as well as causal mechanisms. We will determine the timing and nature
of climatic, vegetational, and faunal events related to the evolution of Earth?s
earliest grassland ecosystems in southern Argentina by integrating floral,
stable isotopic, and faunal data through the long, well-dated, and nearly
continuous sedimentological record at Gran Barranca (~42.0 to ~18.5 Ma). We will
focus on evaluating whether: (1) The rise to dominance of open-habitat grasses
in South America occurred in parallel with their appearance, (2) An increase in
openness of habitats occurred in parallel with the rise to ecological dominance
of open-habitat grasses, (3) Changes in vegetation were correlated with climate
change, and (4) Hypsodonty in South American mammalian herbivores responded
rapidly to the spread of open, grass-dominated habitats. Fossil phytoliths
(plant silica) will be analyzed to provide detailed, continuous floral records
of grasses as well as other climate- or ecology-sensitive plant groups (e.g.,
palms, sedges). Fossil teeth will be analyzed for stable isotope compositions,
focusing on bulk d13C values and isotopic zoning of d13C and 18O values.
Together with phytolith assemblage data and sedimentology, this isotopic
information will be used to infer changes in habitat openness, aridity, and
seasonality in terms of temperature and precipitation. Comparison with records
of faunal community composition and functional morphology will elucidate the
patterns of grassland expansion and faunal responses. Our data will additionally
help answer the following two questions: (1) How does the timing and rate of
climate change in Argentina compare with the marine record? (2) How do patterns
of fauna-flora-climate evolution in South America compare with putatively
similar changes that occurred later, e.g., in central North America? The
proposed project incorporates several avenues for disseminating the research to
the public through the Burke Museum, including an in-museum exhibit, materials
for traveling study kits on the evolution of grasslands, and development of a
phytolith database with images accessible on-line through the Museum?s
website.&lt;br/&gt;