* 0819962
* Organic Acid Promoted Dissolution of Phosphate as Affected by its Solid State Speciation in Single and Mixed Fe, Al, Ca Mineral Systems: Implications for Phosphorus Bioavailability
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Carrick Eggleston, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2011
* USD 222,423.00

Intellectual Merit: The current understanding of organic acid mediated phosphate
dissolution is limited by the lack of a molecular scale characterization of its
solid state speciation. Furthermore, phosphate dissolution has not been studied
in context of its uptake without the complicating influence of metabolism as in
microbial cells or plants. Our current knowledge can mainly be attributed to wet
chemical studies in soils whose inherent complexity makes it difficult to
characterize the effect of primary environmental variables (pH, concentration of
phosphate, type of organic acid and its concentration). In addition, phosphate
dissolution in binary and tertiary mixtures of iron, aluminum and Ca minerals
(main sorbents of phosphate) that can serve as an effective analog for soils has
not been investigated. Based on a molecular scale XANES based investigation of
phosphate sorption in 1:1 (by mass) binary mixtures of Fe-oxide and Aloxide
minerals or Ca containing minerals, we can now: 1) quantify the distribution of
phosphate between individual mineral phases in binary and ternary mixtures
(Khare et al., 2004; Beauchemin et al., 2003); 2) distinguish between adsorption
and surface precipitation in single mineral and binary mixtures (Khare et al.,
2005); and 3) determine phosphate bonding configuration and differentiate
between surface complexes (Khare et al., 2007). Thus, we are now in a position
to exploit these XANES based tools in uncovering molecular mechanisms of
phosphate dissolution. This research will include a high affinity transporter
for yeast cells reconstituted into proteoliposomes as a sink for dissolved
phosphate to understand and realistically predict phosphate dissolution in
natural systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will take place over
two years and will address two main hypotheses:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hypothesis
1: Phosphate dissolution in single mineral, binary and tertiary mixtures is
controlled by the solid state speciation (mode of phosphate bonding, adsorption
vs. surface precipitation and the partitioning of phosphate in individual
mineral phases), of phosphate in these minerals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hypothesis
2: Phosphate uptake will be adversely affected by Al3+ in binary mixtures of Fe
and Al containing minerals however in ternary mineral systems the presence of
Ca2+ will ameliorate Al toxicity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
Phosphorus is an essential plant macronutrient and also a potential water
pollutant. Most terrestrial and marine ecosystems are P limited because
phosphate minerals are sparingly soluble. Because organic acids citrate, malate
released by plants roots or microbes are considered the main mode of P
solubilisation in soils and other natural systems, this basic geochemical
research is pertinent to improving soil fertility. This is particularly
significant because food production needs to double in the next 20 years to
sustain increasing world population. Characterizing organic acid mediated
phosphate dissolution at the nano scale will also help with better predictions
of phosphorus bioavailability and release. Recently phosphate release from
heavily fertilized P enriched soils has degraded surface water quality, causing
eutrophication. Furthermore, better estimates of phosphate bioavailability will
help predict CO2 uptake rates critical to predicting global warming. This
project will contribute to a graduate student's dissertation, to be supervised
by the PI and co-PI jointly. An integrated wet chemical, spectroscopic (XANES),
microscopic (TEM) and geochemical modeling approach will be used.&lt;br/&gt;