* 0819734
* Collaborative Research:  Acoustic Properties, Listener Perceptions, and Outcomes of Interactions between Survey Interviews and Sample Persons
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Frederick Conrad, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2011
* USD 125,780.00

While the sample survey is one of the cornerstones of social science research
methods, the tool is experiencing large declines in participation of sampled
persons. This project studies participation in cross-section Random-Digit Dialed
(RDD) telephone surveys. The declines have led to such significant research cost
increases that serious consideration of terminating basic surveys is occurring.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One large source of variation in RDD cooperation rates is
the interviewer. In centralized telephone interviewing facilities interviewers
are often assigned similar mixes of cases, yet obtain very different response
rates. All the stimuli yielding a decision to participate in an RDD survey must
be delivered through audio channel ? through words, pitch, inflection, and
pacing of the interviewers? speech. These attributes are not the traditional
objects of study of survey methodologists. Hence, the project combines insights
from speech science, phonetics, psycholinguistics, and survey methodology. A
central conceptual framework utilizes the companion notions of tailoring,
convergence, and similarity in cooperative dyadic communication.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;5,000 digital audio recordings of RDD telephone
interviewer introductions (from two data collection organizations, 6 different
surveys, and 165 different interviewers) are transformed into a quantitative
data set suitable for dynamic and static statistical models of response
propensities. Acoustic measures motivated by concepts from speech science are
extracted using Praat acoustic software; raters make judgments of perceived
attributes of speakers using both concepts central to leverage-salience theory
and the social psychology; and word and disfluency rates are extracted from
transcriptions of the audio files. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The resulting data set
is a relational one with records at the levels of the interviewer, respondent
(case), contact, and conversational turn. Hierarchical and survival models are
built using the combined conceptual frameworks predicting the final
participation decision of a sample case. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the
research emphasizes basic science, it has potential practical outcomes. Academic
survey research is a crucial tool for a $15 billion commercial research industry
in the US; this project?s success can contribute to the health of this
commercial sector. &lt;br/&gt;