* 0819009
* The Evolution of Cranial Forms in Anguilliform Fishes: Does Extreme Biting Promote or Constrain Morphological Diversity?
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2008,10/31/2010
* Peter Wainwright, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Richard K. Zimmer
* 10/31/2010
* USD 344,626.00

The diversification of novel body forms and behavior patterns is of central
interest in biology. One factor that may guide or constrain diversity in
organismal design is the correlation of traits: individual trait diversity may
be limited by their associations with other traits. Alternatively, a large
change in one character or in a suite of functionally related traits may have
far-reaching consequences on the integration of complex systems, greatly
affecting the outcome of system design and behavior. Fish skulls are highly
complex musculoskeletal systems that are used for critical survival behaviors
such as prey capture, prey transport (swallowing), and respiration. Our
knowledge of skull design in teleost fishes is derived almost entirely from
studies of suction feeding, the dominant mode of prey capture, prey transport,
and respiration for the majority of fishes. However, biting is an alternative
prey capture behavior that has evolved across many fish groups and the
evolutionary dynamics of morphological and behavioral evolution in biting
lineages is poorly understood. This study will test the idea that the evolution
of biting has promoted diversification in behavior and morphology in one of the
most prominent groups of biting fishes: eels and their allies. Fishes that bite
their prey rather than use suction, have modified their jaws in diverse ways. In
some cases, jaw modification has had cascading effects on the transport and
respiratory complex for some of these fish species that capture their prey by
biting. For example, moray eels, a species rich group belonging to a larger
group of fishes known as the anguilliforms, or true eels, do not rely on suction
for capturing or swallowing their prey. Morays capture their prey by sinking
their teeth into them. Once the prey is captured, morays protract their
pharyngeal jaws, a second set of jaws in their throat, into their mouths to grab
the prey item and transport the prey into their esophagus. This swallowing
behavior is unlike any other fish transport behavior and presents the first
alternative method for transporting prey without the use of suction in the
aquatic environment. This novelty in moray transport behavior provides an
opportunity to examine how functional innovations in integrated systems arise.
This study will be the first comparative analysis on the functional implications
of biting on teleost skull diversity. This work will also improve our
understanding of eel relationships and will integrate fossil information with
newly collected genetic data to produce the first time tree for the group. With
this tree we propose to identify broad patterns of trait associations and trait
modularity in the skull of eels to illustrate how a change in the oral jaws has
had cascading effects on systems used for prey transport, and respiration. The
principal investigator is a first time investigator who is committed to
recruiting and encouraging young scientists, especially women. The collective
efforts of this grant will provide training for graduate students and
undergraduates in a variety of anatomical techniques, while also providing
opportunities for these developing scientists to attend scientific meetings.