* 0819994
* ADVANCE Partnerships for Adaption,Implementation, and Dissemination (PAID) Award:  From Postdoc to Faculty: Transition Issues for Women Scientists
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2013
* Alyson Reed, National Postdoctoral Association
* Standard Grant
* Beth Mitchneck
* 09/30/2013
* USD 520,745.00

The National Postdoctoral Association (NPA) will adapt, implement and
disseminate successful models and best practices employed by ADVANCE grant
recipients and others to assist women scientists to advance in academia. This
project will focus adaptation in two areas: 1) translating efforts targeted at
current women faculty to women training to become faculty, i.e., postdocs; and
2) translating professional development efforts targeted at the general
postdoctoral population to address the unique needs of women during the
postdoctoral training period. The primary purpose of these translational efforts
will be to assist women in making a successful transition from the postdoctoral
training period to the ranks of tenure track faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Major
project components include:&lt;br/&gt;- Conducting a review of all institutional
efforts made by ADVANCE recipients to address these issues, using a survey and
targeted follow-up;&lt;br/&gt;- Convening a focus group of ADVANCE postdoctoral
fellows to determine whether the fellowship helped them to obtain a faculty
position;&lt;br/&gt;- Organizing a National Summit on Gender and the
Postdoctorate;&lt;br/&gt;- Providing on-going technical assistance to summit
participants and others who wish to implement programs for postdocs at their
institutions;&lt;br/&gt;- Preparing and disseminating a compendium report of
models and recommended practices for helping women make a successful transition
from postdoc to faculty;&lt;br/&gt;- Evaluation of the project?s short-term
effectiveness in: raising awareness, serving as a catalyst for action, and
helping summit participants increase the number of women faculty hired from the
ranks of the postdoctorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit Statement:
The project activities will enhance the knowledge and understanding of the
science and engineering communities regarding factors that contribute to a
successful transition from postdoctoral scholar to tenure-track faculty member
among women. The research will create a new base of information regarding
effective strategies and promising practices for promoting a successful
transition that enables women to advance from postdoc to faculty appointments
and ultimately gain tenure or equivalent status.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact Statement: The project activities will broadly impact women with PhDs in
science and engineering fields who seek to make a successful transition from
postdoctoral training to a faculty appointment during the three-year duration of
the project. It will also broadly impact academic administrators involved with
postdoctoral training and the advancement of women in science and engineering
faculty posts. More broadly, the activities will impact future generations of
those considering a faculty career in science and engineering, by facilitating
the creation and maintenance of training and transition mechanisms that help
women to advance from postdoctoral appointments into faculty positions.