* 0819082
* Local Policing in the Context of Immigration
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2010
* Paul Lewis, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Christian A. Meissner
* 07/31/2010
* USD 180,000.00

Unauthorized immigration has become a primary domestic issue in the United
States. An estimated 12 million people without legal status reside in the US,
many in locations unaccustomed to immigration. Along with refugee settlement and
legal immigration, unauthorized immigration is transforming many American
communities. State and local jurisdictions have responded with a patchwork of
ordinances, policies and practices, most of which are designed to discourage
settlement. While some localities have taken no action, others have asked their
municipal police to check immigration status in the course of routine law
enforcement, challenging police to stretch resources and to re-negotiate
relations with minority residents while avoiding racial profiling. These
requests jeopardize long-standing commitments to community policing, while
shifting to the local level some of the responsibility for immigration
enforcement traditionally held at the federal level. The impact of the national
movement to devolve immigration authority to the local level on municipal
policing is the subject of this research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The starting
point for this research is a national survey of police chiefs conducted during
2007-2008 academic year. Cities of 60,000 population or more were included, a
total of 451 cities. The current project accomplishes the following: 1. Detailed
analysis of the 237 responses, and 2. In-depth studies of four cities that have
experienced the impact of recent immigration. The project tests the hypothesis
that policing policies emerge from a dynamic mix of local politics and external
forces, filtered by the professional norms of police agencies. Cities are
selected for in-depth case studies on the basis of their political responses to
increased immigration. Citizens, policy makers, students, non-governmental
organizations, and police departments will benefit from information provided by
this research about the costs and benefits of immigration policing.