* 0819460
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Operationalizing
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2009
* Jessica Kostelnik, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Martinek
* 07/31/2009
* USD 11,159.00

PI and co-PI: N. Dickon Reppucci and Jessica Kostelnik&lt;br/&gt;University of
Virgina&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Doctoral Dissertation Research:
Operationalizing&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0819460&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much research has
attempted to explain how and why false confession occur, and researchers have
identified common characteristics across cases (including types of cases in
which they disproportionably occur, such as murder), as well as personal
(including youth of suspect) and situational (including use of deceit by
interrogator) risk factors for false confessions. However, the extent to which
the interaction between risk factors is considered 1) by law enforcement
officers when making judgments about the surgical precision of techniques one
might use during an interrogation and the diagnostic validity of confession
evidence, and 2) by jurors when making judgments about the coerciveness of an
interrogation, the voluntariness of a confession and the guilt of a defendant,
is unclear. Therefore, this study hypothesizes that law enforcement officers and
jurors might consider the interaction between the age of the suspect and the
length of the interrogation when making judgments about coerciveness and
voluntariness in non-severe cases, but disregard this interaction in severe
cases. For the current study, participants will include 500 community members
and 500 law enforcement officers who will be randomly assigned to reading case
materials from 1 of 12 condition groups produced by a 3 (child, youth, adult
suspect) x 2 (45 minute interrogation, 12 hour interrogation) x 2 (assault
offense, murder offense) factorial design. Participants will be instructed to
consider facts from a police report and excerpts from an interrogation as though
they were serving on a Citizens Review Board to determine whether the
investigator acted appropriately during the interrogation. After reading the
case materials, participants will respond to a questionnaire regarding their
perceptions of the suspect and the interrogation. The study will identify
relationships between 1) the severity of the crime; 2) the age of the suspect;
and 3) the length of the interrogation, and perceptions of 1) suspect
competencies; 2) interrogation coerciveness; and 3) confession voluntariness. In
addition, because the U.S. Supreme Court has indicated in Arizona v. Fulminante
(1991) that an erroneously admitted false confession can be considered ?harmless
error?, the proposed study will also examine the extent to which judgments about
the level of coercion in an interrogation and voluntariness of a confession are
related to judgments about the suspect/defendant?s guilt. The study will also
investigate group differences in patterns of responses between community members
and law enforcement officers. Results will have implications for 1) informing
the collaborative development of law enforcement training for conducting
juvenile interrogations, 2) explicating how risk factors are weighted within the
?totality of the circumstances approach? to the admissibility of confession
evidence, and 3) testing assumptions made in the Arizona v. Fulminante (1991)
decision.