* 0819527
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science:  Dynamics of Policy Expertise Acquisition and Electoral Performance in Japan and Taiwan
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2009
* Akitaka Matsuo, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2009
* USD 10,670.00

How do legislators acquire policy expertise in legislatures without a well-
established seniority rule for committee assignments? This research project
investigates the acquisition of policy expertise by individual legislators and
its relation with the achievement of legislator goals such as reelection, career
advancement, and influencing public policy. In the US Congress, policy expertise
has been acquired through consecutive assignments to the same committee. Since a
strong seniority rule has been in force, committee assignments are generally
automatically renewed, and thus, the process of acquiring policy expertise and
its relationship with electoral incentives has not been adequately considered.
Strong seniority systems similar to that found in the US Congress are not
universal in the world, and legislators' motivation for developing policy
expertise varies across countries. Different political institutions influence
legislators' motivations to be an expert in a policy area(s). Through the study
of legislatures in two democratic countries (Japan and Taiwan), this research
develops a model of policy expertise acquisition for legislators operating in an
institutional context different from that found in the United States. The
Japanese Diet and Taiwanese Legislative Yuan are ideal objects of study because
they provide a great deal of institutional variation. First, intra and inter
country electoral system variance in these countries allows us to assess policy
expertise acquisition within different electoral contexts. In regard to the
Japanese Diet, the employment a single-nontransferable-vote (SNTV) electoral
system until 1995 and a mixed member electoral system since 1995 allows for the
examination of the differential impact on policy expertise acquisition of the
electoral incentives provided by these two distinct systems. In addition, the
Legislative Yuan, where most members were until 2008 largely selected using
SNTV, allows for the investigation of legislative behavior under SNTV in a
presidential democracy (in contrast to Japan's parliamentary democracy). The
Legislative Yuan also provides variation in party control of committee
assignments. In most democracies, committee post allocations are under the
control of parties, and the literature provides little guidance on what happens
when parties have no such control. The Legislative Yuan before 2002 provides the
rare chance to examine committee careers within a context of no party control
over committee assignments. This project's principal argument is legislators
acquire policy expertise to achieve several goals, such as reelection, advancing
their political career, and influencing policy. The different institutional
contexts described above in turn affect the connection between these goals and
the acquisition of policy expertise. To test the empirical implications of our
general theoretical model, we examine legislators' policy activities, their
relation to the policy needs of their respective districts, and the legislators'
career trajectory. The dataset assembled for this project consists of data on:
legislator policy expertise, policy needs of an electoral district, and the
electoral performance of incumbent candidates. Legislators' policy activities
include committee assignments, debate in committee and on the floor, voting
record, and bill introduction. The project's intellectual merit is based on its
provision of a deeper understanding of the process of policy expertise
acquisition. The extant research on legislator policy expertise has been limited
primarily to the US Congress, and the process of evolving policy expertise is
understudied. The strong right of US incumbents to retain their committee
membership prevents serious consideration of the process of policy expertise
evolution. This project addresses these and other issues via the study of two
Asian democracies. This research project has the following broader impact. First
and foremost, it provides knowledge about when and under what institutional
conditions the quality of public policy is improved though the acquisition of
policy expertise by legislators. Second, it supplies vital information on the
understudied Legislative Yuan. Third, the large dataset created for this project
will represent an invaluable resource for future scholars interested in a
variety of aspects of legislative behavior in Japan and Taiwan.