* 0819059
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Immigration, Citizenship, and  Violence in Post-Colonial Nation States
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,06/30/2010
* Anneeth Hundle, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 06/30/2010
* USD 13,841.00

Graduate student Anneeth Hundle, under the guidance of Dr. Damani Partridge,
will undertake research on the factors that affect immigrant political
participation in post-colonial nation states. The research is motivated by three
primary concerns: first, to understand how the experience of colonialism affects
later citizenship; second, to analyze the relationship between nation, violence,
and migration; and third, to investigate systematically the mutually
constitutive relationships between native and immigrant populations in post-
colonial contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be carried out in
Kampala, Uganda, and will focus primarily on women. The researcher will employ
multiple ethnographic research methods, particularly participant-observation and
semi-structured interviews. In addition to participating in and documenting
interethnic relations in daily community life, the researcher will focus
intensive data collection on a sample of 30 women drawn from three different
groups differentially placed in relation to Asian immigration and citizen
rights. These three groups are: African feminist-activists who have represented
cases of violence against Asian-Indian women; with new migrant Asian-Indian
women from India; and elite Ugandan Asian women with colonial ties to Uganda.
The researcher also will collect oral immigration and histories, do media
analysis of newspapers and feminist literature, and collect and analyze spatial
data for urban Kampala. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is important because
it will help to understand the factors that produce violence in diaspora
communities in post-colonial settings. Because such violence is increasingly
common in the world, findings will contribute not only to social science theory
but also to improving social and political policies. In addition, funding this
project contributes to the education of a social scientist.