* 0819031
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Influence of Media on  Language Shift and  Endangerment
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Kathryn Graber, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2009
* USD 2,550.00

Doctoral student Kathryn Graber, under the guidance of Dr. Alaina Lemon, will
investigate the relationship between government language policies and the
persistance of endangered languages through a case study of how local newspapers
affect language shift in post-Soviet Russia. Over the past sixteen years, some
of the most central and impassioned struggles in post-Soviet society have
concerned minority languages and the publics that they mark or create.
Meanwhile, there has been massive restructuring in media funding and control. To
examine these struggles as they unfold in both contemporary and historical
contexts, Graber will focus on the multilingual Lake Baikal region of
southeastern Siberia, where generations of speakers have been slowly shifting to
Russian from Buryat, an indigenous language closely related to Mongolian.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will consist of archival, ethnographic, and
sociolinguistic research on local media production and consumption in Russia's
major semi-autonomous ethnic Buryat region, the Republic of Buryatia. Graber's
preliminary research has shown that some journalists attempt to moderate Buryat
language shift by modeling "proper" Buryat, or by excising Russian words and
grammar. Buryat-language newspapers are also one of the main ways in which
speakers are exposed to the written language. Yet it is not clear how media
discourse affects language use in the wider Buryat-speaking public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will examine the relationship between
linguistic decisions in Buryat-language newspapers and the everyday language of
ordinary speakers. The investigator's research methods will include long-term
participant observation, structured and semi-structured interviewing,
sociolinguistic analysis of interactions, and formal linguistic analysis of
media discourse. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will contribute to better
understanding of the factors that underlie language shift and endangerment. The
research will help policymakers formulate context-sensitive policy in language
planning and development projects. The project also contributes to the education
of a social scientist.