* 0819840
* Improving Risk Assessment in Aviation: Information Seeking, Planning, and Judgment
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Wai-Tat Fu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2011
* USD 251,984.00

Previous research on risk assessment has largely focused on static environments
in which the decision maker is usually given full information to judge the level
of risks involved. Research conducted under this award will extend previous
research to study risk assessments by licensed pilots during pre-flight and in-
flight planning, in which the pilots have to continuously look for and integrate
multiple sources of information (such as weather, air traffic, and terrains) to
assess risks in a highly dynamic environment. Specifically, the project will
study three major classes of activities involved in pilot risk assessments: (1)
information-seeking, (2) information integration during flight planning, and (3)
risk assessments of different flight paths. Detailed behavioral data will be
collected from a high-fidelity flight simulator. The data will be analyzed based
on the theoretical framework that assumes two distinct systems of decision
making: A rational system that exerts explicit top-down guidance on actions, and
an experiential system that is capable of associating external environmental
cues to past history of rewards and punishments. This theoretical framework will
help to understand how background knowledge and skills are related to different
patterns of information-seeking behavior and risk assessments in dynamic
environments. The research should produce new knowledge with practical
implications for training methods that improve risk assessments in dynamic
environments.