* 0819977
* ETBC:  Collaborative Research:  "The Effect of Climate on the Terrestial Sulfur Cycle"
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2011
* Mark Thiemens, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2011
* USD 275,000.00

Intellectual Merit: This proposal intends to examine the manner in which the
terrestrial S cycle varies with rainfall from the driest to the wettest parts of
the planet. Sulfur, one of the most important macronutrients for life, is far
less understood that its ?companion? element N. However, the magnitude of the
human perturbation of the global S cycle, the complex ways in which ecosystems
respond to S, and the basic question of how life drives the behavior of major
elemental cycles makes a study of S an interesting scientific and societally
important challenge. &lt;br/&gt;The project brings atmospheric, geochemical, and
ecological expertise together to quantify the sources and rates of S inputs to
ecosystems, to explore important avenues of internal S cycling within soils and
plants, and quantify S removal pathways along a rainfall gradient from ~1 to
~4000 mm MAP y-1. The work plan also includes the measurement of total soil and
plant S and S isotopes from multiple sets of climate gradients to learn about
the patterns that climate imparts on terrestrial S storage and cycling.
&lt;br/&gt;Like N, it is hypothesized that at the wet end of Earth the S cycle
is dominated by biologically mediated redox reactions. As rainfall declines to
near 0, and as plants and microbes reach negligible levels, the S cycle shifts
to dominantly inorganic processes, and the entire cycle undergoes a fundamental
transformation. This rainfall gradient therefore provides a template to
illustrate the uniqueness of our biotically-controlled planet, and to better
interpret the geochemistry of our nearby terrestrial planet Mars, which has
large surficial sulfate accumulations. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The rainfall
gradient to be used is comprised of a series of sites that are part of the NSF
funded CZEN network (Critical Zone Exploration Network). The project will
benefit from the previous work done at these sites, some of which is critical to
the success of this project (hydrology and geochemistry). The proposed work will
also ultimately provide new data and information to the CZEN network database.
Additionally, CZEN researchers will be collaborators on the project,
strengthening the functioning of this novel initiative in geosciences.
&lt;br/&gt;The project will largely involve graduate students, and will
therefore provide training and opportunities for young scholars. However, the
broad range of scientific expertise involved will make this an especially
exciting and dynamic learning environment for everyone involved. Secondly, this
research will further PI Amundson?s collaboration with Chilean collaborators and
aid in international exchange. &lt;br/&gt;Finally, this proposal has been
submitted to Emerging Topics in Biogeochemical Cycles because it is perceived
that this project encompasses a climatic breadth that will allow us, in the end,
to illustrate via general science and education outlets, the truly unique ? but
alterable ? role of life on the history of our planet. Sulfur, along with N and
some other elements, bears the unmistakable stamp of life. It is only by
examining the big picture, via the sweep of Earth?s climate (proposed here), or
from space (Sagan et al.1993. Nature 365:715-721), that it is possible to convey
the uniqueness and fragility of Earth (Amundson. 2008. Nature Geoscience
1:5-6).&lt;br/&gt;