* 0819186
* Eocene-Oligocene Primate Evolution and Climate Change in the Fayum Depression, Northern Egypt
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2008,01/31/2013
* Erik Seiffert, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2013
* USD 307,314.00

There is now broad agreement among students of primate evolution that the last
common ancestor of the living monkeys, apes, and humans (Anthropoidea) lived in
Africa during the later part of the Eocene epoch, between about 45 and 34
million years ago. The primary fossil evidence documenting this critical phase
in primate evolutionary history comes from sedimentary deposits exposed in the
Fayum Depression, northern Egypt, which are 37 to 28 million years in age. Past
work has revealed evidence for a diverse radiation of anthropoid primates that
lived in this area 29 to 34 million years ago; the recent discovery of fossil
anthropoids and other primates at a much older, 37 million-year-old, site in the
area has now provided paleontologists with an unprecedented 8-million-year-long
record of primate and non-primate mammalian evolution in this part of northern
Africa. Over the course of three field seasons (in 2008, 2009, 2010)
paleontological work in the Fayum area will help to reveal important new
insights into the early evolutionary history of Anthropoidea, including the
impact of one of the most dramatic changes to Earth climate during the Age of
Mammals -- the rapid onset of Antarctic glaciation, and associated global
cooling phase, which began about 34 million years ago at the Eocene-Oligocene
boundary. A skilled team of vertebrate paleontologists, geologists,
paleobotanists, and geochemists has been assembled to collect and analyze
vertebrate fossils, plant fossils, and rock samples throughout this succession
as a means for studying environmental change and primate and non-primate
evolution and adaptation before, during, and after the climatic events at the
Eocene-Oligocene boundary. Stable isotope data will be extracted from fossil
specimens in order to date localities and reconstruct paleoenvironments. As
such, our team will not only collect new vertebrate fossil material as in years
past, but importantly also aims to place fossil sites into a well-dated
framework so that patterns of biotic evolution and extinction can be evaluated
within the context of both local and global environmental
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recovery and analysis of the fossil evidence that
documents our shared evolutionary history with anthropoids and other primates is
of great interest to the scientific community and the general public. Despite
many years of paleontological research, a number of key questions remain
unanswered; for instance, the roles that geography, plate tectonics, climate
change, extinction, and competition have played in shaping our anthropoid
ancestors' ancient evolutionary history continue to be actively debated. This
research will provide paleontological field training for a number of young Ph.D.
students, including members of groups that are underrepresented in physical
anthropology and particularly paleoanthropology. This research will also allow
American and Egyptian researchers to work together as part of an international
collaboration that will provide new opportunities and resources for students and
educators in both the U.S.A. and Egypt.&lt;br/&gt;