* 0819038
* Performing on Cue? The Formation of American Public Attitudes Toward War
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2010
* Christopher Gelpi, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2010
* USD 91,601.00

Perhaps the most important task that American citizens entrust to their elected
officials is the decision to deploy the country's military forces in combat. But
is the American public capable of holding their leaders accountable for the use
of this authority? From a normative perspective, it is important that the public
be capable of reaching reasoned and independent judgments about the wisdom of
using military force if they are to carry out their role as citizens who guide
policy in a democratic society. From an empirical perspective, numerous theories
of the impact of democracy on the use of military force begin with the
assumption that public opinion acts as an independent constraint on the behavior
of democratic leaders in international politics. Can the public actually fulfill
this role?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent scholarship on public opinion and war
suggests that two key variables influence the public's willingness to support
the use of force when American lives are at stake: perceptions of the
justification of the military mission and perceptions of its likely success.
Some have argued that this focus on the justification and success of a military
mission provides evidence that the public can reach "reasonable" judgments about
war that allow them to act as an independent constraint on their leaders.
Others, however, have argued that such judgments appear to be "reasoned" but are
largely derivative of statements made by partisan leaders. According to this
view, the public's ability to constrain the use of force is inevitably limited
by its dependence on partisan messages from elites. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
study uses survey experiments to explore potentially interactive relationships
among conflicting cues and individual predispositions in shaping attitudes
toward military conflicts. In particular, this research investigates the extent
to which individuals can use media reporting to verify cues offered by political
elites. The American public's ability to carry out this task is of great
importance to those who seek to understand the formation of public opinion as
well as the impact of democracy on foreign policy. It is also of great
importance to American policy makers, the media, and the American public.