* 0819706
* Collaborative Research: Black Carbon Remineralization in the Environment: Physical and Chemical Controls
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Andrew Zimmerman, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2012
* USD 190,707.00

Intellectual Merit: It has only recently been realized that pyrogenic carbon, or
black carbon (BC), can make up a significant fraction of the organic carbon in
soils and sediments. As such, BC is an important but poorly understood portion
of the global carbon cycle that serves as a carbon sink and oxygen source over
geological time-scales. Further, BC may be an important ingredient for soil
fertility, controls the fate of organic contaminants, and, as charcoal, is
commonly used for 14C dating and in paleoenvironmental and archeological studies
to reconstruct fire-frequency and human occupation records.

Black Carbon has generally been regarded as biologically and chemically inert
due to its chemical structure and longevity in the geosphere. However,
considering its estimated production rate by biomass combustion, it must also
turnover at considerable rates (100-1000 years?). While recent studies have
recorded measurable degradation rates in short-term microbial incubations,
little is known as to the range of degradation rates that occur with different
BC forms, or the chemical and physical variables that control rates of microbial
utilization. Further, while some studies suggest that the presence of labile
organic matter (OM) may enhance BC degradation, others would have BC serve to
protect OM from microbial decomposition. The proposed study examines the
relationships between BC, OM, and microbes with a focus on examining the
relative importance of chemical and physical factors on BC degradation in soils.

Science Plan: The series of integrated laboratory BC-microbial incubations, OM
adsorption experiments and field-based soil studies proposed will provide a
strong theoretical foundation for understanding the cycling of BC in the
environment. Materials for these experiments will include both BC reference
materials recommended by the International BC Steering Committee and BC produced
by the PI by combustion of a variety of wood and grasses under a range of
controlled temperature and oxygenation conditions. The surface chemistry of
these materials will be characterized before and after lab and field incubations
by 13C-NMR (functional groups) and potentiometric titration (surface charge),
and the surface morphology (external and internal surface area and pore size
distribution and volume) by CO2 sorptometry (an improvement over commonly used
N2 sorptometry). Each of these parameters will be related to rates of microbial
degradation measured via CO2 evolution in the laboratory, and BC loss and
aggregate formation measured in tropical soils in Brazil. In addition,
incubation/adsorption experiments will be used to determine the potential for
labile OM ?priming? to enhance BC degradation and for OM adsorption to sequester
and preserve labile organic carbon within BC.

Broader Impacts: The data generated will be of great value to the community of
scientists struggling to identify the composition and structure of BC, establish
the most appropriate methods of analysis, and will also provide critical
information on the biogeochemical cycling of this poorly understood component of
the global carbon cycle. The results will also be of practical value to those
considering BC as a tool for soil remediation, amelioration, and atmospheric
carbon sequestration. For wide dispersal beyond the conventional scientific
literature, findings will be posted on websites and list-serves that are
actively discussing BC applications. The PI will also interface with the
commercial sector employing or considering BC technologies.

This proposal represents a new direction for the PI, an early career scientist
with no prior NSF funding, and a new collaboration for the PI and co-PI as well
as for four additional collaborators including one in Brazil. It includes a
request for full or partial support of three graduate (2 at UF, 1 at FSU) and
two undergraduate students. Results of this project will be incorporated into a
teacher training workshop and public lectures.