* 0819072
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Seeds of Persistence: The Ethnoecology of Crop Agrobiodiversity Maintenance in the American Mountain South
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2009
* James Veteto, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 07/31/2009
* USD 13,760.00

University of Georgia graduate student, James Veteto, working under the
supervision of Dr. Robert E. Rhoades, will undertake a comparative investigation
of why folk crop varieties continue to persist despite overwhelming economic and
social pressures that threaten their existence. Research has demonstrated the
increasing loss of agricultural biodiversity across the globe and various
conservation strategies have been applied to alleviate this problem. However,
the contribution of social scientists has been limited, even though they are
well-positioned to make in-depth inquiries into the reasons why some
individuals, communities, or cultures continue to nurture folk crop
biodiversity. This study will help to fill that gap.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
study will investigate two main complementary motivations that contribute to the
continued use and conservation of folk crop varieties. The first potential
motivation is utilitarian salience, the selection and maintenance of indigenous
varieties for practical agronomic, economic, and environmental reasons. The
second possible motivation is cultural salience, selection and maintenance of
crops because of culturally defined preferences and influences such as heritage
and memory, culinary traditions, spiritual beliefs and rituals, and values that
are learned and shared. The primary research sites will be the southern
Appalachian mountains of western North Carolina and the Ozark-Quachita Highlands
of Arkansas. Both areas are known for having households that maintain a diverse
set of indigenous plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher will use a
comparative mixed-methods approach to assess the reasons for the persistence of
folk crop varieties and overall crop agrobiodiversity in the two regions. A
purposive sample of active growers will be selected using a combination of
snowball sampling beginning with known local growers as well as databases from
local seed banks. The researcher will use a combination of participant
observation, semi-structured interviews, free listing exercises, benchmark
socioeconomic surveys, Thematic Appreciation Test exercises, and farm surveys.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This thorough investigation of cultural salience in
ethnoecology is important because it will provide new insights into linkages
between the cognitive and behavioral aspects of culture. If indeed cultural
salience is a central force behind the maintenance and persistence of folk crop
varieties, social scientists can make a significant contribution to the
international debate regarding the conservation of crop genetic resources. The
research also will contribute significantly to the education of a graduate
student.