* 0819010
* RIG:  Molecular and Functional Characterization of a Somatosensory Neuron Subtype
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2011
* Alvaro Sagasti, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* James O. Deshler
* 07/31/2011
* USD 175,000.00

Touch sensation in the skin is accomplished by a heterogeneous variety of nerve
cell subtypes that are each specialized to sense different kinds of touch
stimuli, including temperature, pressure, and chemicals. Activation of each cell
type elicits distinct perceptions and behavioral responses that are appropriate
for the particular stimulus. This observation implies that each touch cell
subtype connects to a distinct neural circuit in the brain. This project will
investigate how particular features of touch-sensing neurons are specialized for
their sensory function. To accomplish this, they are using zebrafish larvae as a
model because they have a simplified nervous system, their optical clarity
allows direct imaging of cellular morphology, and they are amenable to a wide
variety of molecular and cellular manipulations. The PI has identified a unique
class of touch-sensing cells in zebrafish that connect to a distinct part of the
brain; whereas most touch-sensing nerve cells connect to circuits in the
hindbrain, this particular subtype connects to spinal cord circuits. The project
will use live imaging techniques to determine whether these cells possess other
distinctive morphological features, to use molecular techniques to determine
whether they express a distinct set of genes, to identify the stimuli that they
sense using live physiological techniques, and to determine what behaviors they
elicit by specifically activating them and monitoring the animal's behavior.
Together these experiments will provide insight into how a sensory cell's
particular morphological and molecular features are optimized for their
functions. This project will be headed by a graduate student. Several
undergraduates will also participate on different aspects of the project,
providing them with a rare opportunity for exposure to basic neurobiological
research.