* 0819817
* Trophic Diversity in the Santa Cruz Formation Herbivore Guild
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Kathryn Townsend, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Yusheng Liu
* 08/31/2013
* USD 84,937.00

Trophic Diversity in the Santa Cruz Formation Herbivore Guild

Darin Croft, Case Western Reserve

The Santa Cruz Formation of Argentina (16-17.5 million years old; early Miocene
Epoch) has produced a spectacular array of well-preserved fossils that are
highly suitable for studying the biology of extinct mammals. Our project will
use these specimens to produce the first detailed dietary reconstructions for
two of the most diverse and abundant groups of Santa Cruz mammals: caviomorph
rodents (the group that includes guinea pigs, chinchillas, capybaras,
porcupines, and their extinct relatives) and endemic ungulates (various extinct
groups of hoofed mammals that lived exclusively in South America and that left
no living descendants). Because many Santa Cruz species are the best known
fossil representatives of extinct families, these dietary data will be valuable
for anyone investigating the evolution of plant-eating mammals or the ecology of
ancient South American mammal communities. Nearly all prior dietary studies in
these groups have relied on relative tooth crown height (hypsodonty), a variable
correlated with diet and behavioral ecology (e.g., feeding height) in extant
mammals but whose correlates are unclear in many extinct groups (especially
those with ever-growing teeth such as notoungulates, a very diverse group of
extinct hoofed mammals). Building on our preliminary investigations, we will use
two alternative methods of dietary reconstruction: low-magnification enamel
microwear (examining small pits and scratches on a tooth?s surface) and mesowear
(assessing macroscopic wear and tooth cusp shape). By gathering data that are
essentially hypsodonty-independent, this study will test the reliability of
hypsodonty for inferring diet in extinct South American mammals and, by
extension, other extinct groups. Our study will be the first direct analysis of
diet for many of the extinct families under consideration, and will include the
first investigation of microwear in living caviomorph rodents. We will also
investigate the relationship between incisor morphology and diet in living
caviomorph rodents to test whether incisor morphology can give clues to diet in
extinct rodent species. Other studies have correlated aspects of incisor
morphology with diet in other rodent groups, but none has yet examined variation
in this particular group in relation to diet. Caviomorphs are quite are unlike
?typical? rats and mice and have been hypothesized to fill the ecological roles
occupied by rabbits and various hoofed mammals on other continents. Results of
our project will be incorporated into exhibits at the Cleveland Museum of
Natural History and will be highlighted in a new mammal diversity and evolution
course at Case Western Reserve University. This project will promote the careers
of two young investigators, and will increase participation of underrepresented
groups in the scientific process through a one-day museum-based teacher training
program for public high school teachers in the Cleveland area; this training
program will use our research on South American mammals to create lesson plans
for teaching fundamentals of paleontology research to 10th grade students. We
will broadly disseminate results of this research through publication in
scientific journals, public lectures at universities and museums and
presentations at scientific meetings, and also through innovative internet
resources such a new public internet archive of microwear and mesowear images.