* 0819276
* PASI:  Pan-American Sensors for Environmental Observatories - An Interdisciplinary PASI; Bahia Blanca, Argentina, January 2009
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2008,04/30/2011
* Thomas Harmon, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 04/30/2011
* USD 108,889.00

This Pan-American Advanced Studies Institutes (PASI) award, jointly supported by
the NSF and the Department of Energy (DOE), will take place January 2009 at the
Instituto Argentino de Oceanografía in Bahía Blanca, Argentina. Organized by Dr.
Thomas C. Harmon of the University of California - Merced, the goal of this PASI
is to deliver an interdisciplinary collaborative training experience to
participants in applications of sensor system technology to environmental
observational science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activity will provide a diverse
group of 30-40 graduate students, postdocs, and junior faculty with backgrounds
ranging from lab-on-a-chip sensor development to field exploration in limnology
with a series of hands-on experiments, which will expand their practical
experience in the field of sensor system technology. The proposed PASI short
course will be transformative by creating a cadre of scientists and engineers
who are trained in the state-of-technology for environmental observations and
primed for embarking on international collaborative research in both technology
development and environmental research domains applying environmental sensor
systems. The project will also help develop training materials that can be
reused in other contexts through U.S. and international research organizations.
Results will be disseminated through the PASEO web site at
https://eng.ucmerced.edu/paseo.