* 0819205
* PASI:   Advanced Tropical Phycology: Integrating Modern and Traditional Techniques to the Study of Tropical Algae; Balboa, Panama, June-July 2009
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Suzanne Fredericq, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 12/31/2009
* USD 80,015.00

This Pan-American Advanced Studies Institutes (PASI) award, jointly supported by
the NSF and the Department of Energy (DOE), will take place June-July, 2009 at
the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institution in Balboa, Panama. Organized by
Dr. Rachel Collin of the Smithsonian Institution, the PASI will provide advanced
international graduate students, post-docs, and young investigators in state-of-
the-art methods and concepts for the study of tropical algae. The proposed PASI
will combine lectures, laboratory exercises, and fieldwork led by a diverse
group of established experts and young professionals in one of the richest algal
floras of the Caribbean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activity will introduce young
participants from throughout the Americas to the possibility of conducting
research in a high-tech research facility in the Western tropics. The PASI will
strengthen existing relationships and ultimately, help to establish new
collaborations between junior and senior researchers in Latin America and their
counterparts in North America. PASI results will be disseminated through a
comprehensive website, including methodological protocols and bioinformatics
results and reports from exercises conducted during the workshop. Bilingual
teaching materials will be generated for download by K-12 and undergraduate
educators. Updates from participants on future collaborative and international
projects in their regions of study will be posted regularly.