* 0819953
* The Horned Dinosaur Radiation
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2013
* Catherine Forster, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Yusheng Liu
* 06/30/2013
* USD 149,998.00

THE HORNED DINOSAUR RADIATION&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Scott D.
Sampson&lt;br/&gt;Co-PIs: Andrew A. Farke, Catherine A. Forster, and Mark A.
Loewen &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Late Cretaceous was a period of elevated sea
levels and hothouse climates. Shallow seas flooded many continental landmasses,
including North America. For about 35 million years, the Late Cretaceous
Interior Seaway extended from the Arctic Ocean to the Gulf of Mexico,
effectively dividing the North American continent into two landmasses. On the
western landmass, sandwiched between the seaway to the east and rising mountains
to the west, dinosaurs underwent dramatic diversification, achieving perhaps the
acme of their evolutionary history. One of the most successful groups of these
?West American? dinosaurs was the ceratopsids, giant (4-8 m long; ~1-4 ton),
rhinoceros-like horned dinosaurs that included Triceratops.
&lt;br/&gt;Ceratopsids rank amongst the most remarkable animals known. The
largest examples possessed skulls about 3 m long, exceeding that of all other
land-dwelling vertebrates (back-boned animals) before or since. Their skulls
were not only big, but bizarre, with toothless beaks, greatly enlarged nose
regions, and a broad array of signature ornaments that included horns over the
nose and eyes, together with a variety of elaborate hooks, spikes, and scallops
along the frill margin. This project will investigate the evolutionary radiation
of ceratopsid dinosaurs, building on abundant recent discoveries that, over the
past five years alone, have more than doubled the number of recognized species.
The approach will be multi-pronged, assessing and integrating five key
components: 1) taxonomy?evaluating and classifying species diversity; 2)
phylogeny?assessing the historical relationships of species; 3)
stratigraphy?determining how species were arrayed through time; 4)
biogeography?evaluating how species were arrayed through space within the
Western Interior; and 5) paleoenvironment?looking for associations between
species and ancient environments. &lt;br/&gt;A cornerstone of the project will
be the first comprehensive, species level assessment of historical relationships
within Ceratopsidae, predicated on a thorough taxonomic reassessment of the
group. The results of this analysis will then be integrated with stratigraphic,
paleoenvironmental, and biogeographic datasets in order to test a pair of
general hypotheses pertaining to the mode and tempo of evolution. The first
hypothesis is that, for most of their duration, ceratopsids were sub-divided
into at least two semi-isolated geographic regions?one in the north (including
Alberta, Montana, and Alaska) and another in the south (including Utah Colorado,
New Mexico, Texas, and Mexico). That is, on the basis of preliminary evidence,
it appears that ceratopsid species evolved relatively independently in the
northern and southern regions of the Western Interior. The second hypothesis is
that the evolutionary radiation of ceratopsids was characterized by relatively
rapid species turnover tied to cyclical rise and fall of the Western Interior
Seaway. In short, periodic expansion (transgression) of the seaway reduced the
amount of available habitat for ceratopsids and other terrestrial animals,
perhaps triggering bouts of extinction and speciation. The significance of this
project resides in its great potential to elucidate the tempo and mode of
evolution within a single, well sampled group of dinosaurs that diversified on a
small landmass over a relatively brief geologic time span (~15 million years).
Ultimately, the results will comprise the most comprehensive assessment to date
of evolutionary radiation within any dinosaur group.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts
will encompass career training for undergraduate and graduate students,
including women and minorities, as well as critical elucidation of dinosaur
evolution immediately prior to the K-T boundary. In addition, project results
will be disseminated to both the scientific community and the general public
through a variety of outlets, including original publication, media exposure,
the internet, museum displays, and lectures/seminars. Outreach highlights
include the most comprehensive treatment of horned dinosaurs on permanent
exhibition anywhere in the world, planned for the new, $100 million Utah Museum
of Natural History facility in Salt Lake City. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;