* 0819132
* PASI:    Cutting-edge Topics in Theoretical Statistics and Applications in Genetics and Bioinformatics; Guanajuato, Mexico, June-July 2009
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Javier Rojo, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 08/31/2011
* USD 99,025.00

This Pan-American Advanced Studies Institutes (PASI) award, jointly supported by
the NSF and the Department of Energy (DOE), will take place from June 19 to July
17, 2009 at the Centro de Investigación en Matemáticas (CIMAT) in Guanajuato,
Mexico. Organized by Dr. Javier Rojo of Rice University, the PASI will address
cutting edge topics in theoretical statistics and applications to genetics and
bioinformatics. Top researchers from Costa Rica, Mexico, Uruguay, and the United
States will present cutting edge research in the areas of Statistical Finance,
Statistical Multivariate Methods, Dimension Reduction, Survival Analysis with
Microarray Data, Bioinformatics, and Statistical Genetics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activity will provide 45 young researchers (including
advanced PhD students, post-docs, and young faculty) with support for the
duration of the Institute. Expected outcomes in this PASI will include: re-
energized efforts in Latin America in theoretical statistics and their
applications, enhanced collaborations between U.S. and Latin American
researchers, and increased student exposure and experience to new fields of
knowledge. The PASI results will be disseminated through lecture notes and
proceedings to be published through the CIMAT and Rice University technical
report series and will be mailed to all the participants. The lecture notes will
also be made available on-line. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;