* 0819148
* Autonomic Nervous System Activity &amp; Relational Aggression
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Nicki Crick, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Sally Dickerson
* 08/31/2012
* USD 599,969.00

School-based aggression is one of the best known predictors of future academic,
social, and psychological adjustment problems including poor school achievement,
dropping out of school, delinquency, peer rejection, peer victimization, and
depression. Until recently; however, research on aggression has been seriously
limited in two important ways: (1) aggressive boys have received most of the
research attention whereas aggressive girls have often been excluded from
relevant studies; and (2) forms of aggression that are salient to boys, such as
threatened or actual physical harm, have been emphasized whereas forms that are
salient for girls, such as threats to end the friendship or the use of the
"silent treatment," have largely been ignored. Because of these limitations,
relatively little is known about girls who are aggressive at school, which
impedes understanding of the adjustment difficulties of girls in general. The
proposed study will address this gender inequity by targeting types of
aggressive behaviors salient for females (relational aggression) as well as
those more characteristic of males (physical aggression). This research will
examine links between aggression and autonomic nervous system activity (blood
pressure, heart rate, and skin conductance), an index of stress physiology, for
a sample of 250 4th graders. This sample will be followed prospectively for two
years with reassessments occurring in 5th and 6th grades. Of particular interest
will be identification of patterns of reactivity to various types of social
stressors and their links to relational and/or physical aggression for boys
versus girls. Findings from the proposed research have significant promise for
substantially increasing the knowledge of the factors that contribute to the
development and maintenance of relational and physical aggression. First, very
little is known about the biological risk factors associated with relational
aggression. Information about the biological contributors to both relational and
physical aggression would improve the ability to identify children most at risk
for long-term behavior problems as well as those at risk for future health
problems. Although not typically considered in past studies of stress physiology
and childhood aggression, relatively high levels of physiological reactivity to
stressors, particularly those of an interpersonal nature, have been shown to
place individuals at risk for serious health problems such as heart disease or
immune dysfunction. Because this risk can begin at relatively young ages and
persist over time, early identification is likely to play an important role in
the prevention of these serious health problems. Findings from the proposed
study are also likely to have important implications for increasing the
specificity of intervention efforts with aggressors. If particular forms of
aggression (relational vs. physical) are shown to be associated with
physiological underarousal, intervention efforts may focus on helping aggressors
to identify more appropriate, socially competent ways of seeking out stimulation
in their environments. In contrast, aggressors who exhibit physiological
overarousal in response to stress may benefit from programs that include anger
management techniques, including recognition of physiological responses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;