* 0819689
* Nano-scale biogeochemistry of organic carbon across a long-term mineralogical gradient
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Dawit Solomon, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2012
* USD 299,454.00

Soil represents the largest reservoir of terrestrial organic carbon (C) on the
global scale. In light of predicted climate change, the soil?s ability to
accumulate and retain C has received growing interest. The Kyoto Protocol on
climate change demands a fundamental understanding of mechanisms that control C
stabilization and release from soils. Yet, the underlying geobiological
mechanisms for the long-term stabilization of C in soils are still not well
understood, and the potential for C sequestration in the uppermost layers of the
Earth?s surface remains unknown. Current conceptual models of soil organic C
turnover build on destructive macroscopic analytical approaches are not fully
process-oriented, and usually fail to provide explicit molecular-level
information about the linkage between mineralogy and organic C functionalities,
as well as the spatial features of organomineral assemblages. The objective of
the proposed project is to design novel experimental and non-destructive high
resolution spectromicroscopic (STXM and NEXAFS) approaches that enable us to
obtain first-hand process-oriented biogeochemical evidence regarding: (i) the in
situ spatial arrangement of minerals, polyvalent metal-ions, organic C
functionalities and other architectural features of organomineral assemblages at
the microscopic and sub-microscopic level, and (ii) element-specific information
about local structural and compositional environments of adsorbing atoms and
surficial interactions, micro- and nano-scale heterogeneity in spatial
allocations and other molecular-level features of organomineral assemblages. Of
particular interest are the long-term changes along a mineralogical gradient
developed during pedogenesis. We plan to conduct the proposed investigation on
samples that will be collected from a long-term soil chronosequence at Merced-
California, where the underlying geomorphologic units range in age from 3 to
3000 Kyr. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: This project aims to develop
innovative analytical approaches involving the use of synchrotron-based direct
microscopic and spectroscopic techniques. These novel methods will reveal high-
resolution information on a molecular- and atomic-level providing a detailed
mechanistic understanding of organic C stabilization due to spatial organization
and surficial biogeochemical interactions. This project will be the first of its
kind and advance knowledge about long-term stabilization of organic C and global
biogeochemical C cycling driven by the complex interaction of C, soil minerals
and the emergent soil properties in the critical zone. For the broader
scientific community, project outcomes will significantly strengthen climate
change and environmental research of Earth?s C cycles.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This project will build local capacity in
teaching, learning and research. Students at the undergraduate, graduate and
post-graduate levels will be trained using a wide array of new technologies and
their applications. A particular effort will be made to actively recruit non-
traditional, minority and female students. The innovative nature of the
analytical approach affords the possibility of developing a short collaborative
hands-on training program on ?The potentials and applications of synchrotron-
based infrared and X-ray spectromicroscopic techniques in environmental
geobiology? to environmental scientists who are at early stage of career
development. We also plan to organize a symposium on ?Synchrotron-based micro-
and nano-scale mapping of organomineral assemblages in the environment? make an
effort to introduce these spectromicroscopy techniques to a wider audience as
emerging environmental research techniques in conjunction with international
geosciences meetings. The results of the project will be communicated to the
scientific community through annual presentations and publications in peer
reviewed international journals. This project joins a number of others
ecosystems research programs in Western US, and communicate results directly to
organizations involved in education, research and policy
making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;