* 0819160
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science:  Group Based Mobilization:  An Experiment
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2009
* Christy Aroopala, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2009
* USD 10,736.00

Groups are often mobilized to take action in politics. For example, the civil
rights movement of the 1960s and other social movements illustrate the large
role that group mobilization plays in politics. Further, in election contests
and policy debates, political elites and campaigns often target the group
identities of voters to mobilize group support. However, while group-based
mobilization is clearly widespread in politics, social science theories have
little to say about which group-based mobilization strategies are likely to work
and in what circumstances. This gap in our understanding of group-based
mobilization stems from a divide in the field between explanations of decision-
making that emphasize individual costs/benefits analysis (rational models) and
those that emphasize attachment to group (group models). This project seeks to
fill this gap by merging group-based models with the rational choice model to
provide an empirically testable theory of when and how group-based mobilization
efforts increase participation. Since individuals who strongly identify with
their group are likely to participate in group efforts regardless of
mobilization efforts, the key question is: what factors make individuals who
moderately identify with their group susceptible to group-based mobilization
attempts? Frames in political communication (i.e. persuasive messages containing
interpretations of events) have been shown to change individuals? opinions or
behavior and can be used to mobilize groups if the frame targets group identity.
However, an underlying rationality determines whether individuals with moderate
predispositions (such as group identity) will accept or reject frames. This
rationality is captured by factors, or moderators that limit framing effects,
that help us predict whether individuals will accept or reject frames (Druckman,
2001a; 2001b). As such, a study of group frames and potential moderators can
help generate testable predictions and merge rational and group-based models of
behavior. This project seeks to demonstrate that successful group-based
mobilization efforts consist of frames that target group identity and that are
reinforced by moderators, such as thresholds (rules that determine how far the
group is from their goal), credible sources of mobilization messages, the stakes
involved in the decision, and the interactions among these factors. The results
from an initial voting game laboratory experiment for the first part of the
dissertation provide support for the hypothesis concerning the interaction
between group-targeted frames and the moderator of thresholds. This research is
supplemented with a public goods laboratory experiment that tests the effects of
group-targeted frames, stakes, and credible sources. In addition, a survey-
experiment has been developed that tests group-targeted frames and support for a
school bond proposal. This project helps us understand the role of group
identity in politics, and this is important to understand for three key reasons.
First, this project helps us understand which types of mobilization strategies
increase participation of underrepresented groups, such as minorities and
females. Secondly, the findings of this project suggest that mobilization
strategies do not have to include content that increases intergroup tensions. In
other words, this project highlights that group strategies can increase
participation of group members without also increasing intergroup tensions.
Finally, this project opens the door for future explorations of strategies for
diffusing intergroup tensions, particularly in situations where these tensions
are high and could involve violence or conflict.