* 0819533
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: "Political Inclusion and Ethnic Relations: Did Political Representation Affect Attitudes Towards Untouchables?"
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Kanchan Chandra, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2009
* USD 11,860.00

To what extent does a traditionally disadvantaged group benefit from gaining
political representation? By focusing on the case of Dalits (the former
"untouchables") in India, this project provides an overview of the relative
benefits and downsides of "descriptive representation" and a specific focus on
the impact of the inclusion of Dalits in political institutions on attitudes
toward Dalits. In contrast with prevalent theories of "realistic conflict" and
group competition, the project argues that attitudes towards Dalits should
improve in the long run with their political representation. To provide
empirical evidence supporting this claim, the study uses survey-experiments and
other attitudinal variables measuring attitudes towards Dalits in a survey of
Southern Indian villages. Empirically, the project has two objectives: measure
the extent to which Dalit representation has affected attitudes towards Dalits
and investigate the causal mechanisms that lie behind any changes. Since
villages in which political offices are specifically set aside for Dalits are
randomly chosen according to the "reservation" system in place since 1993,
survey answers allow clearer causal estimates of the impact of Dalit political
inclusion on attitudes. The project makes several contributions. Scholars have
devoted surprisingly little attention to the attitudinal repercussions of a
change in the ethnicity of political leaders. This question appears crucial in
regards to the prevalent view in political science, according to which ethnic
groups fight for the control of economic and political resources. Following this
hypothesis, a deterioration of interethnic relations would likely offset the
material gains a group derives from political representation. To address this
question, the proposal uses experimental designs employed by political
psychologists interested in racial attitudes in the United States. The project
thus strives to circumvent social desirability effects among respondents and
proposes a rare comparative test of some of the questions the American
literature on group attitudes has been debating for the last three decades. This
project has broader impacts from informing at least two major, public policy-
related debates. The first concerns the relative benefits of increasing the
participation of citizens from disadvantaged groups in policy-making processes.
While this consensual prescription is widely accepted, very little evidence
currently exists concerning the overall benefits this would bring to the
targeted community. This project also informs the debate over the value and the
benefits of "positive discriminations." Arguments over the negative impact on
intergroup relations of positive discriminations, such as "political
reservations," have been developing fast in India, in France and in the United
States. This will also yield relevant findings on this question. While the
project focuses on the impact of descriptive representation on these attitudes,
other scholars interested in racial/ethnic attitudes may subsequently use this
original data to test a variety of hypotheses related to the environmental
determinants of intergroup attitudes.