* 0819993
* ADVANCE Partnerships for Adaptation, Implementation, and Dissemination (PAID) Award:  Resources for Recruitment &amp; Retention (RRR) of Women Faculty in STEM Fields at U. Delaware
* EHR,HRD
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2013
* L. Pamela Cook-Ioannidis, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Beth Mitchneck
* 07/31/2013
* USD 307,936.00

The goal of this ADVANCE PAID project is to transform the culture for women
faculty in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields at
the University of Delaware by educating STEM faculty and administrators in best
practices for the recruitment and retention of women faculty. Building on
successful ADVANCE programs at the Universities of Michigan and Wisconsin, this
goal will be achieved by (1) developing a cohort of faculty to prepare and lead
workshops for STEM faculty and administrators on recruitment best practices and
"mentoring the mentors"; implementing an ongoing mentoring and educational
process for tenured faculty by creating a faculty working group, thereby
increasing ensuring that the workshops and training are relevant, accepted,
continuing, institutionalized, and transferrable; and (3) establishing a cohort
of faculty leaders and administrators with awareness and understanding of how
gender schemas and bias, unconscious marginalization, and the accumulation of
disadvantage negatively affect women's careers. The workshops will be planned by
a gender-balanced group of prominent faculty members, and plans are in place to
enable the program to be institutionalized and continued beyond the grant
period. UD has documented strong institutional support through the commitment of
human and financial resources. The PIs on the program include the deans of both
colleges involved in the STEM recruitment and mentoring efforts. In addition,
strong support has been expressed by the Provost, the Vice Provost, and STEM
chairs. The Evaluation and Assessment Center for Mathematics and Science
Education in Ohio will serve as the external evaluator for the
project.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The work under this project will
spread best practices from the College of Engineering at UD to the College of
Arts and Sciences natural sciences and ultimately throughout the University.
Additionally, as an ADVANCE PAID project, one aspect of this work is to broaden
the impact of work carried out at other ADVANCE institutions through its
adaptation to and dissemination throughout another institution. The University
of Delaware is a smaller institution than the universities of Michigan and
Wisconsin, so our use and modification of their ADVANCE materials may highlight
different issues that impact female faculty at a research institution with a
strong history of promoting undergraduate research while maintaining externally
funded research programs.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;This project
will educate a STEM-based faculty and administration on concrete research
results regarding unconscious biases held by both men and women; on the effect
of these gender schemas on our institutional polices, recruitment, and retention
processes; and on the ways that these policies can be changed (especially
recruitment methods and evaluative methods) to reduce the effect of these
biases. It is critical that these biases, and their cumulative effects on women
(and on other underrepresented groups), be recognized and formally addressed.
The successful implementation of this program will result in excellence in
hiring and in diverse perspectives brought to STEM research areas.