* 0819011
* Integrated Analyses of the Sites- and Mode-of-Action of the ToxA Virulence Determinant from the Fungal Wheat Pathogen, Pyrenophora Tritici-Repentis
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Lynda Ciuffetti, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 07/31/2012
* USD 424,000.00

The plant disease, tanspot, caused by the pathogenic fungus, Pyrenophora
tritici-repentis, is a destructive and economically significant disease of
wheat, which exhibits characteristics that make it ideally suited for
investigating properties of pathogen virulence and plant disease susceptibility.
For example, the fungus produces multiple protein toxins each of which is
required for its ability to cause disease depending on the genetic makeup of the
host. Understanding how these toxins function should provide substantial insight
into how pathogens cause disease and how plants become vulnerable to pathogens.
This project will evaluate one of these toxins called Ptr ToxA and investigates
how and where this protein interacts at the cellular level. The experimental
protocol is highly integrative and incorporates a diversity of approaches
including biochemical, cytological, molecular, and genetical analyses designed
to identify interacting plant partners. Such partners include host proteins that
mediate its uptake, facilitate intracellular transport, and comprise the toxin's
site-of-action. Successful completion of the objectives promises to be
transformative not only for its contribution to understanding the basic biology
of pathogen virulence and mechanisms that govern host disease susceptibility,
but also for understanding processes fundamentally important to plant biology
including, receptor biology and function, intracellular protein transport and
chloroplast structure and function. The project will support training and
outreach activities in several ways including: the implementation of a workshop
in molecular plant-microbe interactions at Heritage University, a
nondenominational private, accreted institution of higher education sited on the
Yakama Indian Nation Reservation in Toppenish Washington; conducting an eleven-
week internship program at Oregon State University hosting select Heritage
University students; and direct training experiences in an area with broad
implications to the plant sciences for a postdoctoral associate or a research
assistant and graduate and undergraduate students.