* 0819519
* Scale and Complexity of Media Markets as Determinants of Local Government News Coverage
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2008,12/31/2010
* Stephen Lacy, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Humes
* 12/31/2010
* USD 498,087.00

The success of democratically elected governments depends on a flow of
information about elected representatives. News media have served this function
in the United States for more than 200 years. Recent developments threaten the
ability of traditional media outlets (newspapers, TV, and radio stations) in
large metropolitan media markets to fulfill this function. Central city
populations continue to decline and suburban sprawl is expanding the number of
and altering the nature of government units in these markets. Simultaneously,
reportorial staffs are being cut to shore up profit margins in the face of
growing competition from cable, satellite and the
Internet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the magnitude of these transformations,
scholarship about the ability of both old and new media to adequately cover city
governments remains limited and fragmented. This leaves unanswered questions
about how well news media cover local governments, which factors influence
coverage, and whether or not Web-based media, such as political blogs and
citizen journalism Web sites, are providing local government coverage.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address these and related questions, this project will
study a random sample of 100 metropolitan statistical areas and for each content
analyze news from all news media in the central city and all the news media
within a selected suburban city to determine the extent and quality of local
government coverage in traditional local news media and Web-based news outlets
and the amount and proportion of local news reporting that can be used by
citizens for political decisions versus coverage of events with more transitory
and, perhaps, mass appeal. The results will constitute a base against which to
measure the state of local news in traditional media, and particularly local
government news, in a period of media change and also assess the impact of new
substitutes for traditional media. By examining influences such as competition
and ownership structure, the study will help inform government policy for
electronic media.