* 0819491
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science:  The Politics of Structural Changes in Voter Turnout
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2010
* William Terry, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2010
* USD 12,000.00

The question of how voter turnout influences political outcomes is critical for
illuminating the meaning and consequence of elections. Despite the obvious
positive and normative importance of the issue, central aspects of how turnout
affects democratic outcomes remain contested. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On one hand,
a frequently voiced and plausible argument is that, because the pool of non-
voters disproportionately consists of citizens who are poor, working-class, or
members of minority groups, political outcomes are likely to reflect the
preferences of the relatively advantaged members of society-precisely because
they are more likely to show up at the polls. Thus, according to proponents of
the "turnout matters" thesis, the candidates and policies of the left, which are
presumed to favor the disadvantaged, should benefit when voter turnout is
high.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the common-sense appeal of this argument,
empirical studies of the relationship between turnout and the political fortunes
of the left have overwhelmingly failed to support it. Those authors who conclude
that "low turnout doesn't matter" have followed one of two main lines of
argumentation: (1.) In terms of their stated policy preferences, if not their
demographics, non-voting survey respondents look very much like voters (hence
low turnout does not favor the right), or, (2.) Turnout rates show very little
correlation with the electoral fortunes of the left, measured in terms of the
vote share garnered by leftist parties, (hence low turnout does not favor the
right).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses formal modeling and both
quantitative and qualitative data to addresses the points of contention in the
debate-in the specific context of large changes in turnout precipitated by
changes in the law. Two instances of structural change in particular are
examined: (1.) recent legal changes to election day registration requirements in
a number of U.S. states that have increased a vote's "portability" across
electoral districts and (2.) the U.S. Voting Rights Act of 1965 which removed
structural impediments to voting by, among other things, removing literacy tests
and poll taxes. These two cases form the basis for empirical tests of the
competing claims made in the literature and some novel propositions advanced in
the present work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By analyzing the repercussions of
specific structural changes in turnout, this research will contribute to our
understanding of the contentious and important issue of turnout's political
implications. This is a topic of broad concern to citizens as well as
policymakers who design or reform political institutions.