* 0819542
* Collaborative Research- Laterally Extensive Breccias in the Mesoproterozoic Atar Group, Mauritania: Tsunami Deposition resulting from a Marine Extraterrestrial Impact?
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Keith Milam, Ohio University
* Continuing grant
* Paul E Filmer
* 08/31/2011
* USD 100,000.00

Tsunamis are oceanic waves with long wavelengths, long periods, and high
velocities, and are most commonly caused by catastrophic displacement of the
water column by submarine fault movements, landslides, volcanic eruptions, or
the marine impact of extraterrestrial bodies. Energy conserved during wave
propagation in the deep ocean is translated to wave height as tsunami waves
cross the continental margins, and is gradually dissipated through friction with
the sediment substrate. Although mobilization of the substrate can occur over
wide areas of the continental shelf, the most devastating effects of tsunami
occur during wave inundation of coastal zones, which experience significant
erosion and transport of sediment that is then deposited en masse in inland
zones, and during tsunami back-surge, which can result in additional erosion and
seaward transport of sedimentary materials. Despite their frequent recurrence
and their potentially extraordinary sedimentologic effect, our understanding of
tsunami deposits is largely restricted to Holocene and younger deposits.
Although more ancient geologic deposits have been attributed to tsunami waves,
only recently has the detailed analysis of wave behavior and related sedimentary
deposition permitted a more systematic compilation of sedimentary signatures
that can be ascribed to processes acting during passage of a tsunami wave-train.
Within such a framework, detailed analysis of ancient tsunami deposits
potentially allow differentiation of specific tsunami processes. The largest
deposits (i.e. mega-tsunami deposits), if well preserved in terms of their
stratigraphic thickness, stratigraphic variability, and lateral extent, may even
provide sufficient data to differentiate among potential tsunamigenic source
mechanisms.

Carbonate strata within the Proterozoic Atar Group, Mauritania, contain a 4 to 6
meter-thick breccia interval that has been attributed previously to seismic
liquefaction. The wide lateral extent of deposits over a thousand kilometers
across the West African craton, as well the presence of amalgamated beds with
distinct intrabreccia scours, variable clast grading, and indication of bi-
directional imbrication, suggests formation via passage of a series of
anomalously large waves (e.g. a tsunami wave-train). Furthermore, facies
reconstruction indicates transport of meter-scale boulders up to 150 km across a
shallow cratonal seaway, suggesting a tsunamigenic source of extraordinary
magnitude. This project, a collaboration between the University of Tennessee
Knoxville and Ohio University, will carry out a detailed sedimentologic,
petrographic, and geochemical analysis of these deposits to characterize the
sedimentological effect of tsunami processes, to explore tsunami behavior and
energy depletion in a shallow epicratonic seaway, and test the hypothesis that
the wave energy originated from a marine extraterrestrial impact.

This project aims to advance discovery while promoting teaching, training, and
learning by linking sedimentologic and planetary expertise of the two
Investigators and involving both graduate and undergraduate students in
international collaboration and the process of scientific inquiry. Both
investigators have a long history of public outreach. The University of
Tennessee will support a local middle school teacher to construct a series of
physically contained, hand-on exercises (and associated web materials) that
explore tsunamis and extraterrestrial impacts as geologic phenomena that shape
our world. These exercises will be provided to a number of regional schools, and
funding will also support undergraduate and graduate ?student ambassadors? to
visit up to ten local middle schools to work with students and teachers in
implementing these exercises, thereby enhancing secondary science education in
eastern Tennessee.