* 0819641
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Variation in Maltese English
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2010
* Lisa Bonnici, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 06/30/2010
* USD 10,633.00

In postcolonial settings, local varieties of the language of the former
colonizers often develop, exhibiting unique structures and social norms of use.
While research into the structure and socio-historic backdrop of post-colonial
Englishes is burgeoning, scholars have focused primarily on non-Western contexts
where colonial forces gained power against the wishes of indigenous residents.
This project examines the structure of the English spoken in a distinctive
postcolonial, bilingual locale, the island-nation of Malta, as well as local
ideologies surrounding English use. Malta, a member of the European Union,
stands apart from other postcolonial contexts in its amicable relations with
former British colonizers, its reliance on tourism and imports, and residents'
expectations of out-migration as well as their Western cultural allegiances.
This project will investigate whether, given these distinctions, Maltese English
exhibits patterns similar to other postcolonial English varieties, which have
been found to distance themselves linguistically from former colonizers through
the development of local norms of correctness and appropriateness of use. Under
the direction of Dr. Robert Bayley, Lisa Bonnici will investigate linguistic
variation in Maltese English, a postcolonial "new" variety of English spoken as
a first language in Malta, through an analysis of informal sociolinguistic
interviews with men and women from four generations. The research combines the
quantitative study of linguistic forms with a detailed study of speakers' ideas
about language. Malta offers an understudied distinctive case of stable societal
bilingualism with English in both a postcolonial and a Western context,
providing an opportunity to further understandings of language use in
postcolonial settings. Furthermore, through informal discussions with
participants, this project will raise local awareness about the legitimacy of
this English variety, which has yet to gain much attention locally and which
some regard as simply "bad English." Finally, this project contributes toward
the study of bilinguals and bilingualism.