* 0819780
* Emotions and Decision Making
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Tamar Kugler, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Rigdon
* 06/30/2012
* USD 321,879.00

Decision making is often a highly emotional experience. Anticipating that one
must make a decision, the process of actually making one, and experiencing its
consequences can each generate intense emotions. However decision researchers
have, until recently, generally assumed that emotions should be kept out of
decision making as much as possible. Systematic study of decision-related
emotions has emerged only in the last decade or so as a significant research
topic. Some important steps have already been made. The research proposed here
aims to extend these initial steps in three main directions. First, the research
examines interactive decisions, where one individual's choices affect the
outcomes of another's, and will study the impact of emotions on decisions
involving risk, trust, altruism and other important social motives. Second, the
research will move beyond earlier work, which has mainly examined the decisional
effects of broad positive and negative emotional states, to investigate the
effects of more specific emotions (e.g. fear, anger, happiness and sadness).
Third, earlier studies have often relied on self-report measures of opinion,
preference, or intended behavior rather than on observing actual behaviors that
have significant real impacts on the decision makers. In contrast, the current
studies will measure actual, incentive compatible behavior. &lt;br/&gt; These
three extensions - social embeddedness, emotional specificity, and real outcomes
- will bring the understanding of the interplay of emotions and decisions closer
to the important societal questions we wish to illuminate: Which emotions
increase or decrease the risk-taking behaviors, from those of high-level
managers making strategic decisions to individual choices of health-related
activities? How do emotions affect the building of trust in personal, political
and business relationships? Which emotions increase or decrease contributions to
important public goods such as public television or community development? In
short these studies will systematically extend existing emotion and decision
research into contexts of higher realism and specificity, and thus of greater
relevance to the settings in which many of the most crucial human decisions are
made.