* 0819001
* Social Movements and Political and Religious Engagement
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Rebecca Sager, Loyola Marymount University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2010
* USD 32,858.00

&lt;br/&gt;SES-0819001&lt;br/&gt;Rebecca Sager&lt;br/&gt;Loyola Marymount
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The United States has a certain level of
secularization within the public sphere and religious involvement in civic life
is a vital source of political and community involvement. This involvement can
take various forms including creating social movement organizations with agendas
based on religious ideals and using religious messages in the hopes of
persuading voters. This project studies the relationship between religion and
political interactions. The PI will analyze data collected through field
research and interviews at a liberal evangelical social movement organization,
during the Presidential campaign in 2008 to answer three main research
questions: How is religion used as a social movement strategy? How do people
negotiate through interaction their religious and political viewpoints? Why are
some religious messages perceived as more valid than others? While current
research on religion and social movements has offered an increased understanding
of the role of religion in creating frames around perceived religious beliefs of
members, the processes of social movement interaction are often much more
complex, and much less strategic, than is accounted for by the theoretical
notion of frames. The study examines the processes and mechanisms by which
people put actions and words together, a research strategy that will expand
social movement theory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additionally, this study will help
shed light on key applied questions about what it is that motivates and sways
voters. Is it the ideas created by social movement leaders that attract voters,
or is it the invitation to be part of a shared cultural and religious identity?
What assumptions do we make about religion and how it matters to others? Answers
to these questions are important to the numerous audiences who have a stake in
understanding why people vote the way that they do. In addition, researching the
subject may be especially important when considering policy development and its
impact on underrepresented communities. A change in political leadership based
on social movement action from the religious left could lead to substantive
changes in state and social policy, as well as larger cultural trends.