* 0819067
* Conversationally Induced Forgetting:  Reshaping Individual and Collective Pasts
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* William Hirst, The New School
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Gottlob
* 08/31/2012
* USD 350,000.00

Memory does not merely record what occurred at a particular time in the past,
but also reflects what intervenes between past and present. As a result, the
frequent conversations people have with each other about a past event can
radically influence the way they subsequently remember. Conversations cannot
only impose new memories onto listeners, they can also reshape memories by,
paradoxically, promoting forgetting, as the investigator's research has recently
established. This socially induced forgetting is quite specific: The inevitable
selective recounting emerging in a conversation will strengthen some memories,
but will also weaken or induce forgetting, in both speaker and listener, for
unmentioned memories related to what was mentioned, without having a similar
effect on unmentioned, unrelated memories. The proposed research explores
factors that might influence this socially induced forgetting, specifically, the
position of power and expertise of the speaker, the trust the listener has in
the speaker, and the goals of the conversation. By examining these factors, the
investigator will specify critical conditions under which socially induced
forgetting may occur and thereby further our understanding of how a memory
becomes, to a substantial degree, a product of the conversations that mediate
the initial experience and a subsequent act of remembrance.

The expected findings will have a broad impact because they will underscore the
danger of depending on the accuracy of memory and will articulate how something
as commonplace as a conversation can reshape memory, not just through errors of
commission, but also through errors of omission. Specifically, the expected
findings will (1) add to growing reservations of the legal community about the
reliability of eyewitness testimony, (2) identify how the conversations
community members have about their community's past can shape its collective
memory, and in turn, collective identity and collective actions, and (3) caution
educators to limit their enthusiasm for distributed or collaborative learning.
In each instance, the research will emphasize that the seemingly positive act of
collaborative remembering will carry with it not just benefits, but also costs.
In doing so, the proposed research will unravel the complex ways in which both
individual and collective memories are held captive by social interactions, and
help both institutions and individuals calibrate their assumptions about memory
accuracy to better deal with learning and the effect that the past has on the
present.