* 0819368
* Collaborative Research:  Integrated Data Management for Hydrothermal Spring Geochemistry
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Kerstin Lehnert, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 08/31/2012
* USD 148,913.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0819368&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: A data
management system for hydrothermal spring geochemistry - called VentDB - will be
established for open access to the full range of compositional data acquired on
seafloor hydrothermal vents from all tectonic settings. This system will allow
legacy and future analytical data on hydrothermal springs and plumes to be
professionally archived, managed, served, and integrated with related vent data
and the broader Geoscience data set. VentDB will contain all published
historical data as well as legacy and new data that investigators will
contribute. VentDB will be developed and managed as part of the Geoinformatics
for Geochemistry Program at the Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory (LDEO) and the
Center for International Earth Information Network (CIESIN), both at Columbia
University, in collaboration with the University of Hawaii. VentDB is modeled
after the successful online database for igneous and metamorphic rock
geochemistry, PetDB, and the emerging data management system for marine sediment
geochemistry, SedDB, providing fast, easy, and flexible access to integrated
geochemical data sets from which users can extract any subset of data customized
to their specific scientific problem, by means of the requisite supplementary
information (metadata) that will be included in the database. The project
deliverables encompass the implementation of the database and its population
with a comprehensive legacy data set, the development of a web-based user
interface and of web services for access to data holdings by client systems. The
development of the VentDB system will make use of existing system components of
the Service Oriented Architecture (SAO) that is applied to all data systems of
the Geoinformatics for Geochemistry program. The user interface will feature
interactive query tools, interactive maps, and tools for data quality evaluation
and data analysis. It will be intimately linked and integrated with other
geochemical, geological, geophysical, and biological data in EarthChem, the
Marine Geoscience Data System MGDS (which includes the Ridge2000 and MARGINS
DMS). Procedures for submission of new data by investigators will be coordinated
with the MGDS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chemical data for seafloor hydrothermal
springs are fundamental to the study of mid-ocean ridge and seafloor processes,
ocean water chemistry, global geochemical cycles, as well as vent ecosystems and
sub-seafloor biospheres. By facilitating access to the global geochemical data
set for hydrothermal springs, VentDB will have a major impact on global
geochemistry, microbiology, and ore deposits research. It will be a primary
vehicle to enhance our understanding of the Earth System by allowing researchers
to integrate data types and develop new cross-disciplinary approaches to
scientific questions. We expect this project will result in many new fundamental
insights and unanticipated conclusions that can only be drawn by the use of
large databases, as we have seen for the PetDB
database.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The development of information
systems that make use of rigorous data management technologies, interchange
tools such as markup languages, knowledge networking, data mining, and
sophisticated visualization tools has a major impact on the application of
geochemical data in research and Earth science education. By making scientific
data easily accessible to students, they are being used in courses and giving
Earth science students new appreciation for data manipulation and
interpretation. The enhanced ability of researchers to integrate diverse data
types will result in discoveries leading to better understanding of the Earth
and eco-systems.