* 0819117
* Workshop and Mini-course on Formal Approaches To Celtic Linguistics; Tucson AZ, March 1-8, 2009
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Andrew Carnie, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 08/31/2010
* USD 26,583.00

Modern Celtic languages (Irish, Scottish Gaelic, Manx, Welsh, Breton, Cornish)
are part of the cultural heritage of more than 20 million Americans. These
languages are now rarely spoken, either here in the U.S. or in their home
countries. All of these languages are in danger of extinction. When a language
is lost, so too is much of the culture. One step towards preserving endangered
languages is providing a complete description of their grammars. The Celtic
languages have many grammatical properties which make them distinct from other
European languages, so the linguistic analysis of these languages can be a
challenge to formal theories of grammar which are based on better-studied
languages such as French, Spanish and English. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prof.
Andrew Carnie, along with three other internationally recognized experts in
Celtic linguistics, will be leading a week-long mini course into formal
approaches to the description of the sentence structure, sound structure and
word structure of these languages. This mini-course will be a starting point for
training the next generation of linguists working on Celtic languages. The
lectures, seminars and practicum sessions will not only teach students the
fundamentals of working on the grammars of these languages, but will teach them
about ethics, documentation and preservation of data, as well as providing
cultural context to the research. The mini-course will culminate in a workshop
bringing together experts who will report on the latest advances in these same
areas. The workshop is designed to encourage scholars working on these areas to
collaborate, exchange ideas, and inspire young linguists working on these
languages.