* 0819838
* How phosphate is incorporated into carbonate minerals and its dependence on crystal growth conditions
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Richard Reeder, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2013
* USD 287,381.00

The interaction of dissolved inorganic phosphate with the carbonate minerals
calcite and aragonite is important to many low temperature geochemical and
paleoenvironmental systems. Phosphate is an essential, sometimes bio-limiting
nutrient, but in soils and natural waters growth of carbonate minerals can
remove phosphate. Phosphate is sorbed strongly to the surface of calcite and
aragonite and incorporated into these minerals during crystal growth as an
incompatible trace element. These processes remove P from the environment,
making it unavailable to organisms, but potentially creating a record of the
dissolved P content. For example, variation in phosphate concentration in
calcite cave deposits at high spatial resolution is used in paleoclimate studies
to mark annual growth layers in speleothems and to indicate paleohydrologic
conditions. Recently it has been proposed that the P content of certain deep-sea
corals can serve as a proxy for the dissolved phosphate concentration in
seawater at the time of growth. Although there have been many studies of the
sorption and incorporation of phosphate in carbonate minerals, the chemical
nature of the incorporated species remains uncertain. Recently, we have shown
that solid-state 31P NMR spectroscopy can be used to determine the P speciation
in calcite in situ at concentrations found in nature. In calcite speleothems
phosphate is incorporated by at least three different processes, involving at
least two distinct crystalline inclusions.&lt;br/&gt;We propose an experimental
program to investigate the pathway for phosphate incorporation in calcite and
aragonite and how it varies with crystal growth conditions. Calcite and
aragonite will be prepared under carefully controlled conditions with varying
dissolved phosphate, growth rate, pH, and other important parameters relevant to
precipitation in nature. The distribution of phosphate in the mineral phase will
be determined by a combination of solid-state NMR spectroscopy and P K-edge
XANES and spectromicroscopic methods, which will also allow identification of
any crystalline phosphate phases. Particular emphasis will be placed on
determining the conditions under which the phosphate concentration of the
solution can be inferred from the P distribution of the mineral which
precipitates. The experimental program will be guided by investigation of
natural carbonate minerals in collaboration with other researchers, including
calcite and aragonite cave deposits and aragonitic deep-sea
corals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project will provide
fundamental new knowledge of phosphate incorporation in common minerals, by
providing information on the chemical form of the P in carbonate minerals how it
varies with crystal growth conditions. An understanding of the P incorporation
mechanism is needed to promote informed use of trace P content for
paleoenvironmental reconstruction. These data will also be useful for
constructing more general models for incorporation of large incompatible
oxyanions in carbonates. The experimental data will provide constraints on the
conditions that lead to formation of surface precipitates, which is at present
poorly understood because such precipitates are very difficult to
detect.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: A primary goal of this project is
to provide relevant research opportunities for the education of graduate
students and to introduce undergraduate students to scientific research in a
structured environment. The research plan is designed specifically for students
to acquire a diverse set of skills in materials characterization and
experimental low-temperature geochemistry, mineralogy, and spectroscopy that are
applicable to a wide range of scientific problems. The research will involve
undergraduate students in a manner that provides mentoring experience for a
graduate student. This project will contribute to research infrastructure in
geochemistry through support of solid-state NMR facilities and support for
graduate students who operate these spectrometers for research
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;