* 0819336
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Civil War and the Material, Social and Affective Consequences of Isolation: The Case of a Fishing Community in Northern Sri Lanka
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2008,01/31/2011
* E Valentine Daniel, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 01/31/2011
* USD 14,940.00

Graduate student Kaori Hatsumi, under the direction of Dr. E. Valentine Daniel,
will investigate the local-level, long-term effects of prolonged civil war on
people whose livelihoods are dependent on the local environment. Her research
will be carried out as a comparative study of fishermen in Sri Lanka, some of
whom were displaced by civil war and are now isolated in a different geographic
zone, and some of whom have have not been directly affected by the conflict.
However, globalization of the Sri Lankan fisheries sector has impacted both
communities.

Hatsumi will undertake 11 months of field research among the fishermen of both
communities. Through oral history collections, participant observations and
archival study on the fisheries industry, she will document and study (a) the
history of the displacement, (b) the manner in which they continue to practice
fishing under drastically reduced and restricted conditions, (c) the entailments
of their lives in a new global political-economy, and (d) the effects these
changes have brought not only on fishing as a mode of subsistence but also as a
mode of existence.

The research is important because it will develop an unique, integrated approach
to understanding the experience of internally displaced populations, a group
whose size continues to increase worldwide. Hatsumi will complement her studies
of economic and adaptive resilience with semiotic analysis of suffering and
social belonging, integrating both cognitive and non-ideational factors such as
the body, ecology, environment and labor into data collection and analysis. The
findings will have practical bearing for agencies of humanitarian intervention
and the research will contribute to the education of a graduate student.