* 0819244
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Comparative Effectiveness and Efficiency of Public and Private Environmental Policy
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2009
* Daniel Matisoff, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2009
* USD 12,000.00

This project uses climate change policy in the U.S. and EU and focuses upon
three questions to examine the effectiveness and efficiency of mandated
regulatory and voluntary changes in firm behavior. First, have two voluntary
cap-and-trade programs, the Chicago Climate Exchange and the Carbon Disclosure
Project, reduced carbon dioxide emissions and, if so, how do these reductions
compare to those achieved by the mandatory carbon registry in Wisconsin and the
European Union's Emissions Trading System? Second, has the voluntary Chicago
Climate Exchange been cost-effective compared to the mandatory EU Emissions
Trading system? Third, what are the sources of inefficiency in the
implementation of the mandatory EU cap-and-trade system, and how might these
inefficiencies be reduced? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project answers these
questions using fuel-expenditure and electricity-expenditure data to determine
whether each program has induced firms to reduce carbon dioxide emissions. The
project also compares the costs of achieving emissions reductions for both
trading systems against ex-ante theoretical estimates of the marginal costs of
reducing carbon emissions. Cost estimates of achieving emissions will be derived
from carbon permit trading data. This project will interview firm managers and
examine corporate responses to the Carbon Disclosure Project in order to uncover
the specific sources of inefficiency in the European Union's cap and trade
system. In particular, this research will examine aspects of firm behavior that
depart from the rational economic model and how characteristics of existing
regulations have led to inefficiencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks
to provide a better understanding of the extent to which firm behavior can be
influenced by social and market pressures compared with government intervention.
While extensive research has studies the effectiveness of voluntary behavior by
firms, this research has not explicitly compared voluntary actions to mandatory
regulation. In addition, taken as a whole, this research has been largely
inconclusive regarding the prospects for effective voluntary action,
particularly in the area of climate change policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Climate
change policy has become an important issue. It is crucial to understand the
trade-offs between allowing market and social forces to shape firm behavior
against the need for government intervention. In addition, lessons from the
European Union already demonstrate some of the pitfalls associated with
greenhouse gas mitigation policy. With several cap-and-trade proposals currently
being discussed in Congress, it is increasingly important to understand the
sources of inefficiency associated with greenhouse gas policy implementation.
Armed with a better understanding of these sources of inefficiency, policymakers
can design policy that builds on the actual behavior of firms, rather than on
assumptions of rational behavior, helps firms adapt to changing regulatory
environments, and reduces barriers to efficient outcomes.