* 0819063
* SGER: Assessing the Educational, Career, and Social Impacts of the XO Laptop Program in Birmingham, AL City Schools
* EHR,DRL
* 04/15/2008,09/30/2010
* Casey Borch, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* James S. Dietz
* 09/30/2010
* USD 200,000.00

+h mayor of Birmingham is making a two year loan of XO laptops to middle school
students in the Birmingham City Schools in Alabama. The educational and social
changes that will occur in classrooms and the effects on several student
outcomes are studied in this Small Grant for Exploratory Research. It is
expected that access to technology will change the educational and social
environment in classrooms and affect student outcomes. The problem of digital
divide is acute among the disadvantaged minority community and this study
examines the changes that will occur due to the use and access to technology.
Given the local government's plan to distribute the XO laptops to the middle
school students, the project takes advantage of this educational intervention to
study its effects on several student outcomes. The XO laptops are unique in that
they emphasize collaborative learning by providing user interface and mesh
networking for cooperative work with others. The sample consists of all 6th and
7th grade students in 6 randomly selected middle schools. The project undertakes
the collection of pre and post data on students' technology usage levels and
types, education and career interests and aspirations. The data collection takes
place at two time points: 6 and 12 months after receiving the laptops. The
repeated measures design allows the study of the trend in levels and types of
technology use. An important goal of the study is to explore the relationship of
the increased technology access to students' learning content and skills and
their career intentions. The study also examines how the technology use affects
students' perceptions of social connections, belonging and personal expression.
Data analyses include descriptive statistics, and multilevel models of change,
using HLM program. In addition to paper and pencil survey data from the full
sample of approximately 2500 students, twenty students are interviewed in-depth
at two time points to probe in detail how the access and increased computer
skills influence educational and psycho-social outcomes. The changes in
classroom culture, pedagogical changes due to the use of technology are studied,
using teacher data and classroom data. This should provide a more accurate
picture of the students' learning environment. In order to control for possible
effects of teacher ability (at 2nd or 3rd level models), the teacher data is
linked with student data for estimating the models controlling for the teacher
effects.

