* 0819245
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science:  Migrant Collective Remittances: Transforming Public Works, Local Government and Transnational Civil Society
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2010
* Steven Wilkinson, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Carol A. Mershon
* 07/31/2010
* USD 12,000.00

Migrant remittances, the portion of earnings foreign workers send back to their
countries of origin, reached $276 billion in 2006. Empirical scholarship
investigating this source of hard currency concludes that households spend the
majority of remittances on basic needs-housing, medicine, food-however, some
studies report a portion for 'productive' ends. The extant literature privileges
the household as the dominant analytic framework overshadowing the collective
efforts of citizens, migrants abroad and government actors to improve local
conditions with remittance income. There is evidence to suggest that communities
across traditional migrant-sending states are improving social welfare by
pooling remittances to finance community projects, although there is currently
no data to permit systematic analysis of the determinants of this phenomenon or
the outcomes produced. This dissertation rectifies this empirical gap and
theorizes the factors that facilitate collective uses of remittances,
specifically how migrants and the civic associations they embody in host
countries negotiate an alternative mechanism to the electoral process in the
provision of public goods and services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project argues
that to explain the variation in remittance-use, researchers must move outside
the confines of the nation-state to evaluate migrant cross-border exchanges and
the economic and extra-economic linkages they create. Migration induces a
spatial extension of social networks across borders enabling the formation of
new forms of political agency and civic practice. This research examines the
interplay of multiple actors and structures operating at different spatial
scales within one comprehensive, interactive framework, creating the opportunity
to explain synergy or co-production: patterns of constructive mutual support
between state, society and migrant actors, Using a multi-methodological approach
grounded in fieldwork, the project explains variation in remittance use across
Mexican municipalities from 1990 to the present. The large-n econometric
analysis examines the affect of remittances on access to public goods and
services, while a survey instrument disseminated to all registered migrant
associations in the U.S. collects data on collective remittance practices and
public-private partnerships. Follow-up interviews with migrants and government
actors triangulate the quantitative component and generate descriptive data on
the process of co-production. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The database of public works
projects and descriptive data accumulated are for the public domain. This
dissertation will also make audible the voices of migrants and their actions
that lead to political and social re-organization in their home communities,
particularly salient during contemporary discussions of immigration policy
reform.