* 0819580
* Dissertation Research: Before the Country Ceases to Exist: Mobilizing Against Migration in El Salvador
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2008,05/31/2010
* Joseph Wiltberger, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 05/31/2010
* USD 15,000.00

Graduate student Joseph L. Wiltberger, under the supervision of Dr. Arturo
Escobar, will undertake research on an emerging trend in countries with high
rates of out migration. This trend is the rise of groups that collectively work
toward constructing viable alternatives to migration and alternative forms of
development, despite state-led strategies to facilitate migration, remittances,
and other forms of development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wiltberger will examine the
situation in El Salvador as a test case. His field research will be multi-sited.
Research will be conducted in both El Salvador and the United States. Data
collection will focus on a region in northern El Salvador with a high rate of
emigration and on the region's substantial migrant population in the Washington,
D. C., area. A mix of qualitative research methods will be employed, including
archival research, semi-structured interviews with migrants and community
organizers, community history interviews, life trajectory intereviews, and
participant observation in organizations trying to provide alternatives to
migration. Wiltberger will collaborate with organizations in El Salvador and
Salvadoran-led organizations in the United States that are responding to the
question of immigration, drawing on contacts and experience from prior fieldwork
in northern El Salvador. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is important
because it will provide critical insight into the contemporary immigration
situation and thus will make a contribution to the fields of migration and
development studies, as well as to improving immigration policy and regulation.
The research will give a unique transnational and place-of-origin perspective on
the practice and politics of migration. The research also will contribute to the
education of a social scientist.