* 0819469
* Geochemical Characterization of Lavas from the 2005-06 EPR Eruption at 9º 50' N: Implications for Magma Genesis, Evolution, and Transport along a Fast Spreading Mid-Ocean Ridge
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Michael Perfit, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 06/30/2012
* USD 255,389.00

ABSTRACT

OCE-0819469

Intellectual Merit: Since its designation as a RIDGE 2000 Integrated Study Site
(ISS) in 2001, the 8°-11° N segment of the East Pacific Rise (EPR) has become
one of the best characterized regions of the global mid-ocean ridge (MOR)
system. However, even here our understanding of ocean-ridge volcanism has been
significantly limited by the lack of geologic, chemical and petrologic data on
individual on- and off-axis Fundamental questions remain regarding the spatial
and, in particular, the temporal chemical evolution of fast spreading centers.
In 2005-06, a submarine eruption occurred within the EPR ISS (9º 47?-54? N) at
exactly the same location as the well-documented 1991-1992 EPR. This cyclic
eruption provides a unique opportunity for the proposed multidisciplinary study
in that it is the first time ridge geologists will be able to evaluate
variations in MOR lava geochemistry at one place over a controlled time period
(~15 years). Moreover, pre-eruption seismic data, high-resolution mapping and
high-precision 210Po-Pb dating of the lavas from the 2005-06 eruption have
resulted in its emergence as the best spatially and temporally-constrained MOR
eruption in the world. Together with the dense lava sampling completed since
2006, these data provide an unprecedented opportunity to examine the petrologic
and geochemical aspects of the eruption as well as the temporal and spatial
changes that accompanied this magmatic event.

The investigators will search for systematic variations in lava chemistry over
space and time, as well as differences in fractional crystallization and mixing
between lavas erupted in 2005-06 and those erupted in 1991-92. Melt-hosted
xenoliths will be studied to reveal details of the magmatic conditions in the
source melt lens, as well as for possible signatures of contamination, degassing
and water-magma interactions within the sub-seafloor. The project involves
laboratory analysis of existing samples, including isotopic, petrologic and
studies of volatiles, halogens and high-precision Pb isotopes.

Broader Impacts: This project will provide new quantitative information on the
petrologic, geochemical, and thermal evolution of the EPR magma plumbing system,
of immediate and significant consequence to achieving Ridge2000 Program goals to
integrate and synthesize results across data sets at the East Pacific Rise
Integrated Study Site. The project will bring two young scientists into the
marine geologic and geochemical field. The principal investigator has been
extensively involved in outreach activities over the past decade, and will
continue with to co-Principal Investigator to support and develop University of
Florida and RIDGE 2000 education and outreach programs both locally and
nationally.