* 0819864
* NSWP:  Formation and Characteristics of the Harang Reversal and Relations to Substorms: Simulations with the Rice Convection Model
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2014
* Lawrence Lyons, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Therese Moretto Jorgensen
* 01/31/2014
* USD 535,000.00

The reversal in the direction of the ionospheric electric field in the region
known as the Harang discontinuity is known to play an important role in the
large-scale dynamics of the ionosphere and magnetosphere. This project uses the
Rice Convection Model (RCM) to simulate the Harang reversal in order to evaluate
the physical processes responsible for its formation and characteristics, as
well as its evolution during substorms. The RCM can appropriately take into
account the physics of the plasma drift transport within the plasma sheet, and
it solves for the ionospheric electric potential self-consistently with the
plasma sheet dynamics through their coupling by field-aligned currents.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will further develop simulations to be more
realistic. A magnetic field solver will provide magnetic fields that are in
force balance with the RCM plasma pressures. Particle boundary conditions will
be established using observations from the Geotail satellite. This combined
model will be used to provide quantitative evaluation of the physical processes
believed to govern the Harang reversal. The quantitative results from the
simulations will be compared with ground-based radar observations. To evaluate
the underlying physical processes, individual physical parameters in the model
will be varied to see how the variations effect the Harang reversal. By varying
a single paramter while keeping others fixed it will be possible to determine
the effect of each parameter on the formation and characteristics of the Harang
reversal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To understand the relationship between the
Harang reversal and magnetic substorms and to test a substorm theory, this
project will evaluate the evolution of the Harang reversal and its correlations
to the plasma sheet during the substorm growth phase and during the initial
stage after a strong decrease in plasma sheet convection. The project will
examine whether or not a decrease in the convective electric field leads towards
increasingly rapid changes and instability as predicted by the theory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The simulations will be the first to provide quantitative
assessment of the Harang reversal, its correlations with the plasma sheet, its
evolution and response to variations of interplanetary conditions during
substorms, and its potential use to predict substorms, which will be crucial to
understanding magnetosphere-ionosphere coupling within the plasma sheet and
substorm triggering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;