* 0819568
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Style, Ideology, and Youth Cultural Practice in the Context of Language Shift
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2010
* Qing McFatter, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 06/30/2010
* USD 12,860.00

This dissertation project will investigate linguistic style and variation among
American Indian adolescents on the Blackfeet Nation in Montana. Specifically,
the study looks at the construction of style through the use of local linguistic
resources from regional English and the heritage language (South Piegan
Blackfoot), and in addition, supralocal linguistic resources made available
through popular culture and media. The study explores to what extent adolescents
actively and creatively make use of resources from popular culture and mass
media for their own social purposes, and reproduce and transform their meanings;
to what extent their linguistic practices reproduce dominant ideologies about
language and social categories; and how ideologies of distinction with regard to
race, ethnicity, and other axes of identity influence the stylistic practices of
these adolescents. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The linguistic practices of 40
adolescents between the ages of 12 and 18 will be analyzed using quantitative
and qualitative methods, with data collected ethnographically. This work draws
on linguistics, cultural studies, and anthropology to better understand
contemporary linguistic practices of American Indian youth. Its findings may
have implications for multilingual and American Indian education, as well as for
developing both curricular and extracurricular activities that strengthen
identity and have a positive effect on academic achievement. Finally, by
considering relationships between popular culture and language revitalization,
this study complements research that aims to better understand the importance of
linguistic diversity, especially in the face of globalization.