* 0819068
* 2008 International Conference on Nanotechnology for the Forest Products Industry; St. Louis, Missouri; June 25-27, 2008
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2008,12/31/2008
* Lia Stanciu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Demitris Kouris
* 12/31/2008
* USD 26,000.00

The International Conference on Nanotechnology for the Forest Products
Industry,initiated in 2006, is the sole conference that is devoted to
nanotechnology in the forest products industry. With over 150 national and
international attendees from industry, academia, and national labs, this is the
largest gathering of forest products professionals and decision-
makers&lt;br/&gt;with a focus on nanotechnology R&amp;D, nano-manufacturing and
business. This conference provides a forum for researchers and students to gain
exposure of new advances in nanoscience and engineering applied to
lignocellulosic biopolymers, and enable a research pathway that contributes to
the next generation of sustainable and renewable nanobiocomposite
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2008 conference sessions cover several
subject areas of resent work and new&lt;br/&gt;opportunities, such as, nanoscale
characterization techniques (imaging, mechanical properties, chemistry,
structure, interfaces, surfaces, etc.), nanoparticle self-assembly manufacturing
techniques, nanocomposite processing techniques, relating changes at the
nanoscale (chemistry,properties , and structure) to bulk properties, and health,
safety and environmental implications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of
this proposed project is to promote undergraduate and graduate student interest
and involvement in nanoscience and engineering within forest produces sector by
encouraging participation in a high level scientific forum, promote industry
participation and promote high quality Keynote speakers.