* 0819826
* Long-Term and Short-Term Market Betas in Securities Prices
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2010
* Ivo Welch, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Niloy Bose
* 06/30/2010
* USD 107,240.00

&lt;br/&gt;Long-Term and Short-Term Market Betas in Securities
Prices&lt;br/&gt;SBE-SES 0819826: Welch&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
decomposes historical market betas into one part that is predictive of future
market betas, and another part that is not. If financial market prices are
rational, it is only the first that should explain future rates of return. If
markets are irrational, the latter part can matter, too. Thinking of what is
behind this decomposition is the main idea of our initial project that has now
been reduced to one year. That project of exploratory research is to help
develop a fuller, theory-based research agenda on critical pricing factors, and
their correspondence to rational market theory, in
finance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For example, it is plausible that extreme 1-day
spikes are results of some historical accident and not systematic. Such daily
observations are outliers in market-beta regressions. If the overall stock
market rate of return was positive (negative) on this day, the calculated market
beta of this stock would be high (low). This would be misleading. Fortunately,
this means that spikes are almost like a natural experiment. To exploit this, we
estimate one market beta based on all of a firm's historical returns, and one
based on its winsorized returns. "Winsorized" data are those data that are left
after outlier detection has been performed by specified statistical criteria and
the flagged observations have been removed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We first show
that this decomposition works: The winsorized market beta predicts future market
betas better than the unwinsorized market beta, and the difference between them
is not predictive of future market betas. All hedging-based theories posit that
only ex-ante market betas should matter. There should be no historical path-
dependence. In contrast, behavioral theories, for the most part (as far as they
can be pinned down) posit that investor biases respond primarily to their
(historical) experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our technique of stripping out
outliers in calculating crucial financial pricing statistics is more general in
that it can apply to more than just market beta. We can test whether other
factors that dominate the empirical pricing literature -- price momentum, HML,
SMB, volume, volatility -- reflect rational pricing or not.