* 0819412
* Collaborative Research Project: Protecting the Environment:  Does the Environmental Movement Matter?
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2008,12/31/2012
* J. Craig Jenkins, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 12/31/2012
* USD 156,000.00

PI and Co-PI J. Craig Jenkins, Ohio State University Robert J. Brulle, Drexel
University

Title: Protecting the Environment: Does the Environmental Movement Matter?

SES - 0819412

ABSTRACT

This research project will examine the extent to which the environmental
movement?s potential is being realized. Emerging during the last quarter of the
19th century, the U.S. environmental movement has been an important voice in
debates over environmentally related public policy and its implementation. With
rising levels of environmental degradation, especially in the form of global
warming, the role of the environmental movement takes on increasing importance.
According to social movement theory, the environmental movement is central to
increasing the adaptive capacity of our society to deal with environmental
problems. The researchers will address three major questions: 1) How have
environmental problems stimulated environmental movement mobilization?, 2) how
has the environmental movement interacted with government, business and the
broader public to change public policy and business practices?, and 3) what was
the ultimate impact of the resultant public policy decisions on the natural
environment? Environmental problems are slow to develop and difficult to turn
around. Thus capturing these dynamics requires a long-term longitudinal design.
The investigators plan to collect and analyze seven new measures over a 100 year
time period in the following areas: (1) environmental movement actions; (2)
cultural attention to environmental issues; (3) governmental policy development;
(4) political opportunity; (5) implementation efforts; (6) countermovement and
business political actions; and (7) environmental quality conditions. This
project?s core scientific merit is its contribution to policy change dynamics.
The research addresses whether the environmental movement mattered in terms of
environmental policy enactment, its implementation and finally its effects on
actual environmental problems. Thus this project contributes to social movement
research by providing a systematic analysis of multiple movement outcomes,
including the objective environmental outcomes being addressed. Of special
importance is evaluating the significance of cultural production on movement
mobilization and bringing this to bear along with analysis of organization
change and collective action. This project also addresses the broader concerns
of government policy makers in the environmental field, such as the U.S. Global
Change Science Program, the IPCC and the National Research Council. All three of
these institutions have called for research on our societal capacity for
creative innovation in addressing environmental problems. By illuminating the
social and political interactions that led to successful environmental policy
decisions, this research can better inform the process of institutional change
necessary to facilitate the creation of an ecologically sustainable society.