* 0819547
* Collaborative Research: Dextrous Control of Multi-Digit Grasping
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Marco Santello, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Gottlob
* 08/31/2012
* USD 121,966.00

The complexity of the human hand requires creative and multidisciplinary efforts
aimed at understanding its control. The brain relies on strategies to simplify
the control of complex movements such as those produced by the hands. However,
most studies of these strategies have focused on limited tasks that may not
generalize to natural grasping behaviors and that do not take into account the
use of sensation. The overall aim of this collaborative research proposal is to
test how grasp strategies depend on the behavior performed. The results will
provide insight into how the brain controls and coordinates the complex
architecture of the hand and how sensory information is used in this control.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this project are potentially transformative
in that understanding how the hand is controlled as well as how the brain
controls complex movements has a wide variety of applications. Given the key
role that the hand plays in our motor behavior, ranging from artistic expression
to tool use, results may influence several fields, including neuroscience,
robotic manipulation (e.g., space exploration, tele-operated surgery) and the
development of 'smart' prosthetics. Furthermore, the projects will foster a rich
learning environment for integrating research and education.