* 0819640
* CUNY Conference 2009 Special Session
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2009
* Matthew Traxler, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Vincent R. Brown
* 09/30/2009
* USD 23,076.00

This proposal requests NSF funding to support students and distinguished
speakers for a special session on sentence processing at the CUNY Conference on
Human Sentence Processing to be held in March 2009 at the University of
California, Davis. To understand how people speak and comprehend language,
researchers need to consider how speaking and comprehension influence each
other. Currently, language researchers tend to treat understanding and speaking
as separate phenomena, and they build separate theories to handle the two
domains. Although substantial progress has been made in developing theories of
language understanding and speech even when the two are investigated separately,
a better understanding is possible if researchers consider how production
affects comprehension and vice versa. The immediate goal of this project is to
foster communication between researchers who study production and researchers
who study comprehension with the further goals of 1) encouraging and developing
collaboration between researchers in language comprehension and language
production, 2) advancing linguistic and psycholinguistic theory by encouraging
researchers to include connections between comprehension and production in their
models, and 3) to promote research that integrates concepts from production and
comprehension so that the resulting theories provide a more comprehensive
description of human language. The CUNY Conference on Human Sentence Processing
is one of the most prominent and successful meetings for researchers interested
in experimental psycholinguistics and sentence processing. The proposed special
session of the 22nd Annual CUNY Conference on Human Sentence Processing will
create a number of important and unique opportunities for language researchers
by bringing them into contact with highly successful scholars whose work bridges
the gap between speech and language comprehension. The special session will
involve researchers from multiple disciplines to foster interdisciplinary
research and promote new and exciting collaborations. The funding will also help
graduate students to participate in the meeting in various ways, including
reduced fees and opportunities for travel support. Finally, the invited speakers
include members of underrepresented minorities.