* 0820416
* CRIF:ID- Construction of a probe for optical detection of nuclear magnetic resonance
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Carlos Meriles, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2012
* USD 416,202.00

This award from the CRIF-ID program to Carlos A. Meriles and Matthias Lenzner at
CUNY City College will fund the construction of a double-channel NMR probe of
exceptional versatility designed to simultaneously accommodate a cryogenic-
compatible, double-resonance circuit and broadband optics. The former will allow
radio-frequency control on the evolution of the nuclear spin magnetization
whereas the latter provides the physical setup necessary to implement schemes of
optical detection of NMR. Detection of the nuclear spin magnetization will be
carried out with the aid of time resolved Faraday rotation. This will allow
novel experiments on NMR micro-spectroscopy of organic materials as well as
investigations of the onset of nuclear spin hyperpolarization in semiconductor
nanostructures.

Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy probes material by detecting small
changes in magnetization that arises from the nuclei in molecules. These changes
can be detected indirectly by an effect on a light beam. This work will
investigate this phenomenon and its application to a broader class of materials
such as organic semiconducting polymers or macromolecules in solution. The work
is expected to have a broader educational outcome because it will offer students
a unique inter-disciplinary scientific education and exposure to teams with
complimentary expertise in optics and nuclear magnetic resonance.

