* 0820270
* Neurobiological Rewards in the Evolution of Endurance Running in Humans and Cursorial Mammals
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2013
* Gregory Gerdeman, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 07/31/2013
* USD 224,860.00

Ever since Darwin, researchers have viewed the origins of bipedal walking as a
defining event in human evolution. Recent research suggests that, while bipedal
walking was an essential element of early hominin evolution, endurance running
(ER) may have played an important role in the origins of the genus Homo.
However, the ER hypothesis has not been fully tested and, given its possible
significance for human evolution, deserves a more complete examination. This
study presents a novel test of the ER hypothesis by examining the neurobiology
of running in humans and running mammals. Human runners often report
neurobiological rewards during and after running bouts (frequently termed the
"Runner's High") that play a major role in both their motivation to run, and
increase their ability to sustain high aerobic intensities over long distances.
These neurobiological rewards include feelings of happiness, euphoria, well-
being, anxiety reduction, and reduced pain sensation, which appear to be caused
by the release of endocannabinoids (eCBs) into the bloodstream and brain. ECBs
are endogenous compounds that activate cannabinoid receptors in both the
peripheral and central nervous systems and lead to neurobiological rewards and
pain reduction. It is possible that selection could have generated ER in several
mammalian lineages by linking locomotor activities with eCB signaling and
therefore, with neurobiological rewards. Evidence of the convergent evolution of
neurobiological rewards for ER in humans and other cursorial mammals would
strongly support the hypothesis that human ER capabilities are the products of
natural selection. This study will test the hypothesis that exercise-induced eCB
signaling evolved convergently in humans and cursorial mammals to motivate and
reward running behaviors. ECB levels will be measured before and after running
in a sample of cursorial mammals (humans and dogs) and non-cursorial mammals
(mice and ferrets). The ER hypothesis will be supported if eCBs increase
significantly after distance running in cursors compared to non-cursors. In
addition, mood assessments will be given to human runners to examine the
correlation between eCBs and neurobiological rewards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
study will provide critical new data testing the hypothesis that endurance
running played an important role in human evolution. This is the first study to
examine the convergent evolution of neurobiological rewards for running in
humans and other mammals and thus, represents a novel test of the ER hypothesis.
If neurobiological rewards evolved convergently in humans and other mammalian
cursors, then ER likely played an important role in human evolution.
Additionally, this study will have important implications for the motivation and
evolution of animal migration. Additionally, this study will have important
implications for human mental health disorders. The mental health community has
begun prescribing exercise to treat depression, anxiety, and other mental health
disorders. Exercise may relieve depressive symptoms through endocannabinoid
signaling since this pathway acts as an anti-depressant in animal models. This
study will provide critical new information regarding how and why exercise may
alleviate symptoms of these disorders. This study will also provide numerous
training and research opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students at
the University of Arizona and UC Riverside and will improve research
infrastructure between the Departments of Anthropology and Pharmacology at the
University of Arizona. Finally, this project will open new collaborations
between the University of Arizona, University of Texas Health Science Center,
San Antonio, and University of California at Riverside.