* 0820855
* Automatic and Controlled Components of Implicit Prejudice
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Jeffrey Sherman, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Sally Dickerson
* 08/31/2012
* USD 399,978.00

People may be unaware of their own important underlying attitudes and beliefs,
particularly in the domains of stereotyping and prejudice. Nevertheless, these
"implicit biases" significantly influence inter-group behavior in everyday
social interactions. Indeed, the influence of these biases often is greater than
that of explicitly stated inter-group attitudes and beliefs, affecting important
outcomes for members of minority groups. As such, it is critical to understand
the nature and operation of implicit bias, as well as the factors that may
change them or reduce their influence. To achieve these goals, Dr. Jeffrey
Sherman of the University of California - Davis uses mathematical modeling with
a tool called the Quad model that he developed in his past research. Application
of this tool has shown that implicit attitudes and beliefs sometimes may reflect
the automatic activation of biased associations in memory or may reflect
failures to regulate the influences of such associations on behavior. The Quad
model can be used to estimate the independent roles of each of these factors in
producing biased and unbiased behavior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are four
specific goals in this research. First, the Quad model will be applied to shed
light on the contextual and individual factors that influence the extent of
implicit bias. Implicit bias has been shown to vary significantly across social
contexts and across individuals, often reflecting personal goals and motives.
This research will model contextual and individual differences in implicit bias
in order to better understand the factors that increase or decrease the
automatic activation of biased associations and the ability to regulate the
expression of those associations. The second goal is to apply a "treatment"
approach to reducing implicit bias. In these studies, interventions that are
designed specifically to influence either underlying associations or the ability
to regulate those associations will be applied to individuals and contexts
associated with enhanced activation of associations or diminished ability to
self-regulate. The goal is to show how interventions can be tailored to address
specific deficits in processing (over-activation of associations vs. failure of
regulation) associated with increases in implicit bias. The third goal is to use
the Quad model to better understand the relationships among different measures
of stereotyping and prejudice, which frequently fail to correspond to one
another. The present research proposes that dissociations among these different
measures may reflect differences in the extents to which the measures reflect
the automatic activation of associations versus the failure to regulate the
associations. Application of the model will help to specify when and why
different measures will and will not produce corresponding results. Finally, the
fourth goal is to use the Quad model to better predict behavior in inter-group
settings. Measures of stereotyping and prejudice are sometimes poor predictors
of people's actual behavior towards members of minority groups. The Quad model
can improve the ability of these measures to predict behavior by independently
assessing the roles of automatic associations, the ability to regulate those
associations, and interactions between these components.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In sum, the purpose of this research is to improve the
measurement of stereotyping and prejudice, increase understanding of the factors
that increase or decrease such biases, and improve the ability of measures of
bias to predict people's behavior. Implicit attitudes influence behavior in
important domains of life including law enforcement, health, and employment. It
is therefore critical to gain a better understanding of their nature and
operation.