* 0820240
* ADVANCE Partnerships for Adaptation, Implementation, and Dissemination (PAID) Award:   Gender Equity in STEM at Oklahoma State University
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* John Veenstra, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Beth Mitchneck
* 08/31/2012
* USD 522,690.00

Oklahoma State University (OSU) proposes to adapt the MIZZOU ADVANCE mentoring
plan in order to increase the retention and advancement of women in science and
engineering. The long term goal of this is project is aimed at identifying and
developing changes to university policies and practices to better serve and
represent its changing academic workers in terms of gender and ethnicity. The
goals of the program are to bring awareness of barriers to women?s and
underrepresented groups? advancement across STEM fields. The data gathered in
this effort will help to institutionalize positive changes at the university
level and identify department-specific barriers in order to increase overall
participation and advancement of women and minority faculty to senior and
leadership ranks. Activities targeting the culture, practices and structures
that impede advancement of women faculty can only be successful through the
intervention of the faculty within STEM departments, who are best positioned to
collaborate with university leadership to improve persistent organizational
problems. Through its partnerships with regional institutions in Oklahoma, OSU
plans to expand the network of institutions and individuals from other STEM
underrepresented groups, such as African Americans and Native Americans, to
equip them with knowledge in order to empower them to begin addressing the under
representation of women in academic science and engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project activities will include (1) Mentoring and
networking programs that span STEM departments, including a two-tier mentoring
program to enhance career development for women and for faculty of color; (2)
University-wide programs and workshops aimed at increasing career flexibility
and culturally sensitive interventions; (3) Workshops for STEM faculty from OSU
and regional institutions; and, (4) OSU ADVANCE website that includes best
practices, research, electronic newsletter. Given OSU's partnership with a
regional HBCU and three tribal colleges, this initiative will also contribute to
the development of adapting these interventions to include underrepresented
groups in removing barriers for women in STEM &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of the OSU Advance Partnership are significant and wide ranging. In
addition to addressing the under representation of women in senior faculty and
leadership positions in STEM areas at OSU, we expect to enhance recruitment and
retention of women in junior faculty positions as well. This program of actions
and interventions will provide an important and tested model for wider
applications in supporting and promoting the success and advancement of women in
STEM fields. The scientific work force of the United States will be vitally
enhanced by ensuring that women and people of color, two rapidly growing
segments of the labor force, are positioned to assume positions of leadership in
STEM fields at OSU and nationally. Students at OSU, both undergraduate and
graduate, will be an important part of data collection and analysis. This will,
in turn, both advance their academic experience and training, as well as
providing them the opportunity to participate in transformational research and
interventions. We are committed to ensuring the highest level of diversity in
recruiting student researchers from traditionally under-represented groups. We
would note that OSU has one of the largest Native American student populations
in the United States in addition to other traditionally underrepresented student
populations. The PI and co-PIs have worked closely with the Oklahoma Louis
Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation Program (OK-LSAMP), NABS (Native
Americans in Biological Sciences), SACNAS (Society for the Advancement of
Chicanos and Native Americans in Science, and similar student and professional
programs. &lt;br/&gt;