* 0820375
* The transition from Non-Employer to Employer Status in Low-Income Countries
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2008,12/31/2011
* Christopher Woodruff, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Niloy Bose
* 12/31/2011
* USD 278,759.00

The Transition from Non-Employer to Employer Status in Low-Income
Countries&lt;br/&gt;SBE-SES 0820375: Woodruff&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central
feature of urban economies in low-income countries is the prevalence of small-
scale businesses. Between a quarter and a third of workers are typically self-
employed, most often working alone or hiring one or just a few employees.
Economic growth depends on job creation by private sector enterprises. This
project addresses the barriers to growth among the very large number of very
small firms in a low-income country. Scientific evidence on the nature of the
barriers is critical to developing policies to stimulate growth.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Recent evidence from the United States and Europe indicates that only
around one percent of non-employers create jobs (for others)in any given year.
Data from a panel of 618 household enterprises gathered by the PI and
collaborators suggests similar transition rates from non-employer to employer
status in Sri Lanka. Between June 2005 and September 2007, the share of
employers in the sample increased by 3 percentage points. However, because the
number of non-employers is very large, the non-employers account for a
substantial share of new job creation even though only a small percentage of
them grow. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Identifying the constraints to growth is
challenging. In the absence of constraints, firms choose the level of capital,
wage labor and manager training so that their marginal product equals the
marginal cost. For example, firms will increase their capital stock until the
return to capital equals the real interest rate (with risk premium) faced by the
firm. Therefore the gap between marginal returns to capital and the market
interest rate provides a measure of the extent to which capital constraints
bind, preventing growth and perhaps job creation. However, the measurement of
the returns to business inputs is complicated by the presence of unobserved
characteristics of the owner and firm which affect both input use and output and
profitability. For example, more able managers may invest in more capital.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project identifies the returns to capital, wage labor,
and management training by randomly altering the price of capital, labor, and
business training faced by firms. Altering the price provides exogenous
variation at the firm level in the cost of different inputs, enabling
identification of the returns to different factors of production, and
measurement of the extent to which relaxation of constraints affects the growth
of micro-enterprises. &lt;br/&gt;The project will provide a detailed and
scientific assessment of programs to identify and stimulate high-growth micro-
enterprises. Faced with limited budgets for programs aimed at job creation,
governments and aid agencies need to focus efforts on those programs and
enterprises that are most effective. The project is designed to provide guidance
on this issue.