* 0820657
* "The In Game" Experimental Tests of How Power Dynamics Cause and Can Reduce Gender Inequality
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2013
* Felicia Pratto, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Sally Dickerson
* 07/31/2013
* USD 299,979.00

Gender inequality has multiple and complex causes that tend to contribute to one
another. Gender inequality is also among the most vexing of scientific problems,
not because we cannot identify plausible causes, but because we have identified
so many of them. This research analyzes gender inequality as a product of
multidirectional power dynamics. The purpose of the research is to
experimentally test theoretical causes of gender inequality in a context in
which multiple forms of power may be exercised. Four experiments will test some
basic theories of how gender inequality is created and maintained. Each
experiment examines how people use four or five kinds of power in interaction
with others in an experimental game. Kinds of power include control of
exchangeable resources like money, use of force to coerce others and reduce
their power, social legitimacy, asymmetric obligations to others, and sexuality.
Each kind of power is represented with a colored token. The rules provide for
how players can use each token to respond to requirements the game imposes or to
initiate actions. Although each kind of power is represented abstractly, the
game has many analogies to life. The game method allows one to measure power in
several forms: exercised power (as used in game behavior), potential power (what
a player is able to do), perceived power (reputations among other players), and
relative power (how much more power one player has than another player). Because
gender inequality provides organization to societies in the form of family
structure, leadership structure, the reproduction of culture, as well as
relations with other societies, understanding how gender inequality is created
and maintained is essential for understanding most other important aspects of
human social life.