* 0820211
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grant: Settlements and Sands: Ancient Human Ecodynamics in the Rub' al-Khali Desert, Dubai, UAE
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2009
* Jesse Casana, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2009
* USD 14,999.00

It has been widely assumed that ancient settlement in the Arabian Desert
corresponds with periods of increased precipitation. Recent archaeological
discoveries, however, contradict this assumption. Work by the Dubai Department
of Archeology has revealed that significant human settlement took place after
the Holocene Climatic Optimum (6000 - 4200 BC) in the Rub? al-Khali desert in
the United Arab Emirates (UAE). This suggests that either the history of
settlement or the reconstructed sequence of environmental change in the Arabian
Desert is not entirely understood. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under the supervision
of Dr. Jesse Casana, Jason Herrmann will seek to address these issues through
coordinated archaeological and paleoenvironmental investigations with the
objective of establishing separate chronologies of human settlement and of
landscape change that can be used to assess the relationship between available
precipitation and desert settlement in southeast Arabia. Investigations will
focus on three archaeological sites in Dubai, UAE: a large Arabian Neolithic
site (DDS-4/8), a third millennium BC site featuring a substantial midden and
exposed hearths (Al-Ashoosh), and a very large metal processing site from the
first millennium BC (Saruq al-Hadid). Archaeological investigations will consist
of surface survey, geophysical mapping, test excavations, and various dating
methods at the three archaeological sites, with the goal of developing
chronologies of occupation at each site and determining the continuity or
discontinuity of desert settlement in the region. Parallel paleoenvironmental
investigations will include near-surface geophysics and direct dating of wind-
blown sediments in surrounding dunes to serve as a proxy for aridity, thereby
providing a history of landscape change. These two independent chronologies will
then be compared to assess whether there is a linear correlation between climate
change and settlement patterns. Synchronized cycles of aridity and periods of
abandonment would support the assumption that the desert was only occupied
during relatively moist periods. Anything other than coordinated cycles of
settlement and environmental change would suggest that more complex
relationships between settlement patterns and environmental change are at work.
The results of this research could advance our understanding of the settlement
and environmental histories in this poorly documented region and will offer
valuable insight into ancient settlement and land use in arid environments
worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More broadly, this project will promote the
creation of educational opportunities, the dissemination of information to the
public, and the preservation of archaeological sites in the UAE. As part of the
Dubai Desert Survey, a collaborative effort by American researchers and the
Dubai Department of Archaeology, this project will provide fieldwork
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students from the University of
Arkansas and the UAE. Results of this project will be featured in exhibits and
educational literature at the Jumeirah Archaeological Museum in Dubai and will
influence government-sponsored public interpretation and management efforts at
the study sites. Finally, the project will help protect threatened
archaeological sites in Dubai. As the city of Dubai continues to grow at an
unprecedented pace, construction is expanding into previously uninhabited desert
regions, threatening undiscovered archaeological remains in a country where
there are few procedures for protection of cultural resources.