* 0820508
*  Genetic and Biochemical Characterization of new ABA Response Factors
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Sean Cutler, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Sarah Wyatt
* 07/31/2012
* USD 574,212.00

The small molecule abscisic acid (ABA) is an important hormone that regulates
many aspects of plant growth and development and plays a critical role in plant
response to environmental stress. As a stress hormone, ABA is a critical
regulator of how plants cope with extreme changes in the environment such as
droughts or unexpected freezes. Because of its importance during exposure to
environmental extremes, the ABA response pathway has been reengineered by modern
biotechnologists to create plants with improved yields under conditions of
drought. Thus, research on the biology of ABA has had, and will continue to
have, an impact on agriculture and human welfare. &lt;br/&gt;ABA, like many
hormones, works by binding to receptors that turn on signaling pathways that
ultimately control downstream physiological processes. Recent studies have
identified three receptor proteins that bind ABA. The receptors identified to
date all show strong exclusive preference for the natural form of ABA, but
several studies have suggested the existence of undiscovered receptors that can
bind to both natural and non-natural forms. A detailed understanding of how ABA
is perceived is a major goal in plant biology and will require identifying all
of the receptors that recognize ABA.&lt;br/&gt;The Principal Investigator's has
discovered a family of 5 new proteins that are candidate receptors for both
natural and non-natural ABA isomers. Because these are the first candidate
proteins to interact with both natural and non-natural forms of ABA, the
research should fill a current gap in our understanding of how ABA works in
plants. The research project will use biochemical and molecular genetic
approaches to understand the function of these proteins in plants. In addition,
modern biological research requires training students to be confident moving
between fields to solve problems. The investigator's lab engages in
interdisciplinary research at the chemistry-biology interface and is an ideal
environment for training scientists able to meet the challenges of modern
scientific endeavors. The project will include activities focused on training
undergraduate students and expose students to multidisciplinary research at the
interface of chemistry and biology.