* 0820344
* The Role of Shared Mental Models and Cognitive Load on Group Memory
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* R. Scott Tindale, Loyola University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Kellina Craig-Henderson
* 08/31/2011
* USD 299,613.00

Much of the decision-making and problem-solving work done in organizations
involves groups or teams. As a consequence, a central component of high-level
performance involves optimal information processing by groups. Although research
on group information processing has increased substantially over the past 10 to
15 years, a number of key questions remain unanswered. The current proposal
attempts to directly address one of these key questions: what is the optimal way
to distribute information among group members. Work on group memory has shown
that group information storage capacity is maximized when each member is
responsible for different types of areas of information. However, research on
group information processing has shown that information use is maximized when
information is shared or known by many if not all group members. The
implications of these two findings are diametrically opposed. Thus, the purpose
of the proposed research is to systematically investigate group memory and
performance across different levels of information redundancy across members.
Using a number of different task domains, Dr. Scott Tindale of Loyola University
of Chicago and Dr. Amanda Dykema-Engblade of Northeastern Illinois University
will investigate how best to distribute information among group members so as to
optimize both storage capacity and use. They will also assess the effects of
shared mental models on group memory and decision performance. Two different
types of mental models will be addressed: models of the group in terms of roles
and expertise, and models of the task in terms of key task components and how
those components must be integrated for successful performance. The researchers
predict that when group members share accurate mental models of both types, they
will be able to handle greater amounts of information and put it to better use
than they would be able to do under conditions where such mental models are
lacking. Overall it is expected that some level of information redundancy will
be necessary for optimal group functioning, but that shared mental models will
reduce the amount of redundancy required. The results of this research will help
organizations to design group task environments for maximum performance.