* 0820756
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Quantitative Real-Time PCR System for Biological Science Research
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Vincent Eckhart, Grinnell College
* Standard Grant
* Vicki Martin
* 08/31/2011
* USD 51,716.00

Grinnell College has received an award from the National Science Foundation to
purchase a state-of-the-art quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) system for
collaborative student/faculty research. This quantitative molecular tool will
support research across subdisciplines within the biology department at
Grinnell, and will be used to address a variety of research questions in the
areas of plant molecular ecology and physiology, microbiology, microbial
ecology, genetics, and cell and developmental biology. Specifically, the
requested system will be used for investigations of: 1) plant responses to
environmental stress; 2) bacterial diversity in the phyllosphere; 3) molecular
ecology of flower color; 4) bacterial response to DNA damage; and 5) epithelial
tissue development in nematode morphogenesis. The proposed activities will
contribute in diverse and important ways to their understanding of the molecular
basis for biological diversity and function in various organisms. The requested
instrumentation will significantly enhance the College?s infrastructure, by
providing new technology for quantitative genetic analysis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As with other instrumentation at Grinnell College, this
new equipment will be integrated into the curriculum at all levels, enriching
the research training and learning of a broad cross-section of students. The
acquisition of a qPCR instrument will strengthen their undergraduate biology and
biological chemistry programs, which continually strive to reflect current
advances in research technology.&lt;br/&gt;