* 0820986
* MRI: Acquisition of a LA-MC-ICP-MS for Innovative, Interdisciplinary Research at UTEP: Student Training, Faculty Development, Institutional Excellence
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Andre Ellis, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2009
* USD 524,720.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program award will acquire a multi-
collector inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer (MC-ICP-MS) for the
Department of Geological Sciences at the University of Texas at El Paso (UTEP).
This instrument will be used to measure the isotopic ratios of important
elements in rock, environmental, and biological samples, and will build on the
pioneering isotopic research of three early-career faculty members. Specific
research initiatives include: 1) The application of stable isotopes to unravel
the key geochemical, hydrological, and magmatic processes that control the local
and global distributions of elements like Cu, Fe, Zn, Cr, and Se , 2) The
application of Cu, Fe, and Zn isotopes to probe chemical reactions that span the
interface between biology and geology (for example, the uptake of metals into
cells), 3) The application of radiogenic isotopes to understand the geologic
history of Earth, and 4) The application of the isotopes of elements like Zn,
Cl, Cr, and Pb to fingerprint contaminant sources and track them in the
environment. The MC-ICP-MS will additionally support research in the areas of
environmental sciences, medical sciences, anthropology, and forensics. This
instrument provides UTEP, the only research intensive doctoral university in the
United States with a Mexican-American majority student population, with a state-
of-the-art facility for advanced isotopic research. The success of student
training and education initiatives depends heavily on the type and quality of
research experiences we can offer. The acquisition of this instrument greatly
enhances these training and educational opportunities and will foster student
and faculty development. The management plan for the MC-ICP-MS will develop
synergies among student training (at both the undergraduate and graduate level),
faculty development, and research excellence.