* 0820708
* The Role of Courts in the Protection and Expansion of Civil and Political Rights : A Pilot Study
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2008,12/31/2011
* Donald Songer, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Zatz
* 12/31/2011
* USD 166,039.00

PI and Co-PI: Donald Songer and Lee Walker&lt;br/&gt;University of South
Carolina&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: TheRole of Courts in the Protection and
Expansion of Civil and Political Rights : A Pilot
Study&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0820708&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will examine the extent,
nature, and causes of the role of appellate courts in the expansion and
protection of individual rights. The investigators will analyze the development
of autonomous and democratic legal structures, which derive their power-seeking
agendas from civil society?s demands for individual rights. The demand for these
individual rights corresponds with the development of full democracy. The
research models the relative effect of the extensiveness of support structures,
versus the effect of judge ideology, and direct and conditional effects of the
series of institutional variables on multiple measures associated with the
expansion of democratic rights. The study explores the relationships of these
variables to three dependent variables: the proportion of rights cases on the
docket of the top appellate court, the extent of support for rights, and our new
measure of judicial outcomes. The data for analysis is obtained from random
samples of 100 decisions per year obtained from one common law country in the
Comparative High Courts Database (Canada) and new data coded from the top
appellate courts of four civil law countries (Costa Rica, Nicaragua, El Salvador
and Venezuela). Cases selected for examination vary in key institutional factors
hypothesized to facilitate and constrain judicial support for rights. The
investigators will examine decisions from 1980 to 2005 using a cross-sectional
time series approach. The statistical analyses will be supplemented by intensive
field work in each of the five nations to further probe the perceptions of the
justices and other key actors in judicial politics on the conditions that
support or retard judicial efforts to expand the protection of citizen rights.
The research conducted will be of broad interest to a wide range of scholars who
study law and courts in political science, law, and sociology. The research is
one of a very few projects to attempt a systematic, cross-national empirical
analysis of judicial outcomes that uses comparable data and a common set of
concepts and measures to assess a large number of courts. Moreover, the research
is innovative in that it provides a broad analysis of judicial decisions from
both civil law and common law countries. Beyond the intellectual merits of the
research, this project will contribute to graduate education and professional
socialization. By providing comparable data on four additional countries over a
substantial period of time, the study creates a rich resource that will enable
future research on comparative judicial behavior in both common law and civil
law countries. Additionally, the research broadens our understanding of the role
judiciary in the democratization process in Latin America and democratizing
societies in general. &lt;br/&gt;