* 0820435
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Novel mechanisms of mate localization in plant-dwelling insects: an integration of behavior, neurobiology and biomechanics
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Carol Miles, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 07/31/2012
* USD 172,627.00

PI: Reginald B. Cocroft/ Carol I. Miles

Proposal # IOS-0820533/0820435

COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Novel mechanisms of mate localization in plant-dwelling
insects: an integration of behavior, neurobiology and biomechanics.

Plant-feeding insects are among the most abundant and diverse organisms on
earth, with a major impact on both natural ecosystems and agriculture. For many
of these insects, survival and reproduction depend on the detection of low-
amplitude vibrations of the plant surface, generated by the activity of
potential mates, competitors, or natural enemies. However, in spite of the
importance of plant-borne vibrations for insect behavior and ecology, two
fundamental questions remain unanswered. First, how can a small insect determine
the direction of a vibration source elsewhere on the same plant? And second, can
an insect use the complex motion of plant stems and leaves during vibration
transmission to estimate its distance from the source? To answer these
questions, an interdisciplinary team has been assembled with expertise in
behavior, neurobiology, mechanical engineering, and computational modeling. The
team will develop new research tools and use them to understand how insect
behavior is guided by mechanical vibrations, using computational models to
integrate the results of behavioral experiments, sensory neurophysiology, and
biomechanical measurements. Previous research by this team has revealed
surprising sources of information that insects may use in sensing; for example,
the motion of an insect?s body, resting on its six legs, can be highly sensitive
to the direction of travel of a plant-borne vibration. Results of the proposed
research will transform the current understanding of how mechanical vibrations
influence the behavior of one of the most ecologically and economically
important groups of organisms. Because collaborative teamwork is increasingly
important for scientific progress, a major goal of the project will be to train
graduate students in the skills needed for a career in interdisciplinary
research. Finally, insights gained during the study could lead to the design of
directional vibration sensors that could have an impact on many industries.



