* 0820582
* "How do reward and salience combine to influence attention and sensory-economic decision making? -- A behavioral and computational study"
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Christof Koch, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mary Rigdon
* 08/31/2012
* USD 340,989.00

Several real-life decisions involve combining sensory and reward information,
yet most previous research in human and animal literature has focused on either
economic or sensory decision making in isolation. The proposed research bridges
this gap by developing a behavioral and computational understanding of how
sensory information about an object's visual attractiveness (salience) and
economic information about its reward value combine to guide visual attention
and decisions such as whether a search target is present or not in a cluttered,
distracting background; and where to look next to find the target. In
particular, the research will investigate the optimality of such sensory-
economic decision making - do humans behave as reward-maximizing
agents?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A potential application of this study is in
designing reward incentives to detect rare, life-critical targets that are
otherwise missed (e.g., bombs in airline passenger bags, cancers in medical
images, and scud missiles in satellite images). The impact of this study extends
to everyday decisions as well: when people go shopping and see multiple items on
a display, where do they look - is attention guided to visually attractive items
or rewarding items in the display or a combination of both? What people see
influences what they buy (they cannot buy what they cannot see). A quantitative
understanding of how salience and reward combine to influence where people look
will lead to better designed user interfaces and displays for education and
instruction material (e.g., in books, other visual media), that will draw the
viewer's attention to important information by increasing its visual salience
and reward value.