* 0820624
* Genome-Wide Analysis of Root Traits
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Philip Benfey, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2012
* USD 4,298,963.00

PIs: Philip Benfey (Duke - Biology), John Harer (Duke - Mathematics), Jonathan
Lynch (Penn State - Horticulture), Joshua Weitz (Georgia Tech - Biology); Senior
Personnel: Herbert Edelsbrunner (Duke - Computer Science), Leon Kochian
(Cornell-USDA-Boyce Thompson Institute), Daniel Williams (North Carolina Central
University - Biology)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of this project is
to use genomic approaches to identify the genes that control the branching
patterns of crop roots. How roots branch in soil is known as the plant's 'root
system architecture' and it varies dramatically from plant to plant. These
differences are known to impact the plant's ability to acquire water and
nutrients. Since many plants have to deal with environments in which nutrients
and water are limiting, the root system architecture is a central feature of how
plants adapt to their environment. A better understanding of root system
architecture addresses two of the major challenges confronting plant biology -
how to feed a burgeoning world population in a sustainable manner and how to
cope with global climate change. Poor soil fertility and environmental stress
suppress crop yields in many parts of the world, and many models predict these
stresses will increase in coming decades. Intensive irrigation and fertilization
are not environmentally sustainable, nor economically viable in most developing
countries. Thus, identifying the genes that underlie root system architecture
could have a profound significance for agriculture and world food security.
Surprisingly, little is known about the individual traits that comprise root
system architecture. There are two principal issues that have restricted the
understanding of the genetic basis of root system architecture: 1) the lack of
cost-effective methods for non-invasively imaging growing roots and 2) the lack
of adequate means of describing the complex spatial structure of root system
architecture. Two non-invasive imaging technologies will be used in this project
to acquire images of growing rice and maize roots under different environmental
conditions. Response of root systems will be compared to responses when grown in
soil under similar conditions. Mathematical approaches to describing growing
root systems and simulations for comparing different root system architectures
will be developed. Quantitative trait loci (QTL) for root architecture traits
will be identified using special populations of rice and maize and efforts will
be initiated toward isolating genes of significance to plant
breeding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this work stem, in part,
from the nature of this research that it is inherently interdisciplinary, thus
training at various levels (undergraduate, graduate, post-doctoral) will
integrate quantitative approaches with applications to experimental biology. A
course will be developed in collaboration with faculty at North Carolina Central
University (NCCU) that focuses on understanding complex genetic traits. NCCU is
a historically black university (HBCU) located 5 miles from the Duke campus. The
course will use examples from plants as well as human disease to inform and
educate undergraduates as to the issues involved in analyzing complex genetic
traits and the cutting edge technologies and computational approaches now
available for identifying the genes responsible for these traits. For qualified
students who have taken this course, research internships will be provided. A
website will be developed to disseminate the results from this project, as well
as to describe methods and results of interest to researchers and breeders. The
web site will be accessible at http://www.biology.duke.edu/benfeylab/.