* 0820381
* MRI: Acquisition of Instrumentation for Integrated Circuit Design and Device Characterization
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Heinrich Foltz, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2012
* USD 130,000.00

MRI: Acquisition of Instrumentation for Integrated Circuit Design and Device
Characterization&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
research is to improve reliability and performance of integrated circuits in
high frequency, high energy and radiation environmental applications. The
approach is to develop asynchronous digital circuits against particle radiation
and ultra-wide band low power radio frequency integrated circuits, and to
characterize wide-band gap semiconductor devices for high energy and high
temperature applications using the requested
instrumentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As semiconductor devices are being scaled
down, various new ideas for integrated circuit design from device level to
circuit level are needed to deal with the challenges due to this shrink. The
investigators request a waveform generator, a logic analyzer, a radio frequency
probe system and its accessories to support the following research project: 1)
asynchronous circuits against particle-induced soft error; 2) ultra-wide band,
low power radio frequency integrated circuit design; 3) wide-band gap
semiconductor devices; and 4) time domain semiconductor device
characterization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed instrumentation and research
projects can directly advance and enhance integrated circuit technology and its
application in defense, space and wireless communications. Students will be
trained through the use of state-of the-art instrumentation through course work
and their involvement in research projects. The research projects will expose
students to cutting-edge microelectronics research and attract them to pursue
advanced degrees, thus increasing the number of underrepresented people and
women in science and engineering. Ten to twenty graduate students are expected
to use the proposed instrumentation for thesis research within the next five
years.