* 0820341
* NYU MRSEC: Semantophoretic Assemblies
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2015
* Michael Ward, New York University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Daniele Finotello
* 08/31/2015
* USD 7,200,000.00

The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at New York
University (NYU) focused on Semantophoretic Assemblies (semantophoretic =
carrying information) unites four NYU Departments, Princeton University, the
Polytechnic Institute of New York University, and collaborators from key
institutions, in an interdisciplinary program that addresses Colloidal
Architecture, merging investigators with expertise in experimental and
theoretical condensed matter physics, colloid science, synthetic chemistry,
polymer chemistry, solid-state chemistry, and biomaterials to develop principles
for the fabrication of innovative materials - from the colloidal to macroscopic
scale - based on colloidal particles equipped with self-contained information
that directs assembly, either through shape or chemical interactions. The Center
operates an ambitious program aimed at creating unique K-12 and post-secondary
education activities while broadening the participation of groups
underrepresented in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics. These
efforts include the award-winning Scientific Frontiers Program, which introduces
competency-matched curriculum content to elementary, middle and high schools and
communities in New York City, reaching substantial numbers of minority students.
The Center also supports REU students, integrating them with an existing REU
operated jointly with the City College of New York, a minority-serving
institution in Harlem. The summer research program sponsors faculty-student
research teams from four-year colleges, and through the NYU-centered Faculty
Resource Network, numerous minority-serving institutions. The Center also hosts
Science Writers-in-Residence workshops, led by prominent science writers, which
are open to Center participants at all levels as well as the community beyond
the MRSEC. The Center's research and education efforts benefit from materials
synthesis, characterization and computational facilities, which are shared by
MRSEC faculty, students, postdoctoral research associates, industrial partners
and outreach participants. The Center operates an Industrial Partners Program
with dual-level membership aimed at encouraging pre-competitive collaborative
research as well as more directed research. Industrial interactions are
reinforced by annual meetings as well as symposia operated in conjunction with
the New York Academy of Sciences. International collaborations through student
and faculty exchanges as well as International Partner Workshops significantly
expand the impact of the MRSEC beyond NYU.