* 0820487
* Collaborative Research: Holocaust Historical GIS
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2008,02/29/2012
* Alberto Giordano, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Continuing Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 02/29/2012
* USD 365,497.00

The Holocaust was a profoundly geographical event that caused mass displacement
and migration, destroyed or fundamentally changed thousands of communities, and
created hundreds of new places for the concentration of population, the
exploitation of labor, and the mass murder of millions of people. Yet its
spatial characteristics and temporal dynamics have scarcely been studied as
explicitly geographical phenomena. Nor have scholars critically considered the
complex and varied range of spatial scales at which the events constituting the
Holocaust took place, from the individual body to the continental expanse of
Europe. Through a partnership with the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum
(USHMM) and access to its exceptionally detailed datasets, the research team
will build a set of GIS applications and geovisualizations to carry out four
overlapping and interlinked case studies on (1) the evolution of the spatial
system of concentration camps; (2) a comparative study of victim transports from
France and Italy; (3) a localized study of forced evacuations or death marches
from concentration camps at the end of WWII; and (4) a detailed study of the
Budapest ghetto. These cases have been chosen for their suitability for
GIScience modeling and analysis at a variety of scales and because they
represent the range of spatial experiences of Holocaust victims (ghettoization,
transportation, incarceration in the concentration camp
system).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will be the first systematic
examination of the geographies of the Holocaust. Previous historical scholarship
on the Holocaust has focused on Nazi policy, individual camps, particular
atrocities, or the history of certain communities, groups, or nations. This
project will take a synoptic view of the Holocaust as a multi-layered, multi-
scaled event and analyze it by employing geographic information science
(GIScience methodologies. For GIScience, the challenges posed by historical
source data make this project a significant opportunity to advance new
approaches to metadata and source interpretation. Our research methods will
provide models for other scholars working in historical GIS as well. Few studies
have moved historical GIS (HGIS) beyond the important but conceptually limited
stage of infrastructure development to grapple with substantive research
questions. Even fewer HGIS projects have examined historical events or
conditions of major social significance. This project does
both.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this project will be disseminated
through professional conference presentations, a final workshop at the USHMM
open to the general public, peer-reviewed journal articles, a book co-edited by
the two PIs with contributions from all the project's participants, and an
interactive website on the Geographies of the Holocaust to be built and hosted
at the USHMM. Finally, data and GIS applications will be deposited at the USHMM
Archives and the Registry of Survivors for long-term preservation and
dissemination.