* 0820619
* Genetic Architecture of Maize and Teosinte
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2009,02/28/2014
* John Doebley, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 02/28/2014
* USD 9,820,783.00

&lt;br/&gt;PI Edward Buckler (Cornell University/USDA-ARS)
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPIs: John Doebley (University of Wisconsin - Madison),
Sherry Flint-Garcia and Michael D. McMullen (University of Missouri -
Columbia/USDA-ARS), James Holland (North Carolina State University/USDA-ARS),
Stephen Kresovich and Qi Sun (Cornell University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Senior
Personnel: Jeffrey C. Glaubitz and Theresa Fulton (Cornell
University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Genetic architecture is the constellation of
gene effects and interactions that underlie variation in a quantitative trait.
Essentially, genetic architecture is the map between phenotype and genotype.
Understanding variation in genetic architecture is key to understanding
evolution, manipulating species for a sustainable agriculture, and preserving
variation as species adapt. This project will improve our understanding of the
genetic architecture of complex traits in maize and its wild relative, teosinte.
Maize has a combination of life history, economic and societal value, and
genetic tools that make it uniquely suited to studying genetic architecture. The
project will identify genes that control domestication traits and three key
agronomic traits: flowering time, plant height, and kernel quality. Genetic
linkage, association, and fine mapping analyses will be performed on the largest
and most diverse set of mapping families publicly available for any species. A
large series of isogenic lines will be used to characterize allelic series and
epistatic interactions. The genetic architecture of each of the four trait
groups will be compared and contrasted, and the influence of recombination and
past domestication bottlenecks on the genomic distribution of functional
diversity will be examined. Finally, the ability of genetic architecture-based
models to predict phenotype will be evaluated in a broad range of germplasm,
including elite US hybrids. This project will take a step toward the ultimate
goal of predicting phenotype from genotype.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Maize has the highest production of any crop in the world, and
plays a central role in all of US agriculture and food production. Maize also
has the greatest molecular and phenotypic diversity among crop species. This
genetic diversity enabled domestication and is key for future maize improvement.
Understanding maize genetic architecture will accelerate the breeding of future
crops. In addition, this project will generate valuable germplasm resources and
develop genomic tools to access and utilize maize and teosinte diversity. These
resources will be used by many other research groups to dissect numerous other
traits and facilitate marker assisted breeding, allele mining, and genetic
analysis. Project resources will be made available to the public through a
project website (www.panzea.org), integration with community websites (Gramene,
www.gramene.org; MaizeGDB, www.maizegdb.org), and stock centers (Maize Genetics
Cooperation Stock Center, maizecoop.cropsci.uiuc.edu; CIMMYT, www.cimmyt.org;
North Central Regional Plant Introduction Station). Maize is also an excellent
system for teaching about evolution, genetics, and agriculture. Outreach
activities will target four audiences: (1) the general public and students
through a traveling museum exhibit on maize domestication, diversity and
improvement, (2) high school teachers through an enrichment course with North
Carolina Agriculture &amp; Technical State University, (3) collaborative science
through an African Scientist Fellowship at Cornell's Institute of Genomic
Diversity (www.igd.cornell.edu), and (4) undergraduate students through
mentoring and research opportunities.