* 0820438
* Rational Inattention, Random Choice, and Dynamics of Price Adjustment
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2013
* Michael Woodford, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 06/30/2013
* USD 224,208.00

Rational Inattention, Random Choice, and Dynamics of Price
Adjustment&lt;br/&gt;SBE-SES 0820438, Woodford&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
develops an alternative theory of stochastic discrete choice. Standard
econometric models of discrete choice in microeconomic applications, such as
transportation economics, account for random individual choices, conditional on
measured fundamentals, by assuming random utility. In macroeconomic models of
discrete adjustment, the most common source of randomness is assumed randomness
in the fixed cost of adjustment. &lt;br/&gt;This research instead pursues the
hypothesis that random choice results from imperfect precision in agents'
discrimination of the features of the choice that they face, of the kind
documented by experimental studies in psychophysics. The precise form of agents'
imperfect awareness of their environment is modeled using the hypothesis of
"rational inattention" proposed by Sims (1998, 2003, 2006). According to that
hypothesis agents have exactly that information which is most valuable to them,
given their decision problem, subject to a constraint on the quantity of
information that they are able to process. In this, quantity of information is
measured as in the information theory of Shannon (1948). Following this approach
yields very specific quantitative predictions in which there is only a single
free parameter introduced by the hypothesis of inattentiveness, namely a measure
of information flow or of the cost of information.&lt;br/&gt;A particular focus
is the application of this idea to models of price adjustment. Models with fixed
costs of price adjustment ("menu costs") are widely used in attempts to explain
data on individual discrete price adjustments. The recent literature has
stressed that allowance for endogenous timing of price changes results in
substantially different dynamics of adjustment of the general price level than
would be predicted by models with exogenous timing of price changes. The latter
is subsumed in empirical DSGE models of the monetary transmission mechanism and
in analyses of alternative monetary policies. This project reexamines the issue
under the assumption that decisions whether to review one's existing price are
made with imprecise awareness of current market conditions. Preliminary results
suggest that the Calvo (1983) model of staggered price setting can provide quite
an accurate approximation to equilibrium dynamics under most circumstances when
there is a moderate cost of attention between full reviews of pricing policy.
However, the predicted outcome is quite different from that of the Calvo model
under certain circumstances, such under unusually large shock. &lt;br/&gt;By
contributing to the understanding of the dynamics of price adjustment -- a key
issue in macroeconometric models of the monetary transmission mechanism used for
policy simulations -- the project aims to improve the accuracy of monetary
policy analysis inside and outside central banking institutions. Findings on the
implications of alternative models of price adjustment for the welfare
consequences of inflation stabilization should be of particular importance to
the improvement of public policy.