* 0820921
* MRI: Acquisition of an Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy Unit for Research and Undergraduate Training in Geology, Chemistry, and Material Sciences and STEM Activities in Grades 7-12
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* David Sarno, CUNY Queensborough Community College
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2012
* USD 60,453.00

0820921&lt;br/&gt;Scal&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funds from this Major Research
Instrumentation (MRI) Program grant will support acquisition of an energy
dispersive spectroscopy X-ray microanalysis (EDS) unit to be interfaced with an
existing scanning electron microscope system at CUNY. Funds are also requested
for a carbon evaporator system which facilitates conductive sample coating. The
system will be employed to 1) characterize unknown materials in sedimentary
rocks using coupled elemental analysis to infer tectonic history; 2) to
understand abrasion patterns, grain zonation and straigraphic mineral chemistry
in troumalines, zircon and garnets; 3) to better understand pearl
microstructure; to visualize nanostructured polyaniline-enzyme-metal particles
used in highly specific biosensors; 4) to visualize polysiloxane networks used
to stabilize gold, platinum and palladium nanoparticles; 5) to assess the
activity, selectivity, and efficiency of nano-scale metal particle catalysts;
and 6) to determine the ratio of metal to siloxane in Pd-colloids. The
instrument will be housed in the Chemistry Department and jointly administered
by the PIs. Broader impacts will be evident through a commitment to provide
undergraduates with a strong foundation in science. CUNY-QCC has STEP and
College Now programs to allure students at the critical age between high school
and college. The College attracts students from a broad swath of ethnic
backgrounds and advantages. The acquisition will be incorporated into the
state?s ?Decade of Science,? and provide a resource for several
departments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;