* 0820117
* Carnegie-Rochester Conference on Public Policy
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Ronald Hansen, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2012
* USD 225,000.00

McCallum-0820117&lt;br/&gt;Carnegie-Rochester Conference on Public
Policy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Carnegie-Rochester conference series has a long
record of generating and disseminating economic research by leading independent
scholars that is genuinely policy-relevant. It is distinguished from other
conference series by the extent to which it brings together academic researchers
and analysts (and officials) from policymaking bodies such as the Federal
Reserve system, foreign central banks (ECB, Bank of Japan, Bank of England,
etc.), the U.S. Treasury and Commerce Departments, the IMF, and the World Bank.
That it is effective in this role is evidenced by the number of past or future
members of its formal Advisory Board that have recently (or currently) served in
leading policymaking positions including Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks
of St. Louis and Philadelphia, Research Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks
of Richmond and St. Louis, members of the Council of Economic Advisers, U.S.
Treasury Undersecretary for International Economic Affairs, and Chair of the
International Financial Institution Advisory Commission (U.S. Congress). Several
non-Advisory Board authors have later taken similar positions, including four as
Governors of non-U.S. central banks. &lt;br/&gt; Conference meetings are held
twice each year, one at Carnegie-Mellon University (Pittsburgh) and one at the
University of Rochester. About 40 participants (plus faculty and Ph.D. students
of the host university) attend each meeting. Papers and discussants' comments
were formerly published by Elsevier in a distinct series; currently each
meeting's papers and discussions are published as special issues (two a year) of
the Journal of Monetary Economics, a leading scholarly journal in economics. A
web site is maintained by the University of Rochester. &lt;br/&gt; In terms of
academic impact, the series of conference volumes has included numerous
influential and widely-cited papers in monetary economics, macroeconomics, and
international economics in addition to occasional volumes focusing on labor
economics, public finance, and one on the economics of terrorism. Influential
papers reflecting the conference?s emphasis on policy-relevant theoretical
and/or empirical analysis include well-known items by Robert E. Lucas, Stanley
Fisher, Michael Mussa, Torsten Persson and Guido Tabellini, Marvin Goodfriend,
Kenneth Rogoff, and John B. Taylor. Two specific papers that deserve special
mention are Lucas's "Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique" (1976) and
Taylor's "Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice" (1993), two of the most
influential papers in monetary economics of the past 40 years.&lt;br/&gt; The
editors and Advisory Board members actively promote participation by young
members of the profession and outstanding scholars from institutions outside the
group of leading departments. Recent conferences have made heavy and increasing
use of an open Call for Proposals to generate papers for upcoming conferences.
The ongoing trend toward economic research that is highly technical and abstract
makes it increasingly important to provide an impetus, as the Carnegie-Rochester
series does, for leading scholars to maintain and emphasize contact with actual
policy problems faced in economies around the world.