* 0820175
* ADVANCE Partnerships for Adaptation, Implementation, and Dissemination (PAID) Award: WIN: Women in Networks, Building Community and Gaining Voice
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Sheryl Grace, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Beth Mitchneck
* 08/31/2012
* USD 742,702.00

This project is designed to increase the work satisfaction, retention, and
advancement of women faculty in science and engineering at Boston University
through enhancing women's networks, and to analyze the ways in which network-
building can contribute to women's satisfaction and success in academic science
and engineering. Programs adapted from ADVANCE schools and some developed at BU
will be implemented to build strong and functional networks for women faculty.
Programs will include pre-tenure mentoring, lunches with leaders, inter-
university and industry interactions, re-start-up grants to reinvigorate the
networks of female faculty in STEM disciplines, and catalyst grants to support
new collaborative research ventures. To evaluate the effectiveness of these
programs in fostering strong networks for women, male and female faculty will be
surveyed at the beginning of the grant period and at its end about the
individuals in their networks who provide them with important resources such as
professional advice. Respondents also will be asked how they met individuals in
their networks. Comparing responses from the first and the final survey we will
learn about the ways in which academic networks grow and change over time.
Finally, we will examine whether participation in ADVANCE programs is associated
with changes in women's networks over time and whether characteristics of
networks are associated with work satisfaction and productivity and with
benchmarks such as promotion.

Intellectual merit: The innovative aspect of this work is its systematic
approach to building and analyzing social networks to improve the career success
and satisfaction of women faculty. Many of the networking and mentoring programs
developed through ADVANCE projects are explicitly designed to enhance women's
networks, and thus their access to critical information, influence, recognition,
and collaborative opportunities, but few programs track changes in women's
networks over time to assess the role of such programs in enhancing women's
networks or monitor the association between changes in characteristics of
women's networks and the career success and satisfaction of women faculty. The
data from our prospective, longitudinal study will identify links between our
ADVANCE programs and changes over time in women's networks, satisfaction, and
career success.

Broader impacts: Greater understanding about ways to overcome network
limitations and enhance networks should help to increase the retention of women
faculty in STEM disciplines and may well generalize to other groups such as
women graduate students. Research findings about the implications of network
characteristics may also generalize to non-academic work places and to other
academic disciplines. The network analysis tools developed as part of the WIN
project will be made available for use by other institutions. This work will
also fund 20+ new collaborative research projects in a broad range of STEM
fields, launching new research in science and engineering spearheaded by women.