* 0820748
* Function of C. elegans APL-1 in Molting
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2015
* Christine Li, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 12/31/2015
* USD 423,639.00

Many animals, particularly insects and worms, progress through distinct larval
stages before arising as an adult. In worms, such as the non-parasitic roundworm
Caenorhabditis elegans, the end of each larval stage is punctuated by a molt,
whereby the animal synthesizes a new cuticle (or skin) and sheds its old one.
This project will investigate the complex sequence of events that gives rise to
molting. The PI has identified a gene, apl-1, that is essential for molting in
C. elegans. When apl-1 does not function, the animal is unable to complete its
molt and becomes trapped within its old cuticle, causing the death of the
animal. By putting in a normal copy of the gene in the nervous system of the
animal, they can rescue the molting defect. Based on these data, Dr. Li
hypothesizes that APL-1 acts as a neural signal in the molting process. She
proposes to examine how APL-1 exerts its effects by following its movement in
the animal and identifying other genes that interact with apl-1. These results
will provide a general framework from which we can understand not only how C.
elegans molts, but also how other worms, such as parasitic worms that damage
crops or infect humans, molt. The experiments will be performed by graduate,
undergraduate, and high school students. Participating students will learn how
to plan, perform, and interpret experiments, will present their data at local
and/or national scientific meetings, and will hone their scientific writing
skills. The undergraduates that will participate in the project are
predominantly minority and/or economically disadvantaged non-residential
students', the goal of the project is to create a vibrant research community
within the laboratory for their learning.