* 0820294
* Collaborative Research: Using Comparative Genomics to Study the Evolution of Social Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 11/16/2007,05/31/2009
* James Hunt, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 05/31/2009
* USD 17,464.00

One of the most significant findings in biology in the past twenty years is that
there is a shared set of genes that serve as the foundation for development in
all animals, big and small, insect and mammal. Is the same true for social
behavior? This proposal addresses this question with comparative genomic
analysis, focusing on two species of social insects that are distantly related
to each other, honey bees (Apis mellifera) and paper wasps (Polistes metricus).
The hypothesis to be tested is that foraging involves the same genes in
different species, even species that regulate foraging socially in different
ways. To test this hypothesis, brain gene expression patterns will be compared.
A large and diverse team of researchers will be assembled to perform this
project with expertise in social behavior, honey bee biology, wasp biology,
evolutionary biology, molecular biology, genomics, and bioinformatics. The
genome of the honey bee already has been sequenced, so genomic information is
readily available for this species. For the wasp, a new approach to obtain the
requisite sequences has been developed and tested, and will be used. Results
from this project will illuminate our understanding of the evolution of social
behavior. Genomic information for the wasp will form a new public resource
available freely to the scientific community. The project will provide
interdisciplinary training opportunities for postdoctoral associates, graduate
students, and undergraduates, including those at a small, liberal arts
undergraduate institution. This project also will enhance the research
experiences of two new faculty investigators.