* 0820757
* The Arabidopsis Proteome Folding Project
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2011
* Robert DeSalle, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Julie Dickerson
* 07/31/2011
* USD 1,621,765.00

New York University is awarded a grant to develop a public database that
provides information about the structure and inferred function of proteins found
in two plant genomes ? the model species Arabidopsis thaliana and the crop plant
Oryza sativa (rice). Proteins are synthesized in the cell as long polymers that
fold to form three-dimensional shapes critical for their function; knowledge of
the 3D structure of proteins can be crucial for inferring their specific
function. Multiple state-of-the-art methods for predicting protein structure
from protein sequences, including fold-recognition approaches, where protein
sequences are mapped onto known folds, and Rosetta de novo structure prediction,
where proteins are folded in silico, will be applied to all annotated proteins
in these plant genomes. We will also integrate these structure predictions with
knowledge of how proteins (and functional sites on folded proteins) evolve, by
estimating the phylogenies of all protein domain families in these genomes and
identifying positively-selected amino acid sites in these prorein families using
codon-based molecular evolution models that can be mapped onto the predicted
structures. This integration of structural and evolutionary information will
result in annotated functional information inferences that will be useful to a
wide cross-section of biologists working on several plant species. These methods
will be especially useful for annotating the large fraction of proteins in plant
genomes whose functions are currently unknown, the majority of which do not have
any annotation of 3D folded structure (i.e., no detectable similarity to another
protein with known structure). The bioinformatics resources for this project can
also be extended for application to other sequenced plant genomes. The project
is a collaborative effort between New York University and the American Museum of
Natural History and will be carried out on the World Community Grid (a loosely
coupled computing platform composed of &gt;400,000 volunteers, organized by
IBM), sidestepping the computational barrier to the required genome-wide
structure prediction in a cost effective way. By participating in the World
Community Grid (wcgrid.org), the project will also provide a forum for
explaining plant genomics to several hundred thousand Grid participants spanning
all geographic, age, and socioeconomic categories. Finally, the project will be
coupled to a continuing education program for high school teachers at the NYU
Steinhardt School that will train teachers how to incorporate bioinformatics
into high school science curricula.