* 0820584
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Organizational Change and Productivity Growth in Chinese Industry, 1922-1957
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Peter Zeitz, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Feltenstein
* 06/30/2009
* USD 14,995.00

The project researches the contribution of factory-based training institutions
in promoting industrial productivity growth. This project takes a novel approach
to evaluating the effect of on-the-job training on workplace productivity by
analyzing the effects of workplace training and education in a primarily
illiterate adult population. Since most existing analyses study the effects of
training in comparatively well-educated populations, they are of only limited
relevance to policymakers in the world's poorest countries, where the inadequacy
of educational institutions leaves many working adults with little or no
education. Such gross educational deficiency is widely believed to limit
workplace productivity in developing countries. Although the provision of
education to the school age population is a crucial policy measure which
promises to provide economic benefits to future generations, it provides no
immediate help to uneducated adults who have matured beyond school age. For
uneducated adults, part-time programs may provide the only feasible method of
acquiring basic literacy and vocational skills. While all education is probably
of some benefit to productivity, factory-based educational programs have the
potential to provide industry- and firm-specific skills which could not be
easily incorporated into remedial education in other settings. If basic
education and vocational skills have complementary effects on workplace
productivity, then factory-based education may have a larger impact on
industrial performance than similar programs conducted in other settings. Since
provision of adult education is costly and resources are limited, identifying
particularly effective forms is crucial to the design of educational policies
for developing countries. The project makes use of data from The Shanghai
Industrial Census to study the expansion of work-based education carried out in
Shanghai between 1949 and 1957. Econometric analysis is used to investigate
whether these programs affected productivity within the enterprises in which
they were implemented. Productivity effects of the educational programs applied
are compared also across industrial sectors and across state-run and private
sectors that loomed large in the Shanghai economy. Analysis of this census is
linked to monthly production and training statistics from government-owned
textile firms operating between 1946 and 1949. The precedents for the 1940s and
1950s expansion of factory-based education are traced to workplace practices of
Japanese-owned enterprises which operated in China during the 1920s and 1930s.
Innovative training programs carried out in these enterprises contributed to the
success of Japanese investments in the Chinese textile sector. After World War
II, Japanese-owned enterprises were nationalized and these training programs
were adopted and expanded by the Nationalist and Communist governments. A
historical analysis of these programs traces the influence of private sector
training on the provision of education to adult workers in Chinese state-owned
firms during the 1950s. The project thus sheds light on both the productivity
effects of workplace educational institutions, and on the role of the private
and public sectors in developing, diffusing, and implementing these programs.