* 0820198
* Collaborative Research: Process-Centered, Analysis-driven System Development Applied to Human-Intensive Medical Processes
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Lori Clarke, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2012
* USD 516,000.00

NSF Proposals 0820198/0820138&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Process-Centered,
Analysis-Driven System Development Applied to Human-Intensive Medical
Processes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PIs: Lori Clarke, Philip Henneman, George
Avrunin, Elizabeth Henneman, and Leon Osterweil&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project presents a new approach to developing human-intensive systems in which
the coordination among human participants, hardware devices, and application
software systems are specified in an executable, process-definition language.
Process definitions are subjected to rigorous analysis in order to detect
defects and evaluate proposed improvements. Such validated process definitions
can then be used to drive simulations and train process participants. The
proposed approach is to be evaluated by developing a process support environment
that is then used to define and analyze medical processes. Medical processes
provide a particularly good evaluation domain as they are human-intensive,
involve diverse software applications and hardware devices, and are both safety
critical and error prone. Separating and rigorously analyzing the coordination
aspects of complex, human-intensive systems represent a paradigm shift from
current development practices. This approach provides a strong technical and
methodological basis for the engineering of human-intensive systems, leading to
systems that are scalable, understandable, and able to amplify human efficacy
and control. Finally, this process-centered approach has the potential to
improve the quality and reduce the cost of medical care. &lt;br/&gt;