* 0820135
* Collaborative Research: Motherhood and Medicine: An Historical Perspective on Health, Fertility and Women's Work and Earnings
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2010
* Stefania Albanesi, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2010
* USD 135,894.00

The substantial swings in fertility and the dramatic rise in thelabor force
participation of women are among the most notable economic phenomena of the 20th
century. This project seeks to evaluate the impact of medical progress on these
developments. The research project comprises two components. The empirical
analysis evaluates the effect of medical progress on women?s fertility, human
capital investment and labor force participation. This project uses the decline
in maternal mortality between 1935 and 1955 as a summary measure of medical
progress. It exploits geographical variation in the timing and intensity of this
decline to gauge its impact on different cohorts of women at varying points of
the life-cycle. The project then develops a theoretical model where improvements
in maternal health determine a decline in the cost of having children and reduce
the comparative advantage of women in home activities. Medical progress has two
opposite effects on fertility: a positive direct effect that arises from the
reduction in the cost of children and a negative indirect effect stemming from
the rise in women?s incentive to invest in market skills. The model endogenously
generates the rise in fertility and women?s participation starting in the late
1930s, as well as the decline in fertility and the continued rise in
participation from the 1970s on. The analysis requires an extensive data
collection effort. This project needs disaggregated historical time series on
maternal, fetal and neonatal mortality, on fertility, education, labor force
participation, as well as demographic and economic variables. The data will be
used in the empirical analysis and for the purpose of calibrating the
theoretical model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is the first in economics
to analyze the impact of improvements in maternal health on the joint historical
evolution of fertility and women?s labor market outcomes in the US. The point of
departure is that the maternal role of women was associated with a substantial
health risks until the early decades of the 20th century. Maternal mortality and
morbidity significantly hindered women's ability to work and weakened their
incentives to invest in human capital. Since then medical progress greatly
reduced the cost of having children. The proposed research seeks to analyze the
role of medical progress on fertility and the economic outcomes of
women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research links maternal health
to women's fertility, human capital investment and work decisions. The results
will potentially be of interest to a broad range of researchers in economics,
history, demography and sociology. The analysis can also aid the evaluation of
public health initiatives by providing a framework to quantitatively assess
their impact on education, work and earnings of women. The research will also be
integrated with the teaching of the investigators, especially at the graduate
level. Graduate and undergraduate research assistants will be introduced to
important skills and potential research topics to develop on their own. The
extensive data collection effort will result in a historical dataset that will
be made available to other researchers.