* 0820482
* Subfactors and Noncommutative Ergodic Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2007,04/30/2008
* Remus Nicoara, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 04/30/2008
* USD 7,582.00

One of the two main directions of Nicoara's research is the study of invariants
of subfactors, mainly the so called commuting squares. These are squares of
inclusions of finite dimensional C*-algebras that arise naturally in the
standard invariant of a subfactor. Commuting squares can also be used as
construction data for subfactors, and the most explicit examples of subfactors
have been obtained this way. By using a combination of algebraic-combinatorial
and analytic methods, the PI proved several finiteness results for commuting
squares and found a good notion of primeness (in the sense of isolation) for
these objects. The isolation results obtained suggest methods of constructing
one-parameter families of non-isomorphic subfactors. The PI will continue to
investigate such constructions, especially those coming from commuting squares
based on complex Hadamard matrices. Planar algebra techniques will be used to
understand these models, as well as other subfactors constructed from commuting
squares. The other direction of Nicoara's research is the study of von Neumann
algebras from the point of view of non-commutative ergodic theory, especially
applications of rigidity in the context of von Neumann algebras.

In 1930's John von Neumann discovered that certain algebras of operators on a
Hilbert space are the natural framework for understanding symmetries of quantum
physical systems. His ideas play an important role in quantum mechanics, and
fundamental laws of nature such as the Heisenberg uncertainty principle appear
as a natural consequence of von Neumann's abstract theory. In the early 80's
Vaughan Jones introduced the theory of subfactors, as a Galois theory for
inclusions of von Neumann algebras. Subfactor theory quickly became one of the
most flourishing branches of operator algebra theory, with a multitude of deep
connections in knot theory, representation theory, 3-manifolds, quantum groups,
integrable systems in statistical mechanics and conformal field theory. A
subfactor can be viewed as a group-like object that encodes what one might call
the generalized symmetries of a quantum physical or mathematical situation. To
decode this information, one computes the higher relative commutants, a system
of inclusions of finite dimensional C*-algebras naturally associated to the
subfactor. This object, called the standard invariant, has an extraordinarily
rich algebraic-combinatorial structure, generalizing finitely generated groups,
finite dimensional Hopf C*-algebras and other large classes of quantum groups.