* 0820899
* MRI-Consortium: Development of the Pre-Shower Calorimeter for the CLAS12 Detector at Jefferson Lab
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Carlos Salgado, Norfolk State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 09/30/2011
* USD 119,491.00

The funding for this proposal is to build a particle detector for experiments
conducted at Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility. The instrumentation
to be build will be part of the CLAS12 detector, located in the Hall-B location
where high-energy electrons will be incident onto targets of protons and
neutrons. The purpose of these experiments is to learn more about the quarks
inside the target nucleons. In particular, the quantum mechanical properties of
the quarks, such as the orbital angular momentum, can be determined from a
combination of the quark radial distributions, correlated with their momentum
distributions. Such measurements are known as Generalized Parton Distributions,
or GPDs. Other measurements, such as the space-time evolution of the quarks
turning into fully-fledged particles after being struck by a high-energy
electron, will also be carried out at this detector. These measurements will
contribute to our understanding of Quantum Chromodynamics, or QCD, which
underlies the fundamental force between quarks and gluons. In the process, the
technology to detect particles from electron-scattering reactions will be
extended to higher energies. Improvements in technology are the cornerstone of
advances in a range of applications such as medical imaging.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The detector components funded by this MRI will be
constructed at the following institutions: Ohio University, James Madison
University, College of William and Mary, and Norfolk State University, with
labor provided by students (both undergraduate and graduate), postdoctoral
researchers and faculty, in collaboration with Jefferson Lab staff. This
provides valuable technical experience for the students and postdocs that will
enhance their career opportunities.