* 0820846
* Community Genomics of Local Adaptation in Medicago Truncatula
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Sergey Nuzhdin, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2012
* USD 3,197,563.00

PI: Sergey Nuzhdin, University of Southern California&lt;br/&gt;Co-PI: Eric von
Wettberg, University of California, Davis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Legume plants,
including the agriculturally important species soybean, alfalfa, pea, and bean,
collaborate with rhizobium bacteria to convert atmospheric nitrogen to
biologically available ammonia. This property has enabled legumes to colonize
marginal habitats and provides an ideal system to study how coevolution promotes
adaptation to stressful environments. The model legume Medicago truncatula is a
close relative of alfalfa and grows naturally in both highly saline soils across
North Africa as well as on normal soils. In collaboration with Tunisian and
French researchers, this research project will use genomic resources to
understand how Medicago and its partner Sinorhizobium have adapted to saline
soil. The main goal of this research is to identify both the genes and the
genetic and biochemcial networks that underlie ecological differences between
saline-adapted and non-adapted populations. By measuring the effects of these
genes and networks under the natural conditions that plants experience, this
research has the unique potential to bridge genetics, ecology, and evolution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Statement broader impacts &lt;br/&gt;Soil salinisation is
a growing problem with the potential to impact up to one third of agricultural
land world-wide. Thus, understanding how abiotic factors, including salinity,
impact symbiotic efficiency represents an important challenge for agriculture
both in the developed and developing world. Since Medicago truncatula is a model
species, the genes and pathways identified in this research will be directly
applicable to breeding efforts to improve many agriculturally important legumes
and more broadly to plant biology as a whole. The interdisciplinary and inter-
continental nature of this project further provides an exceptional training
opportunity. This project will integrate Tunisian and American teams-facilitated
by generous matching funds from public (UC Davis) and private (USC)
institutions-by cooperatively performing field experiments in Tunisia and
through the exchange of personnel. Tunisian students and scholars will be hosted
at the US institutions where they will engage in research, undertake
individually-tailored coursework, and make contacts that will spur their
professional growth. American undergraduate and graduate students will benefit
via hands-on research experience, individual mentored projects, and the
opportunity to participate in workshops and conferences in North Africa.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All data generated by this research will be made publicly
available at http://nlab.usc.edu. The project website will be publicly
accessible with released data and project updates. The genotyping array, and the
genotype and phenotype data collected will serve as a community resource
enabling future work on Medicago. The results of this research will be published
in peer-reviewed open-access journals, made accessible to the American and
African media, and presented by junior members of the team at international
meetings across the globe.