* 0820306
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Spectral Analysis System to Measure Leaf Optical Properties
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Curtis Holder, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2009
* USD 17,535.00

This award provides funds for Dr. Curtis Holder of the University of Colorado at
Colorado Springs to purchase a UniSpec-SC Spectral Analysis System with
integrating sphere to permit examination of the relationship between leaf
optical properties and leaf water repellency. The goal is to determine if leaves
of species with high water repellency differ in reflectance, transmittance and
absorption of incident light from those species with low water repellency.
Because leaf water repellency is largely determined by leaf structure and leaf
surface properties, leaf optical properties may be a useful method to detect
adaptations to leaf water repellency in ecosystems. Dr. Curits will examine the
relationships between leaf water repellency, leaf optical properties and leaf
characteristics of 37 species within three distinct ecosystems: tropical
montaine cloud forest in Guatemala, tropical dry forest in Guatemala and
prairie-foothills ecotone in the USA. This study which will be enabled by this
instrumentation is significant because it will permit the development of more
meaningful models of ecological and forest hydrology processes which incorporate
and are revealed through leaf surface variables. Knowledge of ecological and
hydrological processes within cloud forests, tropical dry forests and grassland-
confier ecotones can be used to guide environmental policy on the management of
ecosystems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will be actively engaged in the
research activities and thus learn field methods and receive experience that
will build confidence and encourage the pursuit of scientific careers. Modules
using the requested instrument will be developed for classroom experiments that
develop inquire-based learning through hypothesis testing.