* 0820553
* Conscious Thought and Rational Norms.
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2013
* Shlomo Sher, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 09/30/2013
* USD 374,459.00

Automatic, unconscious processes are frequently assumed to be responsible for
the systematic patterns of apparently irrational behavior documented by
cognitive psychologists. However, some recent experiments suggest that
deliberate conscious thought actually lead to poorer decisions in complex choice
situations. The purpose of this research is to understand what conditions result
in automatic / deliberative decision making resulting in superior performance
and the sources of these performance advantages.&lt;br/&gt;Two sets of
experiments will investigate these questions from two opposite directions.
Several studies will examine recent experimental evidence for the efficacy of
"unconscious thought" processes. These experiments ask: (1) is the apparent
unconscious thought advantage found in these recent experiments normatively and
psychologically real? And, if so, (2) what are the cognitive mechanisms
underlying this unconscious thought advantage; and (3) does this advantage
extend to choice situations involving inter-temporal trade-offs and moral
dimensions?&lt;br/&gt;A second set of experiments starts with biases observed in
conscious judgment, and asks whether similar biases in information processing
influence the automatic processes engaged by subliminal images. When
participants are exposed to masked images, presented so briefly that they fail
to reach conscious awareness, these images nonetheless can "prime" - i.e.,
facilitate or interfere with - responses to subsequent clearly visible images.
By modifying the content of the subliminal images and the structure of the task,
it is possible to ask whether factors that inappropriately bias explicit
conscious judgments have similar effects on implicit unconscious priming from
subliminal images.&lt;br/&gt;This research promises to deepen our understanding
of the functions of consciousness, the mechanisms of intuition, and the general
relationship between consciousness and rationality. It should help us to better
understand the conditions under which, and the mechanisms by which, conscious
and unconscious thought processes lead to improved decisions.