* 0820766
* CRIF:ID- Development of Instrumentation for the Study of the Spectroscopy and Chemistry of Isolated Biological Ions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Timothy Zwier, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2012
* USD 559,719.00

This instrument development award from the CRIF-ID program to Timothy S. Zweir
and Scott A. McLuckey in the Department of Chemistry at Purdue University will
enable them to construct an instrument for the study of ions in the gas phase.
Specifically, the instrument will enable tandem mass spectrometry experiments
involving ion/ion reactions, ion/molecule reactions, and collisional activation
at room temperature. This will be followed by conformation-specific IR and UV
spectroscopies in a temperature-controlled ion trap. This instrument promises to
allow for new insights into the structures, dynamics, and chemical reactivities
of gaseous bio-ions with unique capabilities for examining the role of ion
preparation conditions and methodologies. By incorporating or using existing
aromatic amino acid residues in the polypeptide, single-conformation IR and UV
spectra can be obtained, thereby interrogating the H-bonding architectures of
individual conformational isomers and probing their UV spectroscopy and
conformation specific fragmentation patterns. The dynamics of conformational
isomerization between specific reactant-product conformer pairs can also be
probed by selective infrared excitation followed by re-cooling with helium prior
to interrogation with a probe UV laser. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative
instrument development project combines in a unique way the powerful tools of
biological tandem mass spectrometry and optical spectroscopy. The new
information generated will likely prove relevant to future progress in molecular
biology research via new structural and dynamical insights on gaseous bio-ions.
Graduate students will be involved in the project developing skill in the
construction and design of state of the art instrumentation.