* 0820083
* ADVANCE Partnerships for Adaptation, Implementation, and Dissemination (PAID) Award:  Changing the Face of Michigan Tech
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Lesley Lovett-Doust, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Beth Mitchneck
* 08/31/2012
* USD 499,496.00

The single most important process that shapes the future of a university is the
selection of new tenure track faculty. When an institution aspires to the
principles of excellence, innovation and diversity, these must be actively used
to guide the hiring and subsequent tenure decisions. Traditional patterns of
reliance on "expert opinion" in the evaluation of candidates tend to perpetuate
the existing faculty composition, and when that is occurring at a STEM-intensive
institution, such as Michigan Tech, there is a risk of stasis.

Several federal employment regulations explicitly encourage the consideration of
women and minorities in job searches. In some States, however, search committees
cannot favor particular groups. The key to improving diversity is, we believe,
to increase the qualified applicant pool, and ensure all eligible candidates are
given proper and timely consideration. It is also important, given the rising
cost of supporting new faculty, to provide strong and effective mentoring not
only to the point of tenure, but through the process of advancement through the
ranks to senior faculty positions and institutional administration. We believe
that application of these principles and support structures for all candidates
will be to the great benefit of the institution, and especially to women
faculty.

Intellectual Merit: Inclusion of a doctoral student will ensure that the results
of the project's initiatives will be reported in the literature, with the
opportunity to share best practices with other universities, particularly those
with strong STEM emphasis. The project participants will collaborate with the
graduate student on professional publications and presentations. Proper data-
based analyses of the results of new and past initiatives provide an important
opportunity to identify strategies and tactics that bring more women into the
STEM faculty ranks. Aspects of the student's study will include: comparisons
between male and female faculty in terms of climate perception and climate
experience, levels of startup and salary, rate of progress through the ranks,
productivity, and research income. It will also allow evaluation of the benefits
of mentoring through comparisons "before and after" the introduction of
widespread mentoring. The cluster hiring outcomes will be compared with those
from traditional departmentally-based processes, and the composition of the
applicant pool, short list and final candidate will be compared with historic
patterns that resulted from previous departmental hiring processes.

Broader Impacts: The project will have a magnified effect and opportunity to
increase the number of women in STEM, because of the fact that most of the new
hires we will be making over the next decade will be in the STEM disciplines.
There is therefore an opportunity to make a considerable impact as these will
represent a 62% turnover in the faculty complement. The project investigators
include several senior women in STEM disciplines who have considerable
background in disciplinary research and university administration. All are
personally and professionally committed to promoting an increase in the presence
and impact of women on campus. This ADVANCE grant will structure the education
of our 300-plus colleagues about the value of open processes and accountability
in the evaluation of candidates. It will also provide a framework of
institutional accountability for search committees and their chairs, departments
and their chairs, Deans, and the Provost that will provide transferable best
practices that can be adopted elsewhere.