* 0820869
* MRI: Acquisition of a Molecular Imaging System to Continue Faculty &amp; Student Research in an Interdisciplinary Biosystems and Engineering Research Program
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2010
* Gymama Slaughter, Virginia State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 12/31/2010
* USD 249,483.00

The Virginia State University's Center for Biosystems and Engineering (CBE)
describes a plan to use a molecular imaging system to continue faculty &amp;
student research and teaching in an interdisciplinary biosystems and engineering
research program. The proposed instrument is the Agilent 5500 Atomic Force
Microscopy (AFM)/ Scanning Probe Microscopy (SPM) system. Currently, the CBE has
research projects conducted by four faculty members in the areas of material
science, surface chemistry, nanolithography, bioelectronics, biosensors,
bioscience, and quantitative nanoscale measurements. These current research
projects are addressing questions about surface derivatization, surface
contamination, defect inspection of silicon chips, nano roughness and
quantitation, and characterization of metals. Our research is at the interface
between these technologies and disciplines such as biology, chemistry,
nanotechnology, and engineering. The CBE conducts fundamental studies for
gaining the knowledge necessary for the predictable design and optimization of
future bioelectronic detection devices. The research is a university-wide
initiative to strengthen the area's bioscience/biotechnology/semiconductor
industry and it is attractive to both students and researchers who are seeking
an understanding of the relationships between biology, chemistry, and
engineering to produce the best bioelectronic devices to protect and improve the
health of individuals and our environment. The research programs not only
contribute significantly to the knowledge base, but also provide the best
possible dynamic training environments for future researchers, our students.
Thus, the acquisition of the AFM/SPM system will allow for the continuation of
our interdisciplinary research program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Virginia State
University (VSU) provides an environment conducive to teaching and research
training for our students through (a) our summer research program that includes
over 30 minority students and (b) our researched-based undergraduate laboratory
classes. The proposed Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM)/ Scanning Probe Microscopy
(SPM) system will enhance the undergraduate program through new course contents
and curriculum. In addition, it will promote faculty and undergraduate research
and increase the number of students and researchers using this instrument
throughout the academic year. The proposed instrument will also offer necessary
training in modern technology to undergraduate students. The result of increased
use of the instrument will be manifested in our intellectual progression and an
opportunity to contribute to the overall scientific field. By providing access
to the instrumentation, we can obtain preliminary data, which can increase the
likelihood for the researchers to publish, procure external funding, and engage
in more joint collaboration with researchers from other universities. VSU
creates environments where all our students can succeed through our hands-on
approach to teaching and research. Thus access to modern instrumentation insures
that our students will be prepared to take part in this exciting field and build
capacity by broadening the engineering research experience for minority
undergraduates.