* 0820517
* Rare Disasters and Exchange Rates
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2015
* Xavier Gabaix, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 06/30/2015
* USD 345,393.00

Rare Disasters and Exchange Rates, Proposal Number
0820517&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;by Emmanuel Farhi (Harvard and NBER) and Xavier
Gabaix (NYU and NBER)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This proposal contains a new model
of exchange rates which offers a solution of the forward premium puzzle. The
puzzle is due to investing in high interest rate currencies (the "carry trade")
yielding much more than warranted by the underlying risk differential with low-
interest currencies. The explanation combines two ingredients: the possibility
of rare economic disasters, and an asset view of the exchange rate.&lt;br/&gt;
The model is frictionless, has complete markets, works for an arbitrary number
of countries, and derives in closed form the values of exchange rates, stocks,
and bonds. In the model, rare worldwide disasters can occur and affect each
country's productivity. Each country's exposure to disaster risk varies over
time according to a mean-reverting process. Risky countries command high risk
premia: they feature a depreciated exchange rate and a high interest rate. As
their risk premium mean reverts, their exchange rate appreciates. Therefore,
currencies of high interest rate countries appreciate on average.&lt;br/&gt; To
make the notion of disaster risk more implementable, the proposals shows how
options prices can in principle uncover latent disaster risk, and help forecast
exchange rate movements.&lt;br/&gt; Calibration of the model yields
quantitatively realistic values for the volatility of the exchange rate, the
formerly unexpected sign of the regression coefficients, and near-random walk
exchange rate dynamics. The project has the following distinctive
features.&lt;br/&gt; (i) It generates easily two central features of the data,
namely "excess volatility" of exchange rates, and the (solution to the) "forward
premium puzzle."&lt;br/&gt; (ii) The model has a novel analytical structure,
based on the ideas of rare disasters, and the newly-developed class of
"linearity-generating processes." This makes the model very tractable: Exchange
rates, stocks and bonds prices can be obtained from it in exact closed forms in
a frictionless setup. The framework can serve as a new multi-purpose model for
international macroeconomics.&lt;br/&gt; (iii) The model makes new testable
predictions: Currencies with high crash premiums should subsequently appreciate.
In addition, the model yields a series of predictions about the joint behavior
of exchange rates and the prices of bonds, options and stocks across
countries.&lt;br/&gt; The proposed research offers a way to understand the
impact of exchange rate pegging. This is particularly relevant, as a large
fraction of emerging countries (e.g., China) do peg their currency. To analyze
pegs, one needs a model that generates a volatile exchange rate in absence of a
peg like the model here provided.&lt;br/&gt;Last not least, the projects theory
delineates how the latent importance of large disasters can be detected in asset
prices.