* 0820854
* Elucidating Gene Networks Regulating Development in Tomato
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2008,11/30/2014
* Neelima Sinha, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Anne W. Sylvester
* 11/30/2014
* USD 5,388,147.00

PI: Neelima R. Sinha (University of California, Davis)&lt;br/&gt;CoPI: Julin
Maloof (University of California, Davis)&lt;br/&gt;CoPI: Jie Peng (University of
California, Davis)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plants acquire the bulk of their energy
from light capture by leaves, and leaf shape has direct consequences on the
efficiency of light capture and photosynthetic carbon fixation. As a result,
leaf shape must be optimized in response to variation in light quality. To
understand the processes controlling these fundamental processes, genetic
networks regulating both environmental response and morphological form must be
integrated. This project uses a genomics approach to understand natural
variation in leaf morphology and light response, and to investigate the
mechanism by which these two genetic networks are integrated to ensure optimal
plant form. These goals will be accomplished by characterizing the differences
between tomato species varying in both light response and leaf complexity.
Characterization of these differences will be made using genomic technologies to
find differences in DNA sequence and gene expression. Statistical analyses will
be used to reconstruct the web of interacting genes (genetic networks) that
regulate leaf morphology and light responses. This analysis will allow
identification of central regulators of development and developmental variation.
Increased knowledge of the basis of phenotypic diversity in the developmental
and environmental context should allow better manipulation of crop systems for
improved agricultural productivity. Finally, a program will be developed to
train future researchers and students from under-represented groups from UC
Davis, Cal State University Sacramento, and Los Rios Community College in modern
cross-disciplinary genomic biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All data, gene chip
data, BIN maps, QTL analysis and networks generated by this project will be made
available to the public as soon as the data has passed quality control. All
Solexa sequence data will be deposited in Genbank
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Genbank/). All microarray data will be deposited in
the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/).
In addition, community specific data will be made available via the SOLGENES
website (http://www.sgn.cornell.edu/) and a project-specific web site that will
be developed.