* 0820666
* Determining the Function of O-GlcNAc Protein Modification in Signal Transduction
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Neil Olszewski, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 07/31/2012
* USD 540,000.00

Intellectual Merit: Post-translational modification of cytosolic and nuclear
proteins with O-linked ß-D-Nacetylglucosamine(O-GlcNAc) affects signal
transduction pathways in plants andmetazoans. In Arabidopsis thaliana, this
modification is made by two O-linked N-acetylglucosaminetransferases (OGTs),
SECRET AGENT (SEC) and SPINDLY (SPY). In arabidopsis, O-GlcNAc modification is
involved in embryogenesis, meristem activity,circadian regulation and responses
to gibberellin, cytokinin and light. While many plant proteins are likely
O-GlcNAc modified, the identities of these proteins is largely unknown. A goal
of a previous NSF award was to identify these O-GlcNAc modified proteins. This
work has led to identification of proteins that are modified by E. coli
expressed SEC and the development of methods that enrich O-GlcNAc modified
peptides sufficiently for determining the peptide sequence and mapping the
modification by mass spectrometry. The first specific aim of this award will
employ these methods to determine what arabidopsis proteins are modified and map
the modification(s). The second specific aim will employ molecular genetic
approaches to determine the function of the modified proteins and the effect of
O-GlcNAc modification on their activity. The nucleocytoplasmic ß-N-
acetylglucosaminidase (OGA) that removes the modification has been identified in
metazoans and deficiency in this enzyme has been shown to affect signaling
pathways and to be associated with human diseases. While related OGAs are
present in bacteria, in silico approaches do not identify a plant OGA suggesting
that plants have an unrelated OGA. The final aim of this project will use
biochemical and molecular biological approaches to identify the arabidopsis OGA
and investigate its role in regulating plant
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: High school, undergraduate and
graduate students have been trained under past awards and this training will be
continued. The PI will participate in U of MN summer programs by providing
laboratory research experiences for high school students, teachers and
undergraduates. The PI will attempt to stimulate an interest in science in high
school students by giving laboratory tours and presentations to students and
teachers. The work of this award will contribute to scientific infrastructure by
developing new methods for the identification of O-GlcNAc modified proteins and
the mapping of the modification on these proteins.