* 0820202
* ADVANCE Partnerships for Adaptation, Implementation, and Dissemination (PAID) Award:  NYU
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Daniel Stein, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Beth Mitchneck
* 08/31/2012
* USD 491,160.00

This new program will develop into an integral component of NYU's campus-wide
diversity initiative, and will also play a central role in the university's
transformation into a leading institution promoting the advancement of women and
minorities in all areas of academic endeavor. The initial focus will be on the
promotion and enhancement of the careers of women science faculty, but the
program is designed also to serve as a springboard for acceleration and
solidification of NYU's progress towards an excellent and diverse faculty. The
NYU ADVANCE-PAID program is guided by two goals: 1) transformation of the
institutional climate at NYU through programs that facilitate the recruitment
and advancement of women in science, and 2) promotion of diversity studies at
NYU and other institutions. Programs to achieve these goals include
institutionalizing mentoring, development training, and assessment; providing
greater access to and opportunities for networking and visibility; creating a
family support initiative to aid in fieldwork and travel; providing recruitment
training and incentives; and creating research challenge grants. Design of the
programs is informed both by the literature and by NYU's specific needs.

Intellectual merit. By bringing together national scholarship on diversity with
NYU's internal studies and data collection, the programs are designed to replace
impediments to women's progress in academic science with a climate that provides
greater support and that facilitates advancement at all levels. The project
supports diversity research in targeted areas, particularly those that study
effectiveness of newer programs. Conferences and symposia on a variety of topics
will disseminate new knowledge gained through these and related studies.

Broader impacts. As a prominent university, NYU's progress towards a more
equitable and diverse institution will have significant effects on the
advancement of women within universities and in their respective academic
disciplines. Greater numbers of women faculty with increased job satisfaction
can have a multiplier effect, leading to increased numbers of women entering the
sciences. Within the larger area, the PI and the ADVANCE-PAID Steering Committee
will partner with neighboring institutions, beginning with Columbia University
and Hunter College of the City of New York, to strengthen one another's programs
through collaboration, coordination, and joint programs. For example, they will
work together to organize and sponsor conferences to present a wide audience
with new results and advances in diversity studies; will share best practices
and lessons learned from their existing programs; and will consider exchanges of
graduate students and postdoctoral fellows to aid in recruitment and placement
of women and underrepresented minorities.

The program will be continuously evaluated and refined through internal data
collection and assessment as well as periodic external review. It will provide a
significant impetus to NYU, enabling it to achieve greater faculty excellence
and become a stronger institution, in which both women and men thrive in a
mutually supportive environment.