* 0820982
* MRI: Rapid Image Acquisition of Dynamic Arabidopsis Cells and for High-Throughput Genetic Screens
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Joseph Kieber, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Vicki Martin
* 08/31/2010
* USD 482,781.00

A grant has been awarded to The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
(UNC) under the supervision of Dr. Alan M. Jones entitled "Rapid Image
Acquisition of Dynamic Arabidopsis Cells and For High-throughput Genetic
Screens" for the purpose of acquiring and maintaining a specialized microscope.
The enormous progress made in the plant sciences from sequencing the Arabidopsis
genome has propelled research to the next higher research plane, where examining
how and when cellular proteins interact over time at a high spatial resolution
has become the new standard in demand. Both the demand and the need for
sophisticated imaging instrumentation have increased, pari passu. However,
imaging fluorescently-tagged proteins in plant cells faces several surmountable
challenges. One is the dynamic nature of plant cells due to cytoplasmic
streaming (rapid cellular movement) that occurs with speeds greater than the
speed of standard capture by a standard confocal microscope (which is a
specialized microscope that enables one to visualize fluorescently-modified
proteins in all kinds of live cells). Therefore, to capture transient protein-
protein interactions within plant cells requires a specialized confocal
microscope that enables rapid acquisitions nearly simultaneously through the
cell, over a short time scale. Reconstitution of this data will be used to
produce a 3-dimensional view of plant protein-protein interactions in vivo over
time. This grant will enable 8 highly-productive plant scientists at UNC to make
significant and faster contributions to fundamental science leading to increased
crop production, plant disease resistance, and biofuels
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact will occur in the classroom,
in public, and in the research labs. The use of a confocal microscope will be
introduced to upperclassmen in an intense, hands-on cell biology laboratory. The
public will become aware of the power of rapid imaging through an educational
display and presentations by the PIs. The plant science group at UNC
collectively trains 20 undergraduates, 15 predoctoral, and 30 postdoctoral
students each year. The requested instrument will also serve the confocal
imaging needs of many additional labs on campus. It is the first of its kind on
the UNC campus and only the second like it in the state of North Carolina. Many
scientists beyond the plant science group will greatly benefit from this
specialized microscope.