* 0820614
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Children's Acquisition of Tone Sandhi in Mandarin
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Yen-Hwei Lin, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2011
* USD 11,850.00

When children acquire their first language, they need to figure out not only the
properties of the different linguistic components of the language they are
acquiring (sound structure, sentence structure and words), but they also need to
understand how these components interact. Although we have a good idea of the
milestones in the acquisition of syntax and phonology, we know very little about
the acquisition of the mapping rules between phonology and syntax. This project
examines the acquisition of a phonological rule in Mandarin Chinese (called Tone
3 Sandhi) that partially depends on information from the syntactic structure.
Although in Mandarin it is possible to differentiate words by 4 different pitch
contours, not always the tones remain the same as they combine with other tone
bearing units in the syntax. Tone 3 Sandhi is a rule that changes a tone called
Tone 3 into a Tone 2 when followed by another Tone 3 within the same rhythmic
unit. Although apparently simple, in order to apply this rule, children must
learn the basic tones of particular syllables, must combine words into
hierarchical structures (sentences) and must then build rhythmic units at the
output of the syntax. Tone 3 Sandhi provides a unique window to determine
children's ability to integrate various types of information in language
production at different stages of development (2 to 6 year-olds) as compared to
adults.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results will provide information about
children's initial assumptions about the mapping between phonology and syntax
and will allow a comparison between children and adults in different discourse
situations in order to determine whether variation in the adult language has an
effect in children's ability to produce Tone 3 Sandhi. Both the adult and child
experimental results will provide a testing ground for the various theories of
T3S in Mandarin Chinese. Furthermore, many Chinese local dialects/languages are
heavily influenced by the dominant official Standard Chinese (Standard Mandarin)
and are undergoing subtle or not so subtle sound changes. &lt;br/&gt;This study
provides the methodology and protocol that can be used to study not only the
acquisition of tone sandhi in different Chinese dialects/languages in
bilingual/bidialectal children but also how their acquisition could have been
affected by the on-going sociolinguistic interaction and change. The more we
understand how exactly a child acquires language and particular aspects of the
grammar, the more likely we can understand what might have gone wrong in child
language disorders and transfer that knowledge to the applied and clinical areas
to help those children with language problems.