* 0820025
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Thin Film Growth and Characterization Lab for Undergraduate Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Phillip Broussard, Covenant College
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2010
* USD 178,935.00

Technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will look at issues in
electron conduction in metals via two different routes. In the first project,
the issue of boundary conditions in the superconducting proximity effect will be
studied. There is a lack of clarity on how the superconducting transition
temperature of a system with repeated layers of superconducting and non-
superconducting materials will depend on the boundary conditions. The
predictions of how surfaces affect the superconducting transition temperature
will be compared against the results for bilayer, trilayer, and more complicated
layered structures. The system to be considered will be sputtered layers of
niobium and either tungsten or zirconium, with the layers being of order 60 nm
or larger. The transition temperature will be characterized both by resistive
and inductive methods. The second project will look at the behavior of thin
chromium films as the thickness decreases to see if the material undergoes a
standard metal-insulator transition which would be expected for a material that
violates the Ioffe-Regel limit, or if it behaves as a "bad" metal which
continues to show metallic resistivity in the regime where none would be
expected. Amorphous Mo-Ge will be used as an example of a material that does
undergo a metal-insulator transition for comparison. The desire is to look at
electron conduction in the regime where Fermi liquid theory is assumed to not
hold and yet a metallic behavior is still observed. Both projects will give
insights &gt; to the behavior of electrons in
metals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Laymen:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
effort will be looking at how the current carrying electrons in metals behave at
low temperatures (approximately -440 degrees Fahrenheit). The first project
deals with materials that loose all resistance to current flow (superconductors)
and will deal with how this behavior changes due to electrical contact between
the superconducting material and a metal that does not go superconducting. The
two different metals (niobium and zirconium) will be layered as in a cake and
observed to see how this affects the temperature at which they loose their
resistance. This study is relevant to the use of superconductors, for at some
point, they must all be put into electrical contact with non-superconducting
metals at some point. The second effort is looking at the change in a metal's
ability to carry current as the average distance the charge carriers can travel
changes. At a certain value of this distance, (roughly the distance between the
atoms in the metal) most metals change to insulators, in that they have very
poor ability to carry current and that ability gets worse as the temperature
gets colder. However, some materials do not change in that manner and become
what physicists call "bad" metals. Instead they still behave like metals in
their ability to carry current gets better as the temperature is lowered, but
the overall ability is much smaller than before. This project will look at thin
layers of the element chromium. For both projects the layers will be about the
thickness of 1/1600 that of a human hair.