* 0820212
* ADVANCE Partnerships for Adaptation, Implementation, and Dissemination (PAID) Award:  Revealing the Cumulative Effects of Subtle Gender Bias via Brief Workshop Activity
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Stephanie Shields, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Beth Mitchneck
* 08/31/2012
* USD 258,518.00

The purpose of this project is to adapt, implement, and disseminate a brief
workshop activity for educating individuals about the sources and cumulative
effects of subtle gender bias. The activity is designed to meet three core
learning objectives, namely for participants to (1) recognize the negative
impact of the accumulation of apparently minor biases and unfair practices on
women's ability to advance in their field, (2) develop awareness that different
gender-relevant factors may be more significant at one stage in work life than
in others, and (3) recognize that patterns, not single incidents, are the most
visible indicators of gender inequity. The activity is self-contained, takes
about one hour to complete, and does not require special skills of the
facilitator. Our primary target audience includes faculty peer decision makers
(e.g., promotion and tenure committees), administrators, and other human
resources staff with responsibilities relevant to recruitment, advancement, and
retention of a diverse STEM faculty. &lt;br/&gt;The Penn State distributed
campus structure offers a unique opportunity to adapt the workshop activity to
and evaluate it in multiple settings: in a large Research 1 environment, in
smaller rural and urban environments, and on campuses that offer a range of
baccalaureate and graduate degrees, professional degrees, or technology degrees.
&lt;br/&gt;The project entails adapting, implementing, and disseminating an
interactive workshop activity for educating individuals about the power and
patterns of subtle gender inequities in the workplace, especially those that can
lead to decreased representation of women in academic STEM fields. There are
three components. First, we will adapt a workshop activity that has been
successfully used in graduate and undergraduate teaching to the STEM academic
context. Second, we will implement it and evaluate its effectiveness in faculty
leadership training in four distinct academic settings throughout Penn State:
Major research campus (UP), predominantly graduate studies campus (Penn State-
Harrisburg), four-year liberal arts college context (Penn State Erie-The Behrend
College), and small enrollment regional campuses (UC system). Third, we will
evaluate the workshop activity as a supplement to self-guided Web-based
informational activities and as a stand-alone activity. Last, we will create and
test a prototype web-based version. At each step we will also obtain evaluation
data to guide further refinement of the workshop activity. Given expected
results, we will proceed with dissemination of the product throughout the 24
Penn State campuses and through existing partnerships with other universities,
and commence development of the web-based version. &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of the adaptation, implementation, and dissemination of the workshop
activity lies in its effectiveness as an innovative experiential method for
teaching and learning about subtle gender bias in the STEM academic context.
Workshop activity materials are based on solid empirical research and
demographic data. The project builds on existing ADVANCE-IT products and creates
an innovative intervention product that can be used in a variety of academic
STEM contexts, especially those with limited resources. The project will have
broader impact through its contribution to science education and potential
benefit to society. Undergraduate and graduate research assistants will be
involved in all phases of the project, assisting in preparation of materials,
evaluation, and project dissemination. Through these activities and meetings of
the project group, the work fosters training and learning as it advances
discovery. In addition, recruitment of participants for evaluation studies will
aim to attain a representative sample of from all ethnic and racial subgroups
within the sites and STEM fields studied. Finally, results will be disseminated
to the public. The project will also benefit society through its potential to be
adapted for use in other settings such as human resources in which people need
or want to learn about how substantial inequities can develop over time.