* 0820441
* Leadership Decision Making
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2014
* Jennifer Lerner, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 09/30/2014
* USD 617,433.00

Anger biases perceptions of risk, which can fundamentally shape leaders? most
critical decisions. In one early experiment, the PI found that individuals who
felt angry tended to engage in riskier behaviors than did individuals in a
neutral emotional state. Having discovered this connection between risk-taking
behavior and anger, the PI will explore the effect more deeply by comparing the
behavior of participants from the general population to those of elite
leaders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The large, diverse sample of high-level decision
makers - representing governments, militaries, non-governmental organizations,
and corporations will participate in a series of programmatic experiments.
Simultaneously collecting biological, behavioral, cognitive, and emotional data
will allow the research team to draw implications for real-world behavior. the
team will examine whether anger triggers optimistic responses even when real
behavior is measured, real money is at stake, and angry people are compared to
those in a neutral state. The PI will also interview our leader-participants to
learn about their decision making in a less structured
format.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As an example, one of the planned experiments will
examine the degree to which leaders adhere to long-term goals and strategies
rather than being distracted by presently salient information. Specifically, the
PI will study whether and how anger and accountability affect the tendency to
focus too many resources on an immediate, temporary solution at the cost of a
long-term, permanent gain. She predicts that angry participants, as compared to
neutral participants, will focus so much on winning battles that they will
ultimately lose the war. She also predicts that angry participants who are
accountable only for their end result will take a more long-term strategy than
those accountable for short-term decisions, while angry participants who have no
accountability will fall in the middle. The results will be used to educate
leaders and the public about how anger may affect their most risky and important
decisions.