* 0820346
* Rhizomics - Comparative Functional Genomic and Proteomic Analysis of Rhizome Specificity Across the Plant Kingdom
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2008,09/30/2010
* Carol Soderlund, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 09/30/2010
* USD 2,701,891.00

David R. Gang (PI), University of Arizona&lt;br/&gt;Carol A. Soderlund (CoPI),
University of Arizona&lt;br/&gt;Jay Thelen (CoPI), University of
Missouri&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Summary of the Project&lt;br/&gt;The rhizome is
the original stem of the vascular plant lineage. Before plants developed upright
stems, they grew horizontally via rhizomes. All extant primitive vascular plants
and many advanced angiosperms still use rhizomes as their sole stem type.
Rhizomes are responsible for the invasiveness, hardiness, and even harshness of
many of the world's most significant weeds. The ability of these rhizomatous
weedy plants to invade new territory via the underground has led to their great
success world-wide, and is directly attributable to their rhizomes. In contrast,
many of the world's most important medicinal plants, such as ginger and
turmeric, produce their medicinally active components in their rhizomes. Despite
their importance, very little is known about what genes are involved in the
growth and function of rhizomes. The aim of this project is to identify genes
and proteins that are expressed exclusively in the rhizome and to characterize
the function of specific genes that play important roles in rhizome function
from plants across the plant kingdom. Genes that are expressed exclusively or
predominantly in rhizomes will be identified by constructing cDNA libraries from
developing rhizomes from selected rhizomatous species and sequencing random
clones from these libraries to provide a large set of expressed sequence tags
(ESTs). Rhizome-specific expression of gene transcripts will be determined using
DNA microarrays. Protein levels in the rhizomes versus other tissues will be
determined using complementary proteomics technologies. These datasets will be
integrated into one database, and will then be comparatively analyzed to
identify rhizome-specific genes common to all species and specific to individual
species. The roles of specific genes in rhizome differentiation, growth and
development will then be validated using a number of approaches, including more
detailed expression profiling and functional analysis by gene knock out or
heterologous expression in other species. This project will impact our
understanding of rhizome growth and function. Because the rhizome is the
original vascular plant stem, and is still used by many species as their major
stem type, this project will impact our understanding of the evolution of
upright stems as well. Because many of the world?s worst weeds spread via their
rhizomes and three of the most important of these weedy species will be the
subject of investigation, this project will also produce information that could
be used to better tailor efforts to control economically important weeds
worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project is that it
will cross-train undergraduate and graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers in multidisciplinary research approaches. This project will
integrate research and education in two major ways: 1. Training of students in
successful approaches to doing research in an interdisciplinary and
geographically dispersed environment, which is becoming more important for
success in the biological sciences; 2. Summer research experiences for
undergraduate students and high school teachers. A strong emphasis will be
placed on recruitment and training of underrepresented minorities and women,
especially for teacher intern and undergraduate student positions, but also for
the post-doctoral and graduate student positions. A web-based database of EST,
microarray and proteomics data will be developed and made publicly accessible at
the project web site: www.plant-rhizome.org.