* 0820349
* The economics of mass layoffs: displaced workers, displacing firms,and causes and consequences
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2013
* John Abowd, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 09/30/2013
* USD 245,950.00

In order to accurately measure the cost of job loss for workers, two issues must
be addressed: the exogeneity of the observed separation to worker
characteristics, and the representativeness of the sample used for the
measurement. This project would advance knowledge along both dimensions. The
difficulty of isolating exogenous individual separation events has led the
literature to use separations that encompass multiple worker layoffs at the same
time (mass layoffs) as the exogenous event upon which to base estimates of the
earnings loss associated with an involuntary change of employers. Thus, the job
losses associated with mass layoffs are a convenient natural experiment for
investigating outcomes whose measurement would otherwise be biased by
endogeneity of the separation. In previous research (McKinney and Vilhuber,
2006; Lengermann and Vilhuber, 2002; Abowd, McKinney and Vilhuber, 2008; Bowlus
and Vilhuber, 2002), the investigators have found some evidence that the mass
layoff event is related to characteristics of the workers employed at the firm.
This project would continue that research, investigating whether the mass layoff
event can be considered statistically exogenous for the worker and, if not in
general, under what circumstances the exogeneity assumption can be maintained.
Second, the previous literature has used survey-based person and/or household
panels, or administrative data for individual US states to investigate these
issues. While providing detailed demographic information, surveys are often
limited by the number of workers actually observed as part of a mass layoff,
restricting the analysis of specific sub-groups and limiting the extent to which
geographic or firm-level information can be incorporated into the analysis. In
the past, users of administrative data have been restricted to using a single
geographic entity, not being able to follow workers across political boundaries,
and have not had access to much information on worker or firm characteristics.

This project would address some of those shortcomings by using the Census Bureau
Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics Program Infrastructure file system,
covering more than 98% of private employment in 46 states as of January 2008
(with 31 states available for research purposes), which have been linked to
select detailed demographic information on workers, and detailed firm-level
information, using survey and census data available at the U.S. Census Bureau.
This project explores and exploits detailed geographic variation, investigates
and uses geographic mobility across state borders, and incorporates worker and
firm level characteristics into the unique longitudinal aspect and quasi-
universal coverage of administrative datasets. The project also provides newer
and updated information on states that have been analyzed previously. It
leverages the magnitude of the dataset to explore alternate measures of mass
layoffs, highlighting the possible sensitivity of the results to the choice of
particular measures of mass layoffs. Besides providing updated results, the
wealth of information allows the investigator us to determine how one measures
an event (or different events) ties directly into the question of the exogeneity
of the layoff, as does the cause of the mass layoff event itself. The ability to
define a number of new measures, to expand outcome measures beyond the original
location of the worker, and to subset the analysis by detailed demographic and
firm characteristics, including geography, helps to check the robustness of any
inference made about earnings losses of workers.

Broader Impacts. The economic impact of job losses on workers, in particular
those resulting from large mass layoffs, can be substantial. Workers may
experience earnings 10 to 20 percent below normal earnings levels even five
years or longer after losing a job. Accurately measuring the cost of job loss is
policy relevant and has motivated regulations and laws to mitigate or alleviate
these losses. Assessing the cost of such laws depends critically on both the
estimated loss by each affected worker and the estimated incidence of exogenous
job loss.