* 0820032
* ADVANCE Partnerships for Adaptation, Implementation, and Dissemination (PAID) Award:  Collaborative Research - SUN:  Supporting Women Faculty in STEM at Liberal Arts Colleges
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Barbara Danowski, Union College
* Standard Grant
* Beth Mitchneck
* 08/31/2012
* USD 216,108.00

This project is a collaboration of Skidmore College and Union College, two
small, selective liberal arts colleges located in close proximity in upstate New
York, to enhance the recruitment and retention of women in the STEM disciplines
and to promote their advancement through rank. The multifaceted program uses and
adapts exemplary tools from NSF ADVANCE Institutional Transformation programs at
large research institutions to the climate and conditions at Skidmore and Union
Colleges and more broadly contributes to the adaptation, translation,
development and expansion of these resources to predominately undergraduate
liberal arts colleges in general.

Intellectual merit. The adaptation of exemplary tools from large research
institutions to Skidmore College and Union College, where the relative
importance of teaching, scholarship, and service is quite different from
research universities, will provide valuable models and resources for the NSF
ADVANCE "Best Practices" portfolio. It should be noted that Skidmore and Union
differ from one another in significant ways: Skidmore, co-educational since
1971, was originally a women's college that traditionally emphasized arts and
humanities. Over the course of the past decade, it has been successful in
increasing the role of the STEM disciplines in its curriculum. Union is a
formerly all-male college, also coeducational since 1970, that historically has
had a strong academic science and engineering orientation -- approximately 40%
of its students major in the lab sciences and engineering. Thus, the two
institutions bring different experiences and strengths to the project, and tools
developed for this project are expected to have broad applicability to a wide
variety of liberal arts institutions.

The project targets women faculty in the STEM disciplines at two specific career
stages: tenure-track women and tenured associate professors who have been at
that rank for seven or more years. A central goal is to provide these women with
the resources and support to move up in rank from assistant to tenured associate
professor or from associate to full professor. In addition, we seek to
understand local climate issues that affect hiring, faculty development, and
promotion of women and create environments that will result in a more balanced
gender ratio in STEM disciplines at our institutions. The project comprises two
types of activities: (1) activities aimed at recognizing and combating gender
bias in the STEM disciplines, including climate surveys, training workshops for
hiring and promotion, public events to raise awareness across campus and
educational activities to reduce undergraduate bias; and (2) activities
providing STEM faculty with mentoring and development opportunities to help them
advance their careers, including: the creation of a cross-institutional
mentoring network of women in the STEM disciplines and support for research,
advanced education and teaching load modification. The activities in this
project will be adapted from exemplary practices currently in use at other
ADVANCE institutions, such as Virginia Tech, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
and University of Michigan. They will be overseen by a Skidmore-Union Network
(SUN) Committee of STEM faculty that is modeled after a successful ADVANCE
program at the University of Michigan. A website will be developed to help
participating women learn about all the programs that are offered, and also to
facilitate finding potential collaborators and mentors.

Broader impacts. This project is designed to build a sustainable partnership
between two highly regarded liberal arts colleges for the enhancement,
recruitment, retention and advancement of women in the STEM disciplines and to
broadly disseminate the models and resources developed under this grant to other
liberal arts schools. It contains activities and tools to strengthen the
teaching and scholarship of women faculty in the STEM disciplines, through the
development of web-based resources that are accessible to a wide range of
schools and their faculty, and by the dissemination of its practices and
findings to other liberal arts colleges seeking to advance the careers of their
women faculty.