* 0820606
* 2008 Polymer Physics Gordon Research Conference, Newport, RI, June 29 - July 4, 2008
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2008,02/28/2009
* Jane Lipson, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 02/28/2009
* USD 3,320.00

The 21st Polymer Physics Gordon Conference will take place at Salve Regina in
Newport, RI, the week of June 29th to July 4th, 2008. The Conference which first
ran in 1969 has remained a key meeting in the area of polymer physics by
ensuring that each program is filled with top speakers presenting their most
current results in areas both new and enduring. The 2008 Conference will combine
breadth and depth, with talks by experimentalists and theoreticians representing
academia, national labs and industry. While the talks are by invitation only,
all attendees are welcome to present posters. The tradition of Polymer Physics
has been that even the very well-known scientists who are attending (without
being invited speakers) are thoroughly involved in the poster sessions. It is
worth noting that the diverse group of national and international speakers and
session chairs includes a record number of women participants, lively and
scientifically stimulating at Salve Regina this
summer.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The modest grant being requested here from the
National Science Foundation will enable support for the attendance of scientists
who are just starting their independent careers in this field. A critical
requirement in keeping a field vibrant and productive is that it continue to
attract bright and committed new members. Once such individuals become invested
in a research area it is equally important to help them make connections with
established members. The Gordon Conference offers unique opportunities in this
regard. It runs every two years, which allows for 'repeated exposure;' the daily
routine makes one-on-one personal interactions a priority, in that talks are
scheduled in the morning and after dinner, with the whole afternoon open for
scientific-social interactions. It is anticipated that participation in the
upcoming Polymer Physics Gordon Conference will have a significant impact on its
junior attendees. This will come about because of the ideas which will be
sparked or further developed as a result of insights and dialogue which take
place during the meeting, as well as from the continuing scientific interactions
and friendships which are formed and nourished as the week progresses. The
Polymer Physics community will be broadened and its future will be strengthened
through the NSF support requested here.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;