* 0820409
* Women's Rights and Economic Development:  A Theoretical Framework
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Matthias Doepke, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Niloy Bose
* 06/30/2012
* USD 199,371.00

Women's Rights and Economic Development: A Theoretical Framework&lt;br/&gt;SBE-
SES 0820409 Doepke&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the key regularities of economic
development is the gradual expansion of the economic and political rights of
women. Historically, women had few political and economic rights in all
countries. In Western countries such as the United Kingdom and the United States
women's rights were first expanded in the mid-19th century. Today, women in most
industrialized countries have acquired the same rights as men. In contrast,
women's rights are still lacking in many developing countries. What explains the
connection between economic development and women's rights?&lt;br/&gt;The
project examines the link between development and women's rights from an
economic perspective. In particular, the project takes a political-economy
approach and identifies the political interests that drive expansions of women's
rights. A key observation is that in the United Kingdom and the United States,
many of the most significant reforms were introduced long before women obtained
the right to vote. In other words, the reforms were passed by all-male
legislatures that were responsible only to male voters, so that the initial
expansion of women's rights amounted to a voluntary ceding of power on the part
of men. This suggests that men came to regard improving the rights of women as
being in their own interest.&lt;br/&gt;The project develops a political-economy
model which can account for the endogenous expansion of women's rights in the
course of development. The theory focuses on men's incentives for sharing power
with women and suggests that changes in the economic environment led to a
situation where both men and women stood to gain from an equalized distribution
of rights. In particular, the theory demonstrates that an increase in the demand
for human capital can trigger the expansion of women's rights. In turn, the
expansion of women's rights further accelerates the accumulation of human
capital. The link between economic development and women's rights therefore runs
both ways. The underlying mechanism is that granting more power to women leads
to increased investments in the education of children. As the demand for human
capital increases and the return to skill goes up, men and women alike
increasingly desire a high level of education for their descendants. Men
therefore come to prefer to share power with women.&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact
of the research derives from its implications for development policy. A number
of studies have identified a lack of women's rights as an important hindrance
for successful economic development. Given that it is generally infeasible to
impose gender equality on a country from the outside, for successful development
policy it is essential to identify conditions under which those in political
control will find it advantageous to improve the legal position of women. The
work on the political economy of women's rights carried out as part of the
project can identify conditions that will facilitate and promote gender
equality. For example, the theoretical framework suggests that public measures
that are complementary to education within the family (such as public health
programs for children and high-quality elementary schools in particular for
girls) could increase the support for women's rights. The research also suggests
that marriage-market institutions may play a key role in the political economy
of women's rights.