* 0820414
* Center for Emergent Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2016
* Patrick Woodward, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Cooperative Agreement
* Daniele Finotello
* 08/31/2016
* USD 11,111,000.00

The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at the Ohio State
University (OSU), titled Center for Emergent Materials (CEM), performs
integrated research on emergent materials and phenomena in magnetoelectronics.
The aim of the Center research activities is to advance understanding of the
emergent materials and phenomena and to develop highly sophisticated
experimental and theoretical tools required to study them, which will lay down
the scientific foundation for building future oxide-based electronic devices
that can perform multiple functions, and energy-efficient, fast computers that
have integrated memory and logic. The Center has two interdisciplinary research
groups (IRGs). IRG 1, Towards Spin-Preserving, Heterogeneous Spin Networks, will
develop a new understanding of electron-spin injection and transport in low-
dimensional, spin-preserving materials such as silicon and carbon. This
understanding provides a new materials basis for creating novel high-density
spin networks for next-generation computing. IRG 2, Double Perovskite Interfaces
and Heterostructures, designs and controls multifunctional properties of
innovative double perovskite heterostructures through the understanding of
structure, defects, and magnetotransport properties at interfaces. This new
knowledge of magnetism in metallic oxides enables important advances in the
emerging field of oxide-based electronics. The IRGs are complemented by a Seed
Funding program, which provides the necessary flexibility and vitality to CEM in
responding swiftly and effectively to the rapidly-changing materials research
landscape. Integrated with the research activities, CEM enhances classroom
education, creates research internship opportunities, widens the Science-
Technology-Engineering-Math (STEM) "pipeline," and enhances diversity in STEM.
Activities include an innovative education research program aimed at cognition
of materials science concepts, K-12 outreach and visitation programs,
undergraduate research programs, and graduate-education enhancement programs.
The multidisciplinary OSU materials community is already home to major world-
class shared experimental facilities, which are brought to bear on CEM research
and education. The Center collaborates with the electronics, storage, and
instrumentation industries; national laboratories and institutes; other U.S.
universities; and international universities and laboratories in China, India,
Germany, and United Kingdom.