* 0820439
* Collaborative Research:  Intertemporal Trade
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Jonathan Eaton, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Niloy Bose
* 06/30/2011
* USD 191,009.00

Abstract Intertemporal Trade SBE-SES 0820439 Eaton and 0820338 Kortum
(collaborative research)

Over the last half century the world economy has become more integrated in a
number of dimensions: International trade has grown much faster than world
output. Foreign assets constitute a growing share of portfolios. Countries rely
more on international pools of saving to finance investment and government
deficits. Because data on imports and exports are readily available and can be
analyzed in a static framework, the first form of integration has been analyzed
in greatest depth. In previous work the investigators developed a quantitative
general equilibrium model of international trade that can incorporate
substantial detail about individual countries and the geographic barriers that
separate them. Because complex dynamic considerations are involved,
investigation into financial integration remains much more primitive. Models
have only two or three countries whose representation is very stylized. Hence
they are incapable of incorporating the rich variety displayed in the data. This
research builds a rich multicountry dynamic framework that integrates time into
the static framework that the investigators developed in their previous work.
The research has three components. The first incorporates trade imbalances to
assess the impact of current account reversals on exchange rates, welfare, and
income distribution within and across countries. A key policy question that the
research addresses is the impact that a likely reversal of the U.S. current
account deficit will have in the United States and abroad. The outcome reflects
(i) adjustment in the set of goods that are traded (the extensive margin), (ii)
the mobility of labor and other factors of production between traded and
nontraded activities, and (iii) the role of geography in adjustment. With little
ability to adjust, the relative GDP changes across countries associated with
achieving current account rebalancing are large. Because of the pervasiveness of
nontradability, the effect of exchange rate changes on standards of living is
more modest. The second component introduces intertemporal maximization. The
static framework is extended to allow for differences in factor endowments,
technology, and trade barriers over time as well as across countries. Countries
trade intertemporally to accommodate shocks. But this trade is costly in terms
of the resources absorbed by geographic barriers. Calculations indicate that
trade barriers of the magnitude implied by static gravity models impede
consumption smoothing by amounts consistent with that observed in the data. The
third component examines investment as well as consumption. Results indicate
that geographic barriers can explain the high (but declining) correlation of
savings and investment. The analysis provides a deeper understanding of the
determinants and consequences of long-run swings in countries' trade balances.
This research furthers economists' ability to model quantitatively a dynamic,
multi-country world. It connects two literatures, the static modeling of trade
flows and dynamic open-economy macroeconomics. The framework it develops can be
used to address a host of key issues in international economic policy.