* 0820609
* Physiological Effects of Helping Others
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2013
* Stephanie Brown, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Rosanna Guadagno
* 01/31/2013
* USD 447,961.00

Recent evidence indicates that helping others predicts improvements in the
helper's physical and psychological well-being. The proposed studies investigate
the extent to which helping insulates the helper against stressors encountered
after the helping episode. This research, generated from animal models of
caregiving motivation and stress regulation, breaks new ground by exploring the
relationship between helping and stress reduction experimentally with human
participants. In particular, this research examines whether helping another
facilitates recovery from cardiovascular stress as well as the emotional and
hormonal correlates that may mediate or moderate links between helping and
stress recovery. Seven studies are proposed to address the gap in research on
experimental investigations of effects of helping others on the helper's stress
response. This research involves manipulating helping (and factors that should
affect helping) in human adults, and examining the physiological (cardiovascular
and neuroendocrine) antecedents and consequences of these manipulations.
Specifically, this research will test the hypothesis that helping others
facilitates cardiovascular stress recovery in the helper. In addition, the
proposed work will attempt to clarify hormonal and emotional mechanisms through
which helping might influence such recovery.