* 0820133
* SRS-CCF:   Supporting Software Evolution by the Combined Analysis of Textual and Structural Information
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Vaclav Rajlich, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2012
* USD 350,000.00

Proposal 0820133&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Supporting Software Evolution by
the Combined Analysis of Textual and Structural
Information&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PIs: Andrian Marcus and Vaclav Rajlich, Wayne
State University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Software evolution is a demanding stage of
the software lifecycle as it requires extensive knowledge about the application
domain and about all the artifacts that have been produced. This includes
knowledge about the software components and their dependencies which can be
extracted from compiler-centered information. It also includes knowledge about
the intent of these components which is human-centered information expressed in
textual form in software. This project will investigate how these two kinds of
information interact, how they complement each other, and how they can be
jointly utilized during software evolution. The research will define and
evaluate a new model for the comprehensive static analysis of source code which
places textual information on similar footing with the results of classical
program analysis. The proposed model will use program dependency analysis and
text retrieval techniques. Using the new analysis, novel methodologies for the
activities of software change, namely, concept location and impact analysis will
be defined and evaluated. The new analysis will help humans increase their
knowledge about the software and improve their communication about the intent of
the software. It will be specifically useful for the analysis of software built
from many heterogeneous components, written and designed by many developers, and
operating on various platforms.&lt;br/&gt;