* 0820536
* Collaborative Research:  Geography, Trade, and Prices
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Christian Broda, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 08/31/2012
* USD 198,621.00

Geography, Trade, and Prices&lt;br/&gt;SBE-SES 0820536 and
0820462&lt;br/&gt;Broda and Weinstein, Collaborative&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the
heart of almost all explanations of why Americans benefit or lose from
international trade is a notion that foreign goods should affect firms and
consumers through their impact on domestic prices. Unfortunately, the data has
not been kind to these theories. Studies have repeatedly found that domestic
prices are hardly affected by foreign prices. Thus, one is left with a paradox.
Although globalization seems anecdotally to be exerting profound effects on the
US economy, the data seems to indicate that our borders insulate us almost
completely from foreign price movements.&lt;br/&gt; Our project solves this
puzzle by using vast amounts of US and Canadian barcode data. Previous studies
relied on price indexes computed by governments or private price surveys of
goods that were not necessarily internationally comparable. Our barcode data
reveals that there is substantial heterogeneity in the set of goods consumed
across cities in the US, even in extremely narrowly defined product categories
such as "milk". This heterogeneity enables producers to charge different prices
for these goods across space and substantially insulates them from price changes
charged by other producers. Not surprisingly, there are also substantial
differences in the composition of goods consumed in Canada and the US. Brands
and models differ to such an extent that only about 10 percent of the goods
consumed are identical. &lt;br/&gt; These two facts help explain why borders
loomed so large in previous work. When comparing aggregate indexes across
countries, researchers typically compared average price movements of largely
disjoint sets of goods. Movements in the price of Coca Cola in the US might
perfectly mirror movement of Coca Cola in Canada, but if Statistics Canada were
only including RC Cola in their price indexes, the effects would appear much
smaller. Our preliminary results suggest that international price differences
for the same good tend to be only slightly larger across borders than they are
within countries, but the borders seem much larger if one uses (poor) data that
compares one set of goods in one country with another set of goods in a
different country.&lt;br/&gt; This heterogeneity of goods also helps us to
understand how price shocks are transmitted across borders. Again the barcode
data reveals that much of the importance of the border in this transmission is
due to an aggregation bias. If one compares identical goods across the border,
price changes in Canada translate very rapidly into price movements in the US.
In other words, the project demonstrates that international price movements have
rapid and large impacts on US prices. However, if one were to look at price
transmission using indices, one would obtain the opposite conclusion.
&lt;br/&gt;We intend to disseminate the results from this research through the
publication of articles and the participation in conferences. Moreover, we will
work with statistical agencies and monetary authorities to help improve the
measurement of prices and formulation of policy. This research will also have a
cross-disciplinary/cross-institutional dimension. Some of the work will be joint
with Dr. Ephraim Leibtag at the Department of Agriculture. We expect that our
work will be useful for people interested in understanding the impact of
globalization on unskilled workers as well as on pricing behavior.