* 0820518
* Renewable Energy Materials Research Science and Engineering Center
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,09/30/2016
* Barbara Olds, Colorado School of Mines
* Cooperative Agreement
* Daniele Finotello
* 09/30/2016
* USD 10,273,737.00

The Renewable Energy Materials Research Science and Engineering Center at the
Colorado School of Mines is focused on transformative materials innovation and
educational directions that will significantly impact the emerging renewable
energy technologies. The Center is organized around two interdisciplinary
research groups. The first concentrates on harnessing unique properties of
nanostructured materials to significantly enhance the performance of
photovoltaic devices. Special emphasis is placed on understanding and
controlling defect structure and passivation in engineered nanostructures,
unique quantum mechanical phenomena that can enhance the collection of solar
radiation, and novel computational and characterization schemes to improve
fundamental understanding of nanostructured photovoltaic materials. The second
interdisciplinary research group explores advanced composite membranes for
renewable energy applications. Membrane technologies are central to many energy
utilization processes, and ionic transport is often a weak link. This group aims
to fabricate novel ion conducting materials by synergistically combining
materials with dramatically different ionic transport characteristics and then
explore the fundamental mechanisms behind ionic transport in these systems. The
Center includes a seed program designed to stimulate innovative directions and
to integrate into the center research portfolio those approaches that show
promise. The initial seed project involves the evaluation of clathrate
structures as potential materials for hydrogen storage. Center educational and
outreach activities directly expose students to renewable energy concepts at a
young age and prepare them, throughout their K-12 education and into college and
graduate school, for potential careers in this field. Activities include:
development of a renewable energy minor for undergraduate students and a
renewable energy elective course sequence for graduate students, creation of a
Research Experience for Undergraduates summer program, expansion of an existing
program of K-12 outreach to address renewable concepts, and a broadening of the
participation of under-represented groups in science and engineering at all
levels. A strategic partnership with scientists and engineers at the National
Renewable Energy Laboratory allows sharing of students, research associates,
equipment and facilities between the two organizations. In addition, the Center
collaborates with companies that are actively involved in alternative energy and
with internationally institutions, particularly the University of New South
Wales and Imperial College, University of London. Center members, partner
organizations, and outside users will profit from a broad array of user
facilities maintained by the center.