* 0820998
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: FACTORS INFLUENCING STAKEHOLDER INVOLVEMENT IN MARINE RESERVE
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2010
* Sarah Smith, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 02/28/2010
* USD 9,395.00

Marine reserves are recognized as one of the most effective means of coastal
resource management, and community participation has been found to be essential
in this process. Recent research has indicated that community participation in
the form of co-management?that is the managing entity, usually government, and
community members cooperatively managing the resource?is most effective for
sustainable coastal resource management. The research will explore stakeholder
involvement in selected examples of existing co-management regimes developed to
manage marine reserves within the Wider
Caribbean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project will identify which
resource users and other stakeholders are currently involved in managing the
resource, the variables that influenced aspects of their involvement, and the
extent and effectiveness of their participation. Understanding the interests of
stakeholders can be a way to more effectively address the distributional and
social impacts of policies, which can in turn increase compliance with
management measures and lead to more sustainable resource management regimes.
The researchers will use network analysis to determine patterns of relationships
between stakeholders that facilitate effective co-management of marine reserves.
Effectiveness is both institutional (the functioning of the management entities)
and biological (health of the coral reefs within the reserve as compared to
outside the reserve). &lt;br/&gt;