* 0820751
* Defining "True" Paranasal Sinuses: Histological Indicators of Secondary Pneumatization
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2008,01/31/2011
* James Rossie, Slippery Rock University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 01/31/2011
* USD 21,275.00

The recent use of computed tomography (CT) to study paranasal sinuses has
resulted in a renewed focus on the phylogenetic significance and function of
these mucosa-lined cranial cavities. However, identification of sinuses via CT
is complicated because even mammals that lack true sinuses have concave regions
(termed recesses) of the nasal cavity that can be mistaken for them. The
difference is developmental; these recesses are simply the product of
ossification of the cartilaginous nasal capsule, while true sinuses develop by a
process known as pneumatization in which bone (and possibly cartilage) is
actively removed by special cells (osteoclasts). To date, no study has
documented the histological and cellular characteristics of these divergent
processes, which lead to very different cranial shapes among species, and may
well underlie developmental anomalies of clinical importance within mammalian
species (including humans). In this project, the researchers will determine if
microscopic distinctions exist between spaces that form identifiable paranasal
sinuses versus the comparable natal recess in nonhuman primates. They will study
cadaveric neonates of primates that do and do not develop maxillary and/or
frontal sinuses, comparing such microanatomical aspects as hydroxyapatite
density and patterns of tissue break-down in the nasal capsule walls, as well as
bone remodelling activity in recesses and nascent sinuses. Microscopic
examination of bone cells along the osseous boundaries of the sinuses/recesses
will reveal the pattern of activity of bone removal (by osteoclasts) and bone
deposition (by osteoblasts). Immunohistochemical methods with add greater
scrutiny of osteoclast activity by identifying binding sites on bone as well as
osteoclast precursor cells. This research tests the hypothesis that paranasal
sinuses form via an invasive developmental trajectory that is distinct from
routine bone remodeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers aim to draw a firm
distinction between paranasal sinuses and recesses, and to more clearly
understand the process which forms a "true" sinus - pneumatization. This
research will contribute to the intellectual development of a graduate student,
who will have the opportunity to assist in nearly every phase of the project. A
digital archive of histological images from the specimens will be created and
made available on the internet, providing a resource for other investigators of
facial anatomy and ontogeny. The results of this research will serve as
foundational knowledge to inform future work. Such information is needed to
allow unambiguous identification of sinuses in any species, which will provide a
firmer foundation for comparative CT studies and clinical research into sinus
pathology. For example, the use of these spaces as phylogenetically important
traits and the full understanding of certain congenital abnormalities of the
facial skeleton (e.g., sinus absence and other abnormalities) hinge on a clear
understanding of how sinuses form.