* 0820423
* 2008 Corrosion-Aqueous GRC:New London, NH; July 20-25, 2008
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2008,04/30/2009
* John Scully, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Alan Ardell
* 04/30/2009
* USD 10,000.00

TECHNICAL: Corrosion is an interdisciplinary field that draws together
fundamental aspects of the physics and chemistry of interfaces, advances in
atomistic and statistical modeling and a broad range of cutting-edge
characterization techniques, and applies them to issues of major societal
impact. The 2008 Gordon Research Conference on Aqueous Corrosion is scheduled to
be held July 20-25, 2008, at Colby-Sawyer College in New London, New Hampshire,
USA. Presentations at the conference will cover a wide range of corrosion-
related topics, but they will all fall under the conference theme: ?Aqueous
Corrosion: Mechanisms, Methods and Models?. The theme of the conference and the
individual subject areas have been selected to highlight the fundamental science
that underpins practical solutions to corrosion problems. The preliminary list
of topics is the following: Models and mechanisms at the nanoscale; High spatial
and temporal resolution characterization methods; Long-term life prediction of
corroding structures. There will be speakers from academia, national labs, and
industry. NON-TECHNICAL: The demographic and gender diverse mix of speakers and
discussion leaders will reflect the worldwide community of people working in the
field of corrosion as well as under-represented minorities or women. The
conference will promote education and the scholarly pursuit of research in this
technologically significant field. All attendees and students in particular,
will be encouraged to present posters. In order to enhance the participation of
the next generation of researchers in the field, the 2008 Gordon Conference will
be immediately preceded by a ?Gordon-Kenan Graduate Research Seminar?, a two-day
meeting run by and for young researchers along similar lines to the main
conference, which will run on the Saturday and Sunday immediately prior to the
start of the main conference. The Gordon-Kenan Graduate Research Seminar will
provide an ideal opportunity for the next generation of corrosion scientists to
develop their ideas and confidence in the field, fostering links with groups
internationally that will enhance their future careers. The broader impacts,
therefore, include student development and fostering of international exchange
and good will amongst scientists world-wide. Every attempt will be made to
engage women and minorities in this process. Organizers will make a concerted
effort to achieve an appropriate representation of women, racial/ethnic
minorities and persons with disabilities, and other individuals who have been
traditionally under-represented in science. When evaluating applicants of equal
merit, applicants from under-represented groups will be given preference. A web
site has been set up at http://www.eng.bham.ac.uk/metallurgy/grc2008/home.htm to
advertise the conference and to communicate with the corrosion community.