* 0820884
* MRI: Acquisition of an In-Situ AFM/STM-TEM System for Interdisciplinary Nano-Research and Education at Michigan Tech
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Patricia Heiden, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2011
* USD 224,063.00

1. Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests for an in-situ
electrical-force nanoprobing system that allows the observation of nanoscale
mechanisms and their direct correlation with quantitative mechanical and
electrical measurements of nanomaterials. The nanoprobing for atomic force
microscopy (AFM) and scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) measurements will be
performed inside a transmission electron microscope (TEM) through a newly
designed side-entry AFM/STM-TEM specimen holder. The combination of AFM and STM
will enable the investigation of how mechanical and electrical stimulation
affects the internal structure of novel materials. Many fundamental scientific
activities in these areas could not be attempted without the new instrumentation
and technique. New research includes fundamental studies to 1) describe the
effect of deformation induced electrical properties in boron nitride and ZnO
nanomaterials; 2) determine the mechanics of individual cellulose nanocrystals
and their interface layer with a biopolymer matrix; 3) understand the effect of
porosities and length scales on the mechanical performance of microactuators.
The new system aids in describing the effect of metal-support interactions on
nanoparticles? agglomeration in catalysts, and the surface curvature size effect
on nanoparticle deformation. In addition, research will include development of
molecular models that describe the stress and strain fields in the mechanical
testing of nanocomposites, and design models of MEMS microactuators that utilize
Si porous sensors. Extensive outreach and educational programs targeted at K-12
students are planned and will include students traditionally underrepresented in
the sciences. Outreach will expose students to new scientific discoveries in
nano-science and engineering. Students will observe, for the first time, the
deformation of individual cellulose nanocrystals; deformation induced
piezoelectric behavior in boron nitride nanotubes; pull-out testing of nanotubes
from a polymer matrix; failure and adhesion of nanoparticles; and deformation in
nanoporous materials in real time and space. Videos of these nanomechanisms will
be presented in undergraduate and graduate classrooms to stimulate students?
research interests and promote learning of emerging
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The
requested instrument enables material scientists to observe changes in the
internal structure of materials under the application of external forces and
voltages. This state-of-the art instrument fits into the sample holder of
Michigan Tech?s existing transmission electron microscope (TEM). Use of a TEM
allows scientists to view the internal structure of materials at nanometer-
length scales (one billionth of a meter or 1,000 times thinner than a human
hair). These nanoscale materials will be detected and manipulated using a
scanning tunneling microscope (STM) and an atomic force microscope (AFM). Using
the combination of these two techniques inside a TEM, scientists can not only
"see" nanoscale features inside the materials but, can also measure electrical
properties and strength of nanoscale materials. Better understanding of
electrical and strength properties is essential for developing new and
sustainable materials. For instance, these techniques will help scientists to
better understand the change in electrical properties of boron nitride and zinc
oxide nanomaterials that are central in developing advanced energy harvesting
devices. In another application, the strength of lightweight and
environmentally-friendly biopolymer composites can be improved through better
engineering of the interface between the polymer matrix and cellulose
nanomaterials. The new system will allow study of nanoparticle agglomeration in
catalysts, the effect of porosities on the strength of microactuators, and
stress and strain fields during the indentation of nanocomposites. In addition,
the instrument will be used for outreach and educational programs for K-12
students, including those traditionally underrepresented in the science.
Students will be exposed to the newest scientific discoveries in the fields of
nano-science and engineering. Students will be exposed to cutting-edge research
and will be able to observe structures at the nanoscale, learning how better
engineering of materials can improve lives, make products more environmentally
friendly, and better society. Moreover, the recorded movies of these
nanomechanisms will be used to stimulate the research interests in undergraduate
and graduate students and promote learning of emerging technologies.