* 0820312
* Competitive and welfare effects of vertical integration and vertical restraints: empirical evidence
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Christian Rojas, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2011
* USD 114,473.00

Almost all industries have a vertical dimension where the good or service moves
from upstream units (e.g. manufacturing) to downstream units (e.g. wholesalers).
The effects of different organizational formats of this vertical structure have
been the focus of much theoretical work in industrial organization. This
research project studies from an empirical perspective the ambiguous theoretical
predictions of the effects of two central topics in this literature: vertical
integration (VI) and vertical restraints (VR). Vertical integration refers to a
decision by a firm to perform both upstream and downstream tasks, whereas
vertical restraints refer to contract clauses between the (separated) upstream
and downstream units whereby the downstream unit is forced to engage in
particular sales formats. The data allows this project to focus on exclusive
dealing and exclusive territories as VR.

A brand level dataset from supermarket scanners on beer and softdrink sales in
the US has been made available for this research. A reduced form approach is
used to study the effects of VI/VR on equilibrium price and quantity. Price and
quantity are regressed on the VI/VR variable and, after controlling for
endogeneity and other factors, unambiguous conclusions can usually be reached;
for example, if VI produces a larger quantity and a lower price, then this
market structure can be interpreted as procompetitive with respect to vertical
separation. While in some cases this reduced form approach allows inference
about the possible direction of change in welfare, a monetary estimate of such
change is not possible. Moreover, a reduced form approach can not determine who
(consumers or producers) benefits or suffers more, and by how much. Thus, to
complement the reduced form approach, this research also adopts a structural
approach where supply and demand parameters are estimated and welfare estimates
are computed.

Intellectual Merit: The main contribution of this research is based on the fact
that empirical work has been limited relative to the quite large amount of
theoretical results on the consequences of VI and VR. In addition, choosing to
study these topics in these industries is particularly important. The industries
exhibit a unique variation across: a) time and space on the decisions of firms
regarding VI (softdrinks) and exclusive dealing (beer and softdrinks), and b)
across states regarding the legal mandates on exclusive territories (beer).
Also, the available dataset consists of a three dimensional panel on dozens of
brands, which spans across the main 63 metropolitan areas of the US over a
period of five years; this richness allows the project to address the critical
issue of endogeneity of the VI/VR decision that has frequently been neglected in
prior work.

Broader Impact: The proposed research has key implications from a policy angle
since US antitrust activity, like theory, has lacked of consistency in
determining the (anti) competitive nature of VI/VR. For example, antitrust
policy regarding VR has fluctuated over the last century starting off as lawful
up to the 1940s, turning to largely illegal by the 1960s and then back to
lenient in the late 1970s after the Sylvania case in 1977. Finally, the Vertical
Guidelines of 1985 reflecting this lenient view were eliminated in the 1990s,
removing any formal antitrust policy guidance for VR (Lafontaine and Slade,
2006). Antitrust policy towards VI (vertical mergers) has also shown significant
fluctuations, as reflected in the differential treatment of vertical mergers by
the three different merger guidelines that the Department of Justice has had
over time. The proposed research will thus provide useful evidence to guide
future antitrust policy towards vertical integration and vertical restraints.