* 0820645
* Collaborative Research: Chemical Communication and the Language of Gametes
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2008,09/30/2013
* Richard Zimmer, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* William E. Zamer
* 09/30/2013
* USD 276,935.00

Despite a century of intensive research, fertilization is one of the least
understood fundamental biological processes. Current theory predicts that
membrane-bound proteins promote gamete recognition, but soluble-egg compounds
attracting conspecific sperm could also act as pre-zygotic factors maintaining
species integrity while increasing fertilization rates. Whereas cell contact
recognition between male and female gametes is critical for sexual reproduction,
the role of soluble egg factors remains undetermined. Using abalone (genus
Haliotis), this project combines a formative conceptual framework with
unprecedented techniques and infrastructure to establish the chemical 'language'
of sperm and egg. It is expected to provide the first concrete evidence that
barriers to hybridization can function prior to gamete contact, and that remote
chemical signals can promote speciation. This study has implications for
reproductive biology in humans as well as wildlife conservation. Future research
could advance innovative approaches for solving problems in human contraception
and infertility, using abalone as a valuable animal model: working with German
colleagues, the investigators have identified and cloned genes coding for
chemoreceptors on human sperm membranes. Recent discoveries link receptor
function with sperm attraction to egg. Compelling challenges in conservation
biology also will benefit from new knowledge of sensory stimuli controlling
fertilization. For many threatened or endangered species, from abalone and
corals to apes and elephants, fertilization is the bottleneck to species
proliferation. Basic research on sperm chemoattraction is likely to yield
original solutions to age old problems in reproductive biology. In captive
breeding programs, for example, soluble sperm attractants could be used to
identify the most promising sperm donors. Assuming gamete compatibility between
mates, a donor with fast and chemo-responsive sperm may enhance the probability
of fertilization while potentially improving offspring quality. The
investigators have a strong tradition of active community outreach and
undergraduate and graduate education. In particular, this project will
invigorate training of women and underrepresented students in interdisciplinary
research, towards careers in physiology, genetics, and environmental sciences.