* 0820985
* MRI: Acquisition of an Illumina/Solexa Genome Analyzer
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Richard Clark, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Vicki Martin
* 07/31/2011
* USD 484,395.00

A grant has been awarded to the University of Utah to obtain a next-generation
genome analysis machine such as the Illumina/Solexa Genome Analyzer. This sort
of equipment uses new methods that allow very large amounts of DNA sequence to
be obtained rapidly, and at approximately 1% of the cost of traditional genome
centers. The equipment will support a diverse base of users, and will contribute
significantly to many NSF-supported research programs. In addition, the
equipment will also be used for undergraduate education. The PIs and major users
of this equipment will address several different basic research question: (1)
Natural Variation and Genome Evolution- Making sense of biological diversity
requires understanding the DNA sequence differences between individuals or
strains and how these sequence differences influence phenotypes. The reduced
cost of sequencing using this new technology, and the speed with which DNA
sequence data can be obtained, will allow several PIs and major users to obtain
high quality genomic sequence data for the plant Arabidopsis thaliana, bacterial
endosymbionts, the ninespine stickleback, red fox, and zebra finch. We
anticipate that the genome sequences will allow us to gain insights into modes
of evolutionary change, including those that underlie response of organisms to
their environments (e.g., drought response in plants). (2) Genetic Networks and
Basic Molecular Mechanisms- A major goal of cellular and developmental biology
is to understand how specific genes come to be expressed in specific cell types.
Several PIs and major users are focusing on transcriptional networks and
mechanisms of RNA decay, and will use the next-generation sequencer to identify
the RNAs that are produced as a result of specific signaling, and the
intermediates that accumulate. The approaches that are possible with the funded
instrumentation will allow both qualitative and quantitative analyses at an
unprecedented level of detail. (3) Behavioral Genetics and Molecular
Characterization of Subtle Mutant Phenotypes- Some genetic variations
(mutations) cause very subtle phenotypes, and so traditional approaches like
genetic mapping are either difficult or extremely time-intensive. Nevertheless,
such mutations are very informative for understanding the molecular basis of
behaviors. Using the next-generation sequencer, in combination with genetic
approaches, will allow rapid identification of the DNA lesions (and genes)
underlying behavioral traits. Initial studies will be performed with the
nematode Caenorhabditis elegans.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The next-generation
sequence analyzer will be placed into a new Genomics Facility in the Biology
Department at the University of Utah. It will be made available to researchers
in the Great Basin Region (e.g. Idaho, Wyoming, Montana, Nevada, and New
Mexico). The Biology Department at the University of considers a hands-on
understanding of large genomics datasets to be an essential component of a basic
undergraduate education. Specific plans to incorporate this new equipment and
analysis of the resulting data have already been developed for three
undergraduate courses.&lt;br/&gt;