* 0820105
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:Understanding Household Portfolio Facts and Asset Quantities over the Life Cycle
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Niloy Bose
* 06/30/2011
* USD 36,020.00

Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Understanding Household Portfolio Facts
and Asset Quantities over the Life Cycle SSBE/SES 0820105: van Nieuwerburgh

This project uses a panel data set of Swedish households' wealth portfolios and
socio-demographic variables to document households' investment behavior. The
investment behavior is compared to that predicted with state-of-the-art life-
cycle portfolio choice models. The purpose is to improve understanding of the
driving forces in households' investment behavior and of the different
investment styles in the cross-section, and over the life cycle. The project
also contributes to the asset pricing literature.

The project utilizes a unique dataset on households' wealth portfolios. It
contains both households' disaggregated financial portfolios, down to the level
of individual stocks and mutual funds, and information about real estate
ownership. The first stage of the project consists of an evaluation of different
features of life-cycle portfolio models. This stage is a natural continuation of
existing research on optimal household portfolio choice. Among the features that
have been proposed to improve the predictive ability of the class of life-cycle
portfolio choice models with risky labor income are: (i) costs associated with
stock-market participation; (ii) preference heterogeneity; (iii) the realization
of disastrous economic shocks; and (iv) housing as an investment opportunity in
the decision to own or rent.

The data period is 1999-2006. Unlike other datasets with detailed information on
households' wealth portfolios, the same households are sampled each year. Due to
the panel dimension of the data, research in a second stage of the project is
able to document facts about households' financial behavior over their life-
time, conditional on the realization of shocks to health status and labor
income. Examples of such responses are portfolio rebalancing and self-insurance.
For welfare purposes, the ability (propensity) to consume out of real-estate
wealth or other forms of wealth is of importance for non-elderly households that
suffer major economic shocks and for the elderly. There are broader impacts of
the results particularly for investment strategy and for the choice of policies
for retirement savings and social security.

The project also contributes to two strands of the asset-pricing literature. In
recent research, heterogeneity across agents in combination with incomplete
financial markets have been used to explain financial price relations such as
the size of the equity premium. Access to high-quality micro data facilitates
taking account of such matters and deriving appropriate model calibrations. The
panel dimension also facilitates contributions to the literature on the
estimation of asset pricing models (Euler equations) using Generalized Method of
Moments (GMM). Combined with heterogeneous financial portfolios at the household
level, the Euler equations for a given household produce powerful identifying
restrictions.