* 0820659
* Transferring Research from a Model System to Uncover the Network that Regulates Long-Distance Signaling in Potato
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2016
* William Lucas, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* thomas okita
* 09/30/2016
* USD 2,754,729.00

PI: David Hannapel (Iowa State University)&lt;br/&gt;CoPIs: Aragula G. Rao (Iowa
State University), Jeff Coller (Case Western Reserve University), William J.
Lucas (University of California, Davis)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plants perceive
outside signals that activate pathways to control their defenses and growth. The
length of daylight or photoperiod is a key signal that regulates growth
processes like flowering in many plants and tuber formation in potato. Tuber
formation in potato involves the transport of a light-activated signal from the
leaf to the underground organ, the potato tuber. The overall scientific
objective of this project is to study the range of signals that are responsible
for controlling tuber formation. Signals involved in this process include both
proteins and RNA. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two research goals will be addressed in
this project: 1) To identify and characterize RNAs of potato that are
transported from the leaf to the underground tuber and 2) To identify proteins
that work with the RNAs to facilitate this transport.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several approaches will be undertaken to implement these
research goals, including the systematic characterization of the network of RNAs
and proteins present in this transport system. Proteins and RNAs will be
identified and tested for their function in this signaling system. The primary
goal of this project is to understand how this collection of signals regulates
tuber formation. The utility of this research activity is that the information
generated by these experiments will have direct applications for enhancing crop
productivity. The broader scientific impacts resulting from this research
activity are inherent in the enhancement of our understanding of how plants use
light signals to control their growth and, for agronomic crops, to affect their
yield. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A significant component of this project is the
educational and outreach features. The educational component will be implemented
through the Summer Internship program that will provide high school and
undergraduate students with the opportunity to participate in plant biology
projects. As a component of outreach training, summer internships for high
school biology teachers will also be offered. These teachers will work with
project leaders on the Iowa State, UC-Davis, or Case Western Reserve campuses to
learn more about plant biology. By targeting high school teachers who may teach
up to 100 students a year, the influence of this program will be greatly
expanded and will fulfill a primary mission of NSF; to communicate to society
the significance of the outcomes of current research in plant biology. The
international component of this project will expand the breadth of training
available through this initiative and enhance global awareness of the scientific
challenges addressed in this research. This project includes ample opportunities
for participation by women and underrepresented groups in laboratory research.
Project outcomes will be made available to the scientific community through a
project website, which will be accessible via
http://www.hort.iastate.edu/research/research-detail.php?id=1148.