* 0820717
* Arabidopsis 2010 Project Collaborative Research:   Modeling Biological Networks in Arabidopsis through Integration of Genomic, Proteomic, and Metabolomic Data
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2016
* Gloria Muday, Wake Forest University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 04/30/2016
* USD 1,100,278.00

Phenylpropanoids are an important class of plant secondary metabolites that are
critical for growth and survival, with functions ranging from providing flower
color, protection from ultraviolet light, and defense against pathogens, to the
regulation of hormone transport. These metabolites are also of medical
importance due to their documented anti-oxidant and anti-cancer properties in
humans. Extensive molecular and biochemical characterization of the pathway
responsible for the synthesis of phenylpropanoids, combined with recent insights
into the physiological functions of the metabolites themselves, make this an
ideal system to address fundamental questions about cellular metabolism using an
integrative, multidisciplinary approach to place these molecular and biochemical
events into a physiological context. Understanding the controls of this pathway
will provide insights into engineering the synthesis of phenylpropanoids and
other plant metabolites, both for improving plant growth and facilitating the
production of these important compounds for the nutritional and dietary
enhancement of crops. &lt;br/&gt; In this Arabidopsis 2010 project, six research
groups will come together in a unique discovery effort, involving the
establishment of biological framework models that integrate gene expression,
protein expression, and metabolite production into a comprehensive map of
phenylpropanoid function, signaling, and metabolism in Arabidopsis thaliana.
This project addresses the priorities of the 2010 project by collecting one of
the first unified sets of time course gene expression, protein expression, and
metabolite data and then use emerging computational methods to combine these
comprehensive data sets in order to create testable models of integrated
biological networks. This project combines modeling, theory, and experimentation
to produce a systems-level understanding of the hormonal controls of the
transcriptional and regulatory mechanisms controlling phenylpropanoid
biosynthesis. Research results from this project will be made widely accessible
to the public through publication and through construction of an information-
rich website at http:// www.phenylpropanoid2010.wfu.edu. This project will
result in interdisciplinary training of undergraduate and graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers. In addition, the PIs will partner with local and
national groups to enhance science education, including development of K-12
student and teacher experiences and providing research opportunities for
individuals from groups underrepresented in science. &lt;br/&gt;