* 0820648
* Analysis of APP1 Regulation of Auxin and Jasmonic Acid Signalling in Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Angus Murphy, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Sarah Wyatt
* 08/31/2012
* USD 412,063.00

Project Abstract&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In plants, the TIR1/AFB receptor
proteins regulate responses to the plant hormone auxin by stimulating the
proteolytic degradation of AUX/IAA repressors of auxin-dependent gene
transcription. Almost all auxin responses have been shown to involve specific
pairings of TIR1/AFBs, AUX/IAAs, and auxin-responsive transcriptional
activators. Experiments with the prolyl cis-trans isomerase (PPIase) inhibitor
juglone suggest that a PPIase may control the rate of AUX/IAA degradation in an
auxin-independent manner. Recently, the investigators have discovered that
Arabidopsis APP1, which possesses juglone-sensitive X-prolyl aminopeptidase and
PPIase activities, directly interacts with AUX/IAA proteins via their
interaction domains. As compared to wild type plants, these app1 mutants exhibit
reduced auxin sensitivity; they have reduced elongation growth, as well as
sharply decreased expression of auxin responsive genes and synthetic reporters
after auxin treatment. Increased APP1 activity results in increased auxin-
responsive gene expression and growth similar to that seen in plants treated
with low concentrations of auxin. The overall goal of the project is to
elucidate the role of APP1 in TIR1/AFB-mediated auxin signaling. The specific
objectives of the project are as follows. 1) The project will determine which
enzymatic activity of APP1 regulates auxin responses. The investigators
hypothesize that the PPIase activity mediatesTIR1-AUX/IAA interactions and that
the proteolytic activity contributes to subsequent AUX/IAA processing. 2) The
project will determine the function of APP1 in the auxin response pathway. The
model underlying the work proposes that APP1 stabilizes the interaction domain
of AUX/IAAs to promote TIR1 binding. This project is expected to characterize an
unrecognized global component of plant hormone signaling. The project is
transformative, as it will help determine whether the PPIase activity discovered
in AtAPP1 is found in APP orthologs from other species and whether APPs may play
a previously uncontemplated role in animal and fungal signaling mechanisms. The
project will also involve students from a summer undergraduate research program
run by the PI and Dr. Wendy Peer that recruits students into the life sciences
from underserved populations.