* 0820977
* MRI Acquisition of Molecular Biology Laboratory Instruments:  The Tree of Life Branches out to MSUM
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Linda Fuselier, Minnesota State University Moorhead
* Standard Grant
* Vicki Martin
* 08/31/2011
* USD 31,893.00

A grant has been awarded to Minnesota State University, Moorhead to expand and
strengthen collaborative research programs, and to incorporate faculty research
into research training courses for undergraduates. Funds from this award will be
used to purchase two instruments necessary for molecular biology research. The
instruments, a gel visualization system and tissue homogenizer, are integral to
a variety of research projects ranging from elucidation of evolutionary
relationships among the very earliest of land plants to understanding
environmental impacts on population genetics of migratory dragonflies.
Undergraduate students will use these molecular biology instruments as they
learn to isolate DNA, and gather and analyze molecular data that will be used in
larger projects. In particular, the instrumentation will stimulate a
collaboration between two universities working on a segment of the ?tree of
life? project and thus, provide undergraduates and their mentors an opportunity
to contribute to the understanding of the evolution of life on
earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Incorporation of these instruments into the
undergraduate science curriculum will provide more students with molecular
research experience and maximize integration of faculty research with science
education. The importance of integrating molecular skills into a research-
infused curriculum cannot be overstated, especially in an age when DNA is used
not only to discern evolutionary relationships but to convict or exonerate
criminals. Importantly, students will graduate with real-world research
experience and a skill set that will make them competitive in the global
marketplace.