* 0820745
* SGER: Flow field quantification in microfluidic mixing systems by single-molecule detection methods
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,04/30/2010
* Lester Su, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Horst Henning Winter
* 04/30/2010
* USD 50,000.00

CBET-0820745 Su

Microscale fluid systems are widespread in bioanalysis, and also appear in
energy systems such as fuel cells. Reynolds numbers in such systems are very
low, so molecular mixing enhancement cannot exploit turbulent effects. Instead,
it is necessary to apply concepts of chaotic advection, which are familiar in
macroscale laminar flows. This SGER will address passive, steady-flow
micromixers, though the general approach will also be applicable to active
mixers that generate unsteady flows through, for example, mechanical actuation.
There are numerous micromixer designs that aim to generate chaotic advection,
which are often adaptations of two-dimensional (2-D) chaotic flow geometries to
three-dimensional (3-D) microchannels. Conceptually, flow trajectories are
compared by treating successive transverse sections of 3-D channels equivalently
to temporal series in 2-D flows Existing efforts to quantify microchannel flows
rely on single-point or field measurements of flow velocities, using techniques
such as micro-PIV. Such measurements are fundamentally mismatched with flow
configurations based on 2-D chaotic flow analogies, however, because many tools
for analyzing chaotic flows rely on knowledge of particle trajectories (or
streaklines), and of their mappings into lower-dimensional space. Determining
trajectories or streaklines from velocity measurements requires knowledge of the
temporal evolution of the 3-D velocity field, which remains challenging for
micro-PIV. The PI will demonstrate a new method for quantifying flow fields in
channel-type micromixing devices, where the method employs single-molecule
detection techniques to measure flow streaklines directly. Streakline
measurements inherently offer more direct insight into mixing than velocity
field measurements, by allowing access to established tools of chaotic flow
analysis. For example, The PI will be able to construct Poincare sections
explicitly to assess the chaotic properties of microchannel flows by considering
the divergence of initially proximal streaklines, or the properties of fixed
points, etc. These measurements will eventually provide a rigorous, yet
intuitive framework for the design and characterization of micromixing devices.