* 0820114
* Workshop:  SFF Symposium Student Support 2008, Austin, Texas, August 4-6, 2008
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2009
* David Bourell, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 04/30/2009
* USD 13,000.00

The purpose of this grant is to offset student costs associated with the
Nineteenth Annual Solid Freeform Fabrication (SFF) Symposium to be held in
Austin, Texas, August 4-6, 2008, is a topical meeting that is a research
exchange in the area of rapid prototyping. The SFF Symposium is a mechanism for
transfer and dissemination of knowledge and understanding in the field of
additive, freeform manufacturing. The meeting draws over 100 researchers from
universities, companies and national laboratories from all over the world. The
SFF Symposium also attracts graduate students worldwide. In 2007, nearly half
the entire meeting participants were students. Participants represented 27
universities, 10 of which were international. The strong international
participation gives domestic participants an excellent opportunity to gain
valuable information on research in the field. A special session this year will
be devoted to freeform education. Topics include, but are not limited to,
undergraduate education and graduate curricula, laboratory experiences, non-
traditional education and K-12 activities. A major goal of this session is to
encourage faculty to increase coverage of freeform technologies in the
educational process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SFF Symposium is an excellent
model for advancing discovery and understanding while promoting teaching,
training and learning. The networking of world-class researchers with students
is strong since the meeting encourages through its pricing structure the
involvement of students. The meeting is a pinion for research infrastructure by
the networking of research personnel and information. Through the heavily cited
proceedings, information is widely disseminated to an extensive network of
researchers and students around the world. The societal impact is identification
of pre-commercial technologies and sharing of information pertaining to freeform
fabrication that will eventually be developed and implemented into machines and
processes that will enhance domestic productivity.