* 0820969
* Mating behavior in allopatric and sympatric postzygotically isolated populations of the model Saccharomyces paradoxus
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Clifford Zeyl, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel M. Scheiner
* 08/31/2011
* USD 212,000.00

Understanding the process of speciation is a major goal of evolutionary
research; currently, most of our knowledge comes from plant and animal studies.
Microbial species make up most of the world's biodiversity, but because many are
hard to isolate and culture, little is known about how they interact. This
research will investigate interactions among natural populations of the sexual
yeast Saccharomyces paradoxus that may be undergoing speciation. Individual
cells will be tested for preferences among potential mates from the same and
other populations - a new approach in microbial ecology - to determine the
mechanism underlying reproductive isolation between populations. The variants of
genes responsible for a yeast cell's ability to identify and communicate with an
appropriate mating partner will then be identified and studied.

This research may provide the first example in a microbial species of the
evolution of differences that allow ecologically similar and closely related
populations to co-exist. Furthermore, understanding cell-to-cell communication
between microbial populations and species has implications for the spread of
genetic material across species boundaries in important contexts such as the
passage of virulence genes between pathogenic and non-pathogenic fungal species.
Studying these basic processes in a risk-free system offers a valuable
opportunity to understand them.