* 0820310
* Multiple Testing in Econometrics: Theory and Applications
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Azeem Shaikh, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2012
* USD 143,737.00

This project pursues three different projects on multiple testing:&lt;br/&gt;1.
Consider the problem of testing s null hypotheses simultaneously. The classical
approach to such a problem is to require control of the Familywise Error Rate
(FWER), the probability of even one false rejection. Unfortunately, when s is
large, the ability of such a procedure to detect false null hypotheses may be
very limited. For this reason, it is often preferred in such situations to relax
control of the FWER. In joint work with Joseph Romano and Michael Wolf, this
project develops methods for this problem that asymptotically control the false
discovery rate (FDR), the expected value of the fraction of rejections that are
false rejections (defined to be 0 in the case of no rejections). Unlike existing
methods for control of the FDR, the methods developed by this project
incorporate information about the joint distribution of the test statistics when
determining which null hypotheses to reject and, thus, are better able to detect
false null hypotheses. The project illustrates this property via a simulation
study and an application to the evaluation of hedge funds.&lt;br/&gt;2. The
literature on program evaluation typically focuses on estimation of the average
effect of a program for all individuals or for all treated individuals. Of
course, even if these quantities are zero, it may be the case that the average
effect conditional on some value of observed covariates is nonzero. Identifying
the values of the covariates for which this is true may be of substantive
interest, especially to policy makers interested in extending the program or
treatment to other populations. &lt;br/&gt;3. Randomized trials of programs in
developing countries have become increasingly popular within development
economics. In many cases, the program involves a single treatment, but there are
multiple outcomes of interest. A prominent example of this is PROGRESA, a large-
scale, on-going poverty reduction program in Mexico started in 1998. Existing
studies have found that PROGRESA has an effect on a large number of different
outcomes when each outcome is considered individually. Many of these findings
may, however, be due to false rejections, leading to an overstatement of the
effect of the program. Together with Soohyung Lee and Joanne Yoong, the
investigator reevaluates the impact of PROGRESA on these different outcomes by
accounting for the multiplicity of tests under
consideration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The projects described above
will be useful not only to economists, but to researchers in a wide array of
disciplines. Control of the FDR has been suggested in numerous applications,
including, among others, educational studies, analysis of microarray data, model
selection, and plant breeding. For this reason, the development of more powerful
methods for control of the FDR, as described in the first project, will be of
use in many applications beyond the evaluation of hedge funds. The estimation of
treatment effects lies at the center of not only many economic questions, as
evidenced by its large literature within economics, but also many questions in
biostatistics. For example, the efficacy of a new drug or therapy may vary with
the observable covariates of the patients. It may be of interest to determine
for which values of these observed covariates the new drug or therapy is
effective, so the results of the second project will therefore be relevant.
Finally, randomized trials are, of course, common not only in development
economics, but in all parts of the sciences. Hence, the methodology developed in
the third project for the evaluation of PROGRESA will be relevant in any such
randomized trial provided that there is more than one outcome of
interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;