* 0820561
* Student Support for 2nd International Congress on Ceramics; Verona, Italy; June 29 - July 4, 2008
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2009
* Katherine Faber, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* David A. Brant
* 04/30/2009
* USD 12,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/CER(1774) 0801520 PI: Faber, Katherine ORG: Northwestern
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Student Support for 2nd International
Congress on Ceramics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: Funds are awarded
to support the travel and registration fees for up to eight US students
(including both graduate and undergraduate students) to the 2nd International
Congress on Ceramics to be held June 29 ? July 4, 2008, in Verona, Italy. This
conference series was initiated in 2006 by a consortium consisting of the
American Ceramic Society, the European Ceramic Society, and the Ceramic Society
of Japan to facilitate discussion and planning concerning major issues that face
the international ceramics and glass industry. The 2nd Congress is organized by
the European Ceramic Society under the purview of the International Ceramics
Federation. Over 100 international experts have been invited to make
presentations. Following the example set by the 1st International Congress on
Ceramics, the organizers plan to publish a revised version of the "Global
Roadmap for Ceramics." Only students who will be presenting posters at the
Congress will be considered for support. Selection of student participants will
be based on the quality of the abstract submitted and a letter of recommendation
from the student's research advisor. Availability of support will be advertised
through the Material Advantage website and direct contact with Material
Advantage advisors in universities and colleges throughout the US. A panel of
judges chosen from American Ceramic Society membership will be used to evaluate
nominations. Consideration will be given to diversity (both for females and
underrepresented minorities) for the meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER
IMPACTS: Substantial benefit will accrue to the US student participants who are
enabled by this grant to attend the 2nd International Congress on Ceramics. They
will have an opportunity to present their own research in a high level
scientific environment where both their scientific accomplishment and their
communication skills are put to a demanding test. And they will be able to meet
both junior and senior colleagues in the ceramics field from around the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;