* 0820842
* Arabidopsis 2010:   Development of a genome-scale cell type-specific gene expression map
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2009,12/31/2013
* Thomas Girke, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 12/31/2013
* USD 570,917.00

Pattern formation in developmental fields is a dynamic process. It involves
generation of specific cell types in a correct spatio-temporal sequence.
Therefore, deciphering gene networks that underlie cell fate transitions
requires new approaches aimed at assaying genome scale expression patterns of
genes at a single cell type resolution. Shoot apical meristems (SAMs) of higher
plants harbor a set of stem-cells and provide cells for the development of all
the above-ground biomass of plants. Most of the important pattern formation
events such as maintenance of stem-cell identity, specification and
differentiation of leaf/flower primordia, and the temporal control of transition
from vegetative to reproductive program are determined in the SAMs. Genetic
analysis has revealed molecular and hormonal pathways involved in stem-cell
maintenance, organ differentiation and flowering time. However, limited
information is available as to how different pathways interact with each other
to function as a network in specifying different cell types and their function.
A major requirement for analyzing developmental gene networks is to determine
gene expression profiles of different cell types, at a single cell type
resolution. In this project, the PI and the co-PI will combine novel
experimental approaches and bioinformatics analysis to generate a cell type-
specific, genome-scale, expression map of the Arabidopsis shoot apex.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experimental methods of protoplasting SAMs cells,
FACS-mediated sorting of fluorescently labeled protoplasts, fluorescently tagged
transgenic seeds, the cell type specific microarray data, the relevant scripts
and analysis tools such as PostgreSQL for the database backend, Python for its
interface and R, JavaScript and Perl libraries for the online analysis and
graphical tools will be available for download (www.CySAM.org). In addition,
training will be provided for a post-doctoral fellow, and graduate and under-
graduate students in designing new methods of isolation and separation of
fluorescently labeled protoplasts and bioinformatic analysis of microarray data.
The Center for Plant Cell Biology (CEPCEB) at UCR runs an NSF-sponsored REU
program for undergraduates without research experience. Most students for this
program are recruited from community colleges. The undergraduate students for
this project will be recruited from the REU program and they will be exposed to
state-of-the art cell isolation, genomic and bioinformatic technologies.