* 0820214
* ADVANCE Partnerships for Adaptation, Implementation, and Dissemination (PAID) Award:  Collaborative Research -  Atmospheric Science Collaborations and Enriching NeTworks (ASCENT)
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Heather Thiry, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Beth Mitchneck
* 12/31/2012
* USD 58,571.00

This project will create a discipline-specific, well-designed program focusing
on women&lt;br/&gt;in atmospheric science/meteorology to create leaders for
advancement.&lt;br/&gt;The emphasis during the proposed three-day Atmospheric
Science Collaborations and&lt;br/&gt;Enriching Networks (ASCENT) summer workshop
program and follow-up reunion&lt;br/&gt;events will be to initiate positive
professional relationships, among female faculty of&lt;br/&gt;different ranks
and postdoctoral researchers. These individuals will work in teams
(each&lt;br/&gt;senior scientist will be paired with two junior scientists) and
foster connections.&lt;br/&gt;Furthermore, while networking with like-minded
women scientists, participants will have&lt;br/&gt;the opportunity to explore
specific promising practices toward eliminating the "leaky&lt;br/&gt;pipeline,"
defined by the attrition of women at different stages in their academic
careers.&lt;br/&gt;By fostering relationships among women faculty and
researchers, ASCENT will&lt;br/&gt;demonstrate a commitment to developing
research bases and improve the quality of&lt;br/&gt;collaborative atmospheric
research conducted at multiple universities and colleges.&lt;br/&gt;ASCENT has
been designed to achieve the following specific goals:&lt;br/&gt;1) Ensure that
junior women scientists know about and have access to resources
and&lt;br/&gt;people who can help guide them through their career and life
path.&lt;br/&gt;2) Encourage positive mentorship and create mentoring
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;3) Learn and teach others about primary obstacles for
women in atmospheric sciences&lt;br/&gt;and meteorological fields, and develop
or share communication tools to assist in&lt;br/&gt;navigating these
obstacles.&lt;br/&gt;4) Meet potential scientific collaborators at other
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;In order to ensure success and longevity of the proposed
workshop and collaborative&lt;br/&gt;experience, an extensive evaluation program
will be implemented. The process will&lt;br/&gt;begin at the initial stage of
workshop development; continue throughout duration of the&lt;br/&gt;workshop and
past termination to determine long-term outcomes. Evaluation
findings&lt;br/&gt;will be disseminated in professional forums, such as
conferences or refereed journals.&lt;br/&gt;Throughout these workshops, the
organizers will assemble knowledge on techniques&lt;br/&gt;and methodology to
strength the participation of women within the fields of
atmospheric&lt;br/&gt;science and meteorology. This information will be
disseminated to this academic&lt;br/&gt;community via Eos and Bulletin of the
American Meteorological Society (BAMS).&lt;br/&gt;ASCENT will also produce a bi-
annual electronic newsletter to provide summaries of&lt;br/&gt;"lessons learned"
and current literature regarding the advancement of women
in&lt;br/&gt;geoscience. This newsletter will be sent to all participants in the
workshops, the Earth&lt;br/&gt;Science Women's Network (ESWN) list serve, and
other interested parties.