* 0820267
* ADVANCE Partnerships for Adaptation, Implementation, and Dissemination (PAID) Award:  Collaborative Research -  Atmospheric Science Collaborations and Enriching Networks (ASCENT)
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Laura Edwards, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Beth Mitchneck
* 12/31/2011
* USD 278,851.00

This project will create a discipline-specific, well-designed program focusing
on women in atmospheric science/meteorology to create leaders for
advancement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The emphasis during the proposed three-day
Atmospheric Science Collaborations and Enriching Networks (ASCENT) summer
workshop program and follow-up reunion events will be to initiate positive
professional relationships, among female faculty of different ranks and
postdoctoral researchers. These individuals will work in teams (each senior
scientist will be paired with two junior scientists) and foster connections.
Furthermore, while networking with like-minded women scientists, participants
will have the opportunity to explore specific promising practices toward
eliminating the "leaky pipeline," defined by the attrition of women at different
stages in their academic careers. By fostering relationships among women faculty
and researchers, ASCENT will demonstrate a commitment to developing research
bases and improve the quality of collaborative atmospheric research conducted at
multiple universities and colleges. ASCENT has been designed to achieve the
following specific goals:&lt;br/&gt;1) Ensure that junior women scientists know
about and have access to resources and people who can help guide them through
their career and life path.&lt;br/&gt;2) Encourage positive mentorship and
create mentoring opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;3) Learn and teach others about
primary obstacles for women in atmospheric sciences and meteorological fields,
and develop or share communication tools to assist in navigating these
obstacles.&lt;br/&gt;4) Meet potential scientific collaborators at other
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to ensure success and longevity of
the proposed workshop and collaborative experience, an extensive evaluation
program will be implemented. The process will begin at the initial stage of
workshop development; continue throughout duration of the workshop and past
termination to determine long-term outcomes. Evaluation findings will be
disseminated in professional forums, such as conferences or refereed journals.
Throughout these workshops, the organizers will assemble knowledge on techniques
and methodology to strength the participation of women within the fields of
atmospheric science and meteorology. This information will be disseminated to
this academic community via Eos and Bulletin of the American Meteorological
Society (BAMS). ASCENT will also produce a bi-annual electronic newsletter to
provide summaries of "lessons learned" and current literature regarding the
advancement of women in geoscience. This newsletter will be sent to all
participants in the workshops, the Earth Science Women's Network (ESWN) list
serve, and other interested parties.