* 0820958
* MRI: Acquisition of a State of the Art Scanning Electron Microscope at Chicago State University on Chicago's far Southside
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* LeRoy Jones II, Chicago State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2012
* USD 354,536.00

A grant was awarded to Chicago State Univeristy to acquire a scanning electron
microsope (SEM). This instrument will enhance the resources of the core electron
microscopy facility. The newly installed SEM will yield excellent secondary
electron images in standard high vacuum mode and provide the capability to image
uncoated and partially hydrated samples in the low vacuum mode using the
backscatter detectors. Moreover it will allow easy collection of high-resolution
digital images for presentation and publication. The WEB-SEM option that will
allow us to actively use the microscope from a remote location, like an
elementary school classroom, to support our outreach efforts. Research projects
include developing zinc oxide films for solar cells; monitoring the products and
processes of microwave enhanced chemistry; developing self-healing bone cement;
and understanding the biochemistry of the assembly of the microtubule associated
protein Tau; understanding the changes in starch granule breakdown in alfalfa;
exploring the differentiation and apoptosis of cells in the colon and ileum
after thermal injury; and understanding the role of truncated actin binding
proteins in altering the dynamics and structure of the cytoskeleton.

The SEM will be used to support the educational and outreach goals of the
university. The equipment will be used extensively in the Techniques in Electron
Microscopy course and less extensively to support introductory courses for
biology and science education majors. Two summer enrichment courses for minority
students use the SEM for workshops and to support independent research projects.
Taken together, these two programs address the needs of high school and early
college students in developing their STEM skills. The WEB-SEM module will allow
us to develop an outreach program where 6-12 teachers in the Chicago Public
Schools can use the microscope from a remote location to support their classroom
curriculum. Given Chicago State's predominantly minority student population and
the demographics of the surrounding community, we strongly feel that we are in
the position to effectively use the requested equipment to bolster both research
and science education among underrepresented groups.