* 0820607
* U.S.-Germany Planning Visit:    Structural Health Monitoring Sensors for Offshore Wind Turbines
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2008,03/31/2009
* Jerome Lynch, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 03/31/2009
* USD 7,578.00

OISE-0820607 U.S.-Germany Planning Visit: Structural Health Monitoring Sensors
for Offshore Wind Turbines &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports a
collaboration between Dr. Jerome Lynch in the Department of Civil and
Environmental Engineering at the University of Michigan, Dr. John Sweetman in
the Department of Maritime Systems Engineering at Texas A&amp;M at Galveston,
and Dr. Raimund Rolfes at the Institute for Structural Analysis at the
University of Hannover in Germany. This proposal, and its collaborative mate
0813764, will fund a six day visit to Germany for Dr. Lynch, Dr. Sweetman, and
two students from the University of Michigan to develop a research proposal
dealing with structural health monitoring technologies to be installed on
offshore wind turbines. In addition, the PI?s plan to develop a graduate course
dealing with offshore wind energy. The U.S team has expertise in wireless
sensors and embedded data processing for damage identification, and the German
collaborator provides expertise and access to a new offshore field of wind
turbines being deployed in the German Bight. This is a unique opportunity for
the U.S. team, because such a field of offshore wind turbines does not currently
exist in the U.S. The sensors that will be deployed will harvest a rich set of
data that fully captures the complexity of wind-wave-structure interactions
inherent to offshore turbines. This data will be useful in optimizing the design
of future offshore wind turbines thereby helping the U.S. in its quest for
renewable energy sources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;