* 0820831
* Transcription Profiling and Functional Analyses of Bacterial Disease Susceptibility Pathways of Rice
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2013
* Frank White, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2013
* USD 3,301,127.00

PI: Frank White, Kansas State University&lt;br/&gt;Co-PI: Adam Bogdanove, Iowa
State University&lt;br/&gt;Co-PI: Bing Yang, Iowa State
University&lt;br/&gt;Collaborator: Dan Nettleton, Iowa State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rice, the major food source for a
large portion of the world population, is a premier species for genome-enabled
crop research. The interactions of rice and associated pathogens are an
important topic and an excellent opportunity for in-depth analyses of the
adaptive processes of plant disease susceptibility and defense. The two
pathovars of Xanthomonas oryzae, the causal agents of bacterial blight and leaf
streak of rice, cause disease in part by modulating host plant gene expression.
Global changes in rice gene expression will be characterized during the disease
process and during successful defense responses to identify the host genes that
control host susceptibility and resistance (R) to bacterial infection.
Additionally, since pathogen populations have evolved over time in response to
new genetic mechanisms of resistance in the host, the project will characterize
the diversity of adaptations based on host responses to infection by different
pathogen strains. Mutant rice lines and manipulation of host gene expression by
inhibitory RNA (RNAi) will be employed to determine the functional significance
of selected candidate host genes involved in disease and defense responses. The
project will carry out (1) profiling of host transcriptional responses in rice
cultivar Nipponbare, as well as other diverse host genotypes (domestic rice and
wild relatives) to three sequenced strains of the pathogens using microarray
gene chip hybridization and quantitative, real time, reverse transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction methods; (2) profiling of responses of a set of rice
lines near-isogenic for either recessive or dominant R genes to define pathways
for susceptibility and induced innate immunity; and 3) functional analyses of
candidate host susceptibility and defense genes and associated gene families
using gene transfer, RNAi, and mutagenesis techniques. Array data will be
deposited to PlexDB (http://www.plexdb.org/)and other project outcomes will be
available through http://www.oznet.ksu.edu/plantpath/whiteslab/welcome.htm.&lt;b
r/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will elucidate the processes in rice
susceptibility and resistance to bacterial blight and bacterial leaf streak, and
establish important, broadly relevant concepts of plant-pathogen interactions.
The results will provide insight into strategies for achieving durable and broad
resistance against disease, which, in itself, can have wide-reaching impacts on
the environment and quality of life. The work will enhance the educational
environments at Iowa State University and Kansas State University and strengthen
international collaborative research. The participating research programs will
foster the participation of scientists at all levels of education and
internationally. Each of the investigators contributes strongly to research
programs for both resident and visiting undergraduate students, including the
Summer Research Opportunities Program (SUROP) at Kansas state University, REU
and RET programs at Iowa State University, and individually tailored research
and supplemental coursework. Workshops will be conducted including members of
all labs and interested national and international students and researchers in
the field.