* 0820112
* Collaborative Research:   Abiotic Stress Combination:   Bridging the gap between Arabidopsis Stress Research and Agriculture
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2012
* Eduardo Blumwald, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 03/31/2012
* USD 228,571.00

Arabidopsis 2010: Abiotic stress combination: Bridging the gap between
Arabidopsis stress research and agriculture&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work
undertaken on this project is designed to make significant contributions to the
goals of the 2010 program - to understand the networking and function of every
gene in Arabidopsis. The specific focus of the project is on abiotic stress
combinations and the genetic and metabolic networks that respond to stress
combinations such as drought and heat, drought and salinity and salinity and
heat. Abiotic stress is the primary cause of crop loss world-wide, with losses
in the US estimated at 14-19 billion dollars each year. While abiotic stress is
routinely studied in Arabidopsis by applying a single stress condition such as
drought, salinity or heat, this type of analysis does not reflect the conditions
that occur in the field where crop plants are subjected to a combination of
different stresses. The central objective of the project is to identify novel
genes, gene networks and metabolic pathways that specifically respond to a
combination of two different abiotic stresses. The hypothesis to be tested is
that dedicated genes, networks and pathways are activated in plants that are
simultaneously exposed to two different stress conditions. This project is
designed to bring Arabidopsis into the front line of applied research on abiotic
stress tolerance, and bridge the gap between stress studies conducted with
Arabidopsis in the lab and the conditions that impact crops in the field. The
two key "Broader Impacts" of the proposed research are: 1) Development and
maintenance of a centralized website that will bring together agronomists,
breeders and Arabidopsis molecular biologists
(http://www.ag.unr.edu/Stress_Combination/). 2) Educational outreach for K-12
and multidisciplinary training to postdoctoral, graduate and undergraduates
trainees. Both undergraduate and K-12 outreach and training activities will
target the under privileged and under represented in Science. Historically,
abiotic stress combinations, such as drought and heat, had the outmost
devastating economical and sociological impacts on the US, with losses of 48.4
and 61.6 billion dollars in 1980 and 1988 respectively. The proposed project
will pave the way for the development of crops with enhanced abiotic stress
tolerance, contributing to ameliorate the consequences of future weather
disasters that are likely to increase in frequency due to anticipated climatic
changes.&lt;br/&gt;