* 0820823
* Arabidopsis 2010:   Metabolomics:   A Functional Genomics Tool for Deciphering Functions of Arabidopsis Genes in the Context of Metabolic and Regulatory Networks
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2014
* Oliver Fiehn, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 02/28/2014
* USD 2,925,398.00

The functions of over 1/3 of the annotated protein-coding genes of the
Arabidopsis genome are still unknown, and the annotation of an even larger
portion of the genome is not sufficiently accurate for unambiguous assignment of
function at the biochemical and physiological levels. This project will bring
together a consortium of multidisciplinary collaborators to establish pipelines
for generating metabolomics data-streams and to provide statistical and
computational interpretation of the resulting integrated datasets. The goal is
to develop metabolite-profiling capabilities that will enhance the research
community's ability to formulate testable hypotheses concerning Arabidopsis gene
functions. The consortium has developed metabolomic platforms that together
detect approximately 1,800 metabolites, of which 900 are chemically defined. The
aim of the project is to apply these established metabolite-profiling platforms
to reveal changes in the metabolome associated with knockout mutations in up to
200 Arabidopsis genes of unknown function and compare these to similar mutants
in 50 genes of known function. The consortium will disseminate these data via
the existing multi-functional metabolomics database: www.plantmetabolomics.org.
Enhancement of this database and associated statistical and visualization
toolsets will enable researchers to formulate testable computational models of
the metabolic network of Arabidopsis. The successful completion of these goals
and integration with other NSF-sponsored functional genomics and cyber
infrastructure developments will generate transformational resources for
ultimately modeling the complex metabolism of Arabidopsis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop new
resources for the research community that will enhance the capability to
globally profile genome expression at the metabolite level. These metabolite
resources, in collaboration with other NSF-funded resource development projects,
will enable researchers in the community to formulate credible, testable
hypotheses concerning gene function. The project will foster the development of
the science of metabolomics as a functional genomics tool through workshops,
internships and organization of national and international meetings. The project
will also develop new activities to enhance the impact of science education and
training in the community, by conducting workshops for researchers at consortium
labs and at international biological meetings. In addition, research internships
will be offered to undergraduate students, eight of whom will have the
opportunity to experience international science training in a European genomics
laboratory. These research-based training internships will illustrate to the
students the synergy that accompanies the integrated applications of chemistry,
biochemistry, genetics, bioinformatics and computational sciences to solving
complex biological problems.