* 0820128
* ADVANCE Partnerships for Adaptation, Implementation, and Dissemination (PAID) Award:   SEEDS at the University of Miami
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* James Tien, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Beth Mitchneck
* 08/31/2013
* USD 543,441.00

The University of Miami's SEEDS (Scientists and Engineers Expanding Diversity
and Success) initiative has two main objectives: 1) to implement innovative and
proven programs for faculty recruitment and retention and 2) to use these to
leverage a larger institutional commitment that will assure continuity and
permanence of institutional change. UM is establishing a University-level SEEDS
office as a focus for diversity programs across all three UM campuses,
establishing a Best Practices Committee to assess equity in policies, funding an
Interactive Theatre initiative to help educate academic populations in diversity
issues, and sponsoring a comprehensive climate survey to identify gender and
ethnicity issues at UM. The SEEDS office will orchestrate initiatives, develop a
comprehensive website and work with the Best Practices Committee to educate
departments, department chairs and search committees on diversity issues,
efforts funded by UM. NSF funding will support seven programs, including five
based on proven programs: SEEDS Networking, Senior Scholar Lectureships, Career
Workshops, "You Choose" Leadership Opportunities and Mentoring Across
Differences, and two novel programs: "Early Career Research Conferences" and
"Working From Within For Departmental Transformation". These strategies draw
from an extensive literature on gender and race equity in science and
engineering to effectively recruit women and underrepresented minorities
actively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Taken together, these programs and activities
capitalize on a critical period of faculty replacement and expansion at UM, when
catalyzing recruitment and retention initiatives can significantly increase
faculty diversity. The opportunity is substantial: UM now has 302 SEM faculty
and anticipates more than 100 tenure-track SEM faculty searches in the next five
years. UM is located in Miami, the gateway to the Americas, where the Hispanic
success story is palpable at every turn, and where our undergraduates are 27%
Hispanic and 10% African-American. However, our Science, Engineering and
Mathematics faculty has only 5% underrepresented minorities. We thus have a
substantial eagerness for recruiting and retaining women of color. Because Miami
is particularly attractive for Hispanic peoples and since several of our
research fields have a strong pipeline representation of Hispanic women, we
expect a good measure of success in our efforts to learn about, celebrate,
promote, recruit and retain Hispanic women. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit: SEEDS innovatively combines a focus on underrepresented minorities with
proven and novel programs to both broadly engage an entire university community,
and focally transform target departments. Novel "Early Career Research
Conferences" showcase young women and underrepresented minority scientists in
cutting edge research conferences, thereby directly promoting their careers and
highlighting them for local and national searches. A novel "Working from Within"
program combines an initiative to educate department chairs with an
administrative advocacy and financial support of selected women faculty leaders
who are armed with a "Transformational Toolkit" to remedy specific concerns
within their own departments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: SEEDS will
alleviate isolation, foster career development, educate the academic community
and infuse changes in hiring and promotion institution-wide with a high
probability of improved climate as well as increased hiring and retention of
women and underrepresented scientists during a critical period of faculty
expansion.