* 0820505
* RUI: Energy Anabolism in Glacier Ice Worms: Evolution, Mechanisms and Contribution to Cold Adaptation
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2008,09/30/2013
* Roman Dial, Rutgers University Camden
* Standard Grant
* Inna Sokolova
* 09/30/2013
* USD 332,733.00

&lt;br/&gt;Glacier ice worms (Mesenchytraeus solifugus) are the largest and most
complex animals in which biological processes (e.g., growth, reproduction,
metabolism, etc.) occur at zero degrees centigrade and below. Ice worms inhabit
glaciers and ice fields ranging from central Oregon to Alaska, and a related
species has been reported in Tibet. In this project, the researchers will
collect worm specimens from strategic geographic regions (e.g., British
Columbia, Tibet) to establish evolutionary relationships between distant ice
worm populations and their temperate relatives (i.e., Mesenchytraeus species
that typically occupy streams and lakes). By comparing specific DNA sequences
(i.e., mitochondrial and ribosomal RNA genes), the investigators hope to
reconstruct the evolutionary history of ice worms in North America and Asia.
Additionally, the process of energy production in ice worms will be examined in
detail. Previous studies demonstrate that ice worms have unusually high steady-
state energy levels that may contribute to their cold temperature survival
abilities. They hypothesize that a few key enzymes (i.e, AMP phosphatase, AMP
deaminase) will be turned off in ice worms, while others (e.g., adenylosuccinate
lyase) may display relatively enhanced activity?in combination, these changes
may be necessary and sufficient to maintain elevated energy levels in ice worms.
Collectively, these analyses will provide species history information on an
organism that has survived past cycles of global climate change but is now
directly threatened by the changing global climate, and will also shed light on
the fundamentals of bioenergetics at low physiological temperatures. The project
will integrate participants ranging from traditional students to K-12 teachers,
to collect ice worms in the field and study them in the laboratory. Research
objectives will be integrated into a Glacier Biology course at Alaska Pacific
University, and laboratory courses at Rutgers University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;