* 0820642
* TRMS:  High-Throughput Functional Analysis of Soybean Defense Pathways by Virus-Induced Gene Silencing
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2008,06/30/2014
* Melissa Mitchum, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 06/30/2014
* USD 2,211,734.00

PI: Steven A. Whitham (Iowa State University)&lt;br/&gt;CoPI: Thomas Baum (Iowa
State University)&lt;br/&gt;CoPI: John H. Hill (Iowa State
University)&lt;br/&gt;CoPI: Melissa G. Mitchum (University of
Missouri)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Soybean is the second most economically important
row crop species in the United States, but very little information is available
on the specific genes that regulate soybean defenses. The soybean crop is
perennially subjected to attack by a variety of pathogens. Studies involving
model plants, such as Arabidopsis, have yielded much information on plant
defense genes and have shown that there is general conservation of defense
related pathways across species. Knowledge of defense-related genes in model
plants combined with the extensive sequence information available to soybean
provides the opportunity to transfer research from model systems to soybean. The
overall goal of this project is to interrogate the functions of soybean genes in
disease resistance pathways. This will be accomplished by incorporating
information from soybean gene expression, resistance gene mapping studies, and
soybean homologs of key genes that regulate defense responses in Arabidopsis. In
each of the three specific objectives of this project, high throughput virus-
induced gene silencing (VIGS) assays will be used to investigate the roles of
the candidate genes in resistance to the important soybean pathogens Soybean
mosaic virus (SMV), Asian soybean rust (ASR), and soybean cyst nematode (SCN).
This research will provide key knowledge needed to unravel defense signaling
networks of soybean, which is a requirement for modulating plant resistance in
the future. In soybean, there is a critical need to develop methods for
analyzing the functions of genes on a scale that allows researchers to exploit
the available soybean sequence information and knowledge gained from model
systems. The implementation of the VIGS assays will demonstrate proof of concept
that high-throughput gene function studies are feasible in soybean and can be
applied to other important traits. &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this
project address both scientific and societal needs. It is expected that this
research will be exploited to improve soybean cultivars for disease resistance
by accelerating breeding programs and by enabling the engineering of novel
resistance traits. The investigators will make the vectors, VIGS constructs, and
methods developed in this project available to the soybean research community.
The soybean sequences inserted into the VIGS constructs will be made available
through the Soybase database (http://soybase.agron.iastate.edu/). The
participation of 7th-12th grade teachers and undergraduate students in this
project is expected to further broaden the impact by encouraging young people
with aptitude and interest to pursue careers in the biological sciences. The
teachers will participate in the NSF Research Experience for Teachers program
that is held each summer for seven weeks at Iowa State University. The teachers
receive training in molecular biology techniques, curriculum development, and
engage in independent research projects in the investigators? laboratories. The
undergraduates will participate directly in the research project throughout the
year under the mentorship of graduate students or postdoctoral scientists.
Finally, scientific exchange will be enhanced through collaboration with
Brazilian scientists interested in applying fundamental research to the problem
of ASR.