* 0820653
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Natural Resource Governance and Economic Development
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2009
* Sally Merry, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Martinek
* 08/31/2009
* USD 8,665.00

Pi and Co-PI: Sally Merry and Terra Eve Lawson-Remer

Institution: NYU

Title: Natural Resource Governance and Economic Development

SES ? 0820653

Abstract

This project examines the impacts of natural resource governance institutions on
economic development, specifically poverty, inequality, income, and conflict.
Data will come from ethnographic case studies and econometric models to shed
light on the ways in which natural resource governance affects economic
development. Case studies in Mexico, Sierra Leone, and Fiji will also be used to
examine the interaction between formal laws and informal social norms in the
determination of distribution and efficiency outcomes. In addition, a series of
statistical regressions will be incorporated to investigate the impact of
various forms of property rights, different accountability mechanisms, and other
dimensions of natural resource governance on conflict, poverty, and human
development indicators. Understanding the impacts of different natural resource
governance structures is critical to devising appropriate policies for reducing
poverty, sustaining ecosystem services, and mitigating natural resource related
conflicts. To the extent that some resource governance laws are more effective
than others in raising living standards of the poor, knowledge about these
institutional mechanisms can aid the global commitment to reduce poverty. At the
same time, insights regarding effective natural resource governance institutions
can be applied to improve the provisions of a wide array of ecosystem services,
such as carbon emissions reductions and sustainable wildlife populations.
Finally, a better understanding of the issues surrounding natural resource
governance will contribute directly to our ability to address the root causes of
violent conflicts.