* 0820564
* Early cell fate specification in the mud snail Ilyanassa.
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2011
* Lisa Nagy, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 06/30/2011
* USD 450,000.00

Lisa M. Nagy, (IOS-0820564) Early cell fate specification in the mud snail
Ilyanassa. &lt;br/&gt;Development in all multi-cellular organisms depends on an
asymmetric distribution of patterning molecules that occurs during the earliest
cleavage cycles. As a consequence of the early establishment of asymmetry, cells
embark on different pathways to ultimately become the recognizable organs of the
adult. This proposal focuses on the role of two signaling pathways - signaling
through the NMDA receptor and signaling through the NOTCH pathway - in the
establishment of asymmetry and cell fate in the mud snail Ilyanassa. Preliminary
findings suggest that blocking either of these pathways disrupts important
events in determining the fate of particular cells and results in a failure to
establish bilateral symmetry in the embryo. The Nagy lab uses Ilyanassa as their
model system as their embryos undergo a series of pronounced asymmetric cell
divisions and have a distinctive pattern of cell fates, characteristics that
make them ideally suited for the proposed research. Significantly, the NMDA
receptor is best known for its role in synaptic transmission and memory and
learning and has not previously been implicated in early cell division in any
animal species. The expected results will broadly impact the scientific
community because asymmetric cell cleavage is a fundamental property of stem
cells and increasing our understanding of stem cell behavior effects the ability
of the scientific community to improve health care through treatments utilizing
stem cells. The proposed work forms the basis of graduate and undergraduate
training and outreach to local elementary and high schools. As these experiments
are straightforward methodologically, they provide an excellent opportunity to
introduce student and teachers-in training to the beauty of the invertebrate
embryo and to modern methods in cell and molecular biology, imaging, and design
and interpretation of scientific experiments. The lab actively participates in
programs designed to recruit under-represented minorities from the local high
schools and community college for research experiences.