* 0820725
* Research Initiation Grant: Bacterial Respiration of Terrestrial Carbon in Freshwater Systems: Implications for the Terrestrial C Budget
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2008,09/30/2011
* Shannon McCallister, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 09/30/2011
* USD 174,975.00

&lt;br/&gt;The exchange of carbon between terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems is
a critical component of the global carbon cycle. Movement of terrestrial carbon
from land to water represents a loss of carbon from the former and a gain for
the latter, and these changes must be taken into account when determining the
net carbon balance of either system. In most terrestrial carbon cycle studies,
the magnitude of this loss has not been determined, possibly resulting in an
over-estimation of carbon storage in the terrestrial system. If the carbon that
enters the aquatic system is eventually respired, or lost to the atmosphere,
then this is a potentially serious error in calculations of regional and global
carbon cycling. The specific goal of this project is to determine the age of
terrestrially-derived carbon from forests in Massachusetts and the subsequent
metabolic fate of this carbon in adjacent aquatic systems over seasonal and
annual cycles. A multi-disciplinary approach will employ a variety of
biochemical and analytical techniques to determine the age and fate of soil
carbon. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will have important implications for
decision makes and managers who are interested in maximizing net carbon storage
within particular regions. Outreach efforts will focus on the concept of
connectivity between inland ecosystems and downstream estuaries and the coastal
zone. The focus will be on improving the coverage of concepts and topics in
aquatic ecology in curricula for K-12 education. The principle investigator is
partnered with the Math and Science Center of Virginia. Three teacher-student
teams consisting of one high school biology or earth science teacher and four
10th grade students, with priority given to students from under-represented
groups, will participate in a two-week, field-oriented institute to educate and
provide research experiences.&lt;br/&gt;