* 0820832
* CRIF:ID- Development of Instrumentation for Single Molecule Trapping and Spectroscopy for Chemistry Research
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Jorg Woehl, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2012
* USD 320,944.00

This award from the CRIF-ID program to Jorg C. Woehl in the Department of
Chemistry at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee will fund the development and
construction of a novel tool for single molecule research which combines
capabilities (1) for the optical imaging and spectroscopy of individual
fluorescent molecules or other optically active nanoparticles, and (2) for their
controlled manipulation (trapping and positioning) at the nanoscale. The basic
idea of the proposed novel trapping scheme is to create a circular potential
energy well (an electrostatic corral) to capture charged molecules, such as
membrane proteins or other laterally confined molecules, by applying an electric
potential to the metal layer of the optical aperture tip of a near field
scanning optical microscope. During the project timeframe, the PI's research
group will build, test, and characterize an optical aperture trap, and required
software for single particle trapping. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Single molecule
spectroscopy techniques have lead to a new understanding of many physical,
chemical, and biological processes since they allow the observation of
individual events, free from ensemble averaging, thus giving access to the full
statistical heterogeneity of molecular properties This knowledge is important as
it provides the basis for analyzing and explaining why two molecules of the same
species can, for example, exhibit quite different biological activities. This
instrumentation will advance the field of single molecule trapping for the study
of particles in physical, chemical and biological processes. The work will be
conducted by graduate students who will obtain valuable training in the design
and construction of sophisticated scientific instrumentation.