* 0820445
* Collaborative Research: Temporal Configuration Analysis for Extracting Qualitative Information from Multi-Wave, Multi-Dimensional Data
* SBE,SES
* 11/06/2007,09/30/2009
* Steven Scott, Wake Forest University School of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 09/30/2009
* USD 45,030.00

The project will develop an analytic methodology that will provide researchers
with a means for extracting qualitative information about the dynamics of
individual behavior from multi-wave, multi-variable data sets. This innovation
will be timely and useful in that it coincides with recent improvements in study
design and data collection methodologies that have led to increased availability
of and interest in longitudinal data among social, behavioral, and economic
researchers. The methodology will be motivated by a diverse range of
applications that include studies of crop diversification of tobacco farmers,
suicidal behavior of adolescents, and emotional changes monitored through
"Experience Sampling Methods," among others. The methodology will be called
Temporal Configuration Analysis (TCA) so as to emphasize the focus on detection
and identification of meaningful patterns in individual behavior trajectories
over time. The key element in TCA will be a dynamic model that tracks the
transition of "latent states" from one time point to another for each
individual. Latent states (e.g., health state, psychological state, political
inclination) can be viewed as summary measures of observed variables that
translate to or condition manifested behavior. TCA will allow a researcher to
identify homogeneous subgroups of individuals in terms of their temporal
trajectories of latent states and then to examine the profile of each subgroup.
Accordingly, a researcher will be able to interpret the results from analysis of
multi-wave data in terms of both observed and latent measures and their
trajectories. This will provide additional behavioral meaning and insight. TCA
will also feature a broad range of component statistical models to provide users
with flexibility in handling commonly encountered data characteristics, such as
cross-sectional dependence, state-dependence, and serial correlation. TCA will
create a statistical framework for analyzing multi-wave data in which inter-
temporal qualitative information is of interest.

The project will have immediate, broad, and significant impact on the social,
behavioral, and economic sciences and statistical research. First, researchers
will be able to analyze multi-wave data in a new way that is different from and
more informative than traditional methods such as latent growth curve analysis.
For example, it will be possible to describe and visualize behavioral responses
by projecting these configurations onto the space of actual behavior. Second,
the project will contribute to the science of statistics, specifically in the
area of hidden Markov models (HMM). The investigators expect that once this
method is developed, explicated, and applied, statisticians and mathematical
scientists will expand the TCA framework to include additional innovative
research applications. The project's impact will be broadened and maximized in
several ways: (1) dissemination of accessible, user-friendly, high-quality
software that will document the TCA methodology and allow researchers to use it
easily; (2) integration of research and education at several levels-grades
10-12, undergraduate, and graduate; and (3) interaction between the team of
applied and theoretical investigators and various research groups, both
nationally and internationally, with emphasis on publishing applied research
findings. The project will deliver Web-based end-products-high-quality programs
in packages familiar to social, behavioral, and economic researchers. The
investigators will collaborate with the Center of Excellence in Research,
Teaching, and Learning (CERTL) at Wake Forest University, using its
infrastructure and experience in training American students in science and
engineering, to integrate research into education. The project team, which
includes national and international researchers from several disciplines, will
leverage this collaboration to increase both the impact and visibility of the
project through extensive coordination with various national and international
research groups. This award was supported as part of the fiscal year 2005
Mathematical Sciences priority area special competition on Mathematical Social
and Behavioral Sciences (MSBS).