* 0820361
* Collaborative Research:  The Econometrics of Reallocations in the Presence of Complementarity and Social Spillovers: Estimands, Identification and Estimation
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Guido Imbens, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2012
* USD 211,980.00

Several controversial social policy debates involve disagreements about the
outcome and inequality implications of reallocating individuals across groups.
Examples of reallocating policies in public education alone include school
busing and desegregation, school vouchers, ability tracking and single-sex
schooling. Location-constrained rental vouchers, as provided in the Moving to
Opportunity (MTO) demonstration of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development, change the assignment of public housing recipients to
neighborhoods. Affirmative action admission rules alter the assignment of
students to universities; as the passing of the passing of Proposition 209 in
California has dramatically illustrated. Despite the prevalence and
controversial nature of reallocating policies, statistical methods for measuring
their effects are virtually nonexistent. This project would develop estimands
which characterize the average outcome and inequality effects of reallocations
as well as corresponding estimation and inference
procedures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential intellectual merits of the
proposed activity include increasing our understanding of how to evaluate
reallocating policies empirically. Conventional approaches to program evaluation
focus on characterizing the average effect of a policy within an affected
population. This information is, at best, only indirectly helpful for predicting
the impact of a reallocation. Consider the problem of assigning teachers, of
varying quality, to classrooms of students, of varying mean ability. The average
effect of a unit change in teacher quality, the traditional evaluation estimand
in this context, may be zero, even if the effect of reassigning teachers across
classrooms is substantial. The evaluation of reallocations involves a complex
interplay between the production technology and the constraints imposed by
feasibility. Reallocations are distinct from other policies in that they involve
no augmentation, only a redistribution, of resources. This is a feature which
helps to explain their often controversial nature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts resulting from the proposed activities includes an expansion of
the methodological toolkit available to applied researchers interested in the
study of reallocating policies, and, more generally, social spillovers or
neighborhood/peer effects. STATA and MATLAB software implementing the proposed
estimators are developed. The growth in various forms of single-sex public
education has been rapid in recent years, and is likely to expand further given
recent changes to Title IX regulations. The researchers also apply their
techniques to study the effects of the gender composition of a classroom on
student achievement and hence contribute to evaluating the case for single-sex
schooling.&lt;br/&gt;