* 0820485
* Collaborative Research: Paleontological Investigation of Early Primate Evolution in Asia
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Daniel Gebo, Northern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2012
* USD 82,872.00

With support from the National Science Foundation, an international team of
biological anthropologists and paleontologists will explore early Cenozoic (ca.
60-45 million year old) rock strata in the Erlian Basin of Inner Mongolia for
evidence of the earliest phases of primate evolution. American members of the
scientific team are based at the Carnegie Museum of Natural History (Pittsburgh,
PA), Northern Illinois University (DeKalb, IL), and the American Museum of
Natural History (New York, NY). Several different lines of evidence, including
the fossil record and reconstructions of evolutionary relationships based on
analyses of long sequences of DNA, suggest that the earliest phases of primate
evolution likely transpired in Asia. However, the fossil record of primate
evolution in Asia remains spotty, and most of the Asian primates from this time
interval are documented by very fragmentary anatomical remains. As a result,
there is no scientific consensus about how these Asian fossils fit on the family
tree of primate evolution. More generally, there is no consensus regarding where
and when such important events in primate evolution as the origin of primates
and the origin of anthropoids (the group of primates that includes living
monkeys, apes, and humans) occurred. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Erlian Basin,
which straddles the modern border between China and Mongolia, is the only
depositional basin in Asia bearing rock strata of the appropriate age to yield
fossil primates from the crucial interval of early Cenozoic time when primates
and anthropoids are thought to have originated. Field methods will include three
modes of paleontological exploration (surface prospecting, quarrying, and
screen-washing) to locate new fossil primates in the Erlian Basin. Analytic
methods include computer-assisted reconstructions of evolutionary relationships
based on anatomical features, as well as high-resolution computed tomographic
(CT) studies of anatomy. Working with geologists and experts on
paleoenvironmental reconstruction, the team will establish the basic chronology
of primate evolution in the Erlian Basin. These data will allow testing of
competing models of when and where primates evolved. A particularly interesting
goal of this project is to determine whether ancient episodes of primate
dispersal across the Bering land bridge between Alaska and Siberia correspond
precisely to ancient global warming events. The scientific results from this
project will enlighten understanding of where, when, and how earliest primate
ancestors evolved. This will result in greater knowledge of how these earliest
primates migrated from Asia to adjacent continents (notably including North
America) as the physical environment of the planet shifted due to plate
tectonics and changing climate. Broader impacts of the project include enhanced
scientific cooperation between American and Chinese scholars, training of
undergraduate and graduate students in both field and laboratory techniques, and
multiple forms of public educational outreach (including museum exhibits,
television documentaries, popular publications, and public lectures).