* 0820220
* ORCHID: Harnessing Digital Evolution to Design High-Assurance Adaptive Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2013
* Philip McKinley, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2013
* USD 600,000.00

Proposal Number 0820220&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: ORCHID: Harnessing Digital
Evolution in Design High-Assurance Adaptive Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PIs:
Betty Cheng, Philip McKinley, Charles Ofria, and Xiaobo
Tan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A robust cyber-infrastructure must be able to monitor
the environment and its own behavior, adapt to changing conditions, and protect
itself from component failures. The hallmark of the Orchid project is to
introduce the fundamental biological principle, evolution, into the development
process for adaptive real-world software systems. The project will use and
extend the Avida digital evolution software platform to address three primary
tasks: (1) exploiting the automatic generation of software models and search
capacity of digital evolution to enable the developer to identify viable system
configurations; (2) generating novel strategies to adapt from one system
behavior to another in response to changing environmental conditions; and (3)
providing assurance for adaptive systems by revealing latent properties within a
given configuration in order to distinguish generated configurations and remove
unwanted behavior. A prototype system will be developed and used to conduct an
experimental case study in the design of self-adaptive aquatic mobile sensor
networks for homeland security and environmental monitoring. In addition, an
instructional system, Avida-EDAS, will be developed to enable students to evolve
models of adaptive software, conduct experiments to assess the impact of adverse
environmental conditions, and observe the effects of different adaptation
strategies on system execution.&lt;br/&gt;