* 0820462
* Collaborative Research:  Geography, Trade, and Prices
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* David Weinstein, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Niloy Bose
* 06/30/2011
* USD 263,998.00

Geography, Trade, and Prices SBE-SES 0820536 and 0820462 Broda and Weinstein,
Collaborative

At the heart of almost all explanations of why Americans benefit or lose from
international trade is a notion that foreign goods should affect firms and
consumers through their impact on domestic prices. Unfortunately, the data has
not been kind to these theories. Studies have repeatedly found that domestic
prices are hardly affected by foreign prices. Thus, one is left with a paradox.
Although globalization seems anecdotally to be exerting profound effects on the
US economy, the data seems to indicate that our borders insulate us almost
completely from foreign price movements. Our project solves this puzzle by using
vast amounts of US and Canadian barcode data. Previous studies relied on price
indexes computed by governments or private price surveys of goods that were not
necessarily internationally comparable. Our barcode data reveals that there is
substantial heterogeneity in the set of goods consumed across cities in the US,
even in extremely narrowly defined product categories such as "milk". This
heterogeneity enables producers to charge different prices for these goods
across space and substantially insulates them from price changes charged by
other producers. Not surprisingly, there are also substantial differences in the
composition of goods consumed in Canada and the US. Brands and models differ to
such an extent that only about 10 percent of the goods consumed are identical.
These two facts help explain why borders loomed so large in previous work. When
comparing aggregate indexes across countries, researchers typically compared
average price movements of largely disjoint sets of goods. Movements in the
price of Coca Cola in the US might perfectly mirror movement of Coca Cola in
Canada, but if Statistics Canada were only including RC Cola in their price
indexes, the effects would appear much smaller. Our preliminary results suggest
that international price differences for the same good tend to be only slightly
larger across borders than they are within countries, but the borders seem much
larger if one uses (poor) data that compares one set of goods in one country
with another set of goods in a different country. This heterogeneity of goods
also helps us to understand how price shocks are transmitted across borders.
Again the barcode data reveals that much of the importance of the border in this
transmission is due to an aggregation bias. If one compares identical goods
across the border, price changes in Canada translate very rapidly into price
movements in the US. In other words, the project demonstrates that international
price movements have rapid and large impacts on US prices. However, if one were
to look at price transmission using indices, one would obtain the opposite
conclusion. We intend to disseminate the results from this research through the
publication of articles and the participation in conferences. Moreover, we will
work with statistical agencies and monetary authorities to help improve the
measurement of prices and formulation of policy. This research will also have a
cross-disciplinary/cross-institutional dimension. Some of the work will be joint
with Dr. Ephraim Leibtag at the Department of Agriculture. We expect that our
work will be useful for people interested in understanding the impact of
globalization on unskilled workers as well as on pricing behavior.