* 0820769
* Transposon tagging and fast neutron mutagenesis in soybean:  Necessary resources to aid in the translation of genomics information into applied technologies
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Wayne Parrott, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 09/30/2012
* USD 2,555,757.00

PI: Wayne Parrott, Univ. of Georgia&lt;br/&gt;Co-PI: Tom Clemente, Univ. of
Nebraska, &lt;br/&gt;Co-PI: Gary Stacey, Univ. of Missouri,
Columbia&lt;br/&gt;Co-PI: Carroll Vance, Univ. of Minnesota&lt;br/&gt;Senior
Personnel: Zhanyuan J. Zhang, Univ. of Missouri,
Columbia&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The soybean crop is a major source of vegetable
protein and edible oil. A thorough understanding of soybean genetics is
essential for the development of new soybean varieties that will meet the
nutritional, environmental, and industrial requirements that soybean will
fulfill over the next decades. Soybean has many research tools available that
facilitate its genetic study. However, there has been one genetic tool notably
absent for soybean, namely the availability of reverse genetic tools; that is, a
way to identify and determine the function of soybean genes that hold academic,
biological or agricultural importance. Therefore, the long-term goal of this
project is to develop and distribute the resources to needed to investigate the
function of soybean genes, especially those involved in soybean quality and
yield. This goal will be accomplished by building and cataloging a collection of
soybean deletion, insertional, and gene activation mutants derived by
engineering soybeans with genes from rice, tobacco or maize that naturally move
around the genome and insert themselves into other genes. Such mutants alter the
appearance of the plant, or can be detected in the laboratory. Moreover, the
team will investigate the use of fast neutrons to enhance their ability to find
the desired mutations. The research team will then compare the relative
efficiency and effectiveness of the various techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Not
only will soybean geneticists, breeders, farmers and consumers benefit from the
information this project derives, but the set of transposon tools developed by
this proposal will be available and useful for any dicot crop. Furthermore, any
soybean plants that are immediately useful for additional genetic studies or for
use in the development of new varieties will be immediately available to the
geneticists or breeders who need and request them on a cost-recovery basis. The
research will be executed in large part by graduate students and postdoctoral
fellows, effectively helping train the next generation of soybean breeders and
geneticists. In addition, each participating state has a series of small
research projects that are specifically designed to interest and engage
promising high school and undergraduate students in science and scientific
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Soybean oil and protein are already substrates for
numerous industrial and alimentary uses. It is expected that new, designer oils
and proteins can be used for everything from healthier diets to nutraceuticals
to novel industrial compounds to biodiesel. The genetic knowledge and
information on the available seed stocks will be made available to the public
via a web site (http://digbio.missouri.edu/gmgenedb/index.php) designed for the
purpose, presentations by the scientists of their work at scientific meetings,
and reports of the work published in peer-reviewed journals. &lt;br/&gt;