* 0820309
* IRADS: Center for the Study of Black Youth in Context (CSBYC)
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2008,08/31/2015
* Robert Sellers, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Namy
* 08/31/2015
* USD 2,493,104.00

The Center for the Study of Black Youth in Context (CSBYC) will focus on
research and action on social, psychological, and educational development among
African American children and youth. The CSBYC has four major objectives: (1) to
develop an infrastructure for a series of coordinated research investigations of
the ecological, cultural, racial, and familial contexts that influence the
development of African American children; (2) to provide training for early
scholars, graduate students, and undergraduate students around skills necessary
to do research and practice with diverse populations of ethnic minority children
in diverse community and school settings; (3) to cultivate collaborative
relationships and partnerships between the University of Michigan and local
communities to inform current and prospective practice and intervention
approaches for improving youth social and educational outcomes; (4) to serve as
a resource and clearinghouse for scholarship, training, and practice approaches
that can be utilized by scholarly and community stakeholders in the state more
broadly, as well as among institutional and community settings nationally. To
meet these goals, CSBYC investigators will conduct an initial research study of
middle school aged children in four diverse community settings. The goals of the
research project are to study ways parents and family caregivers socialize their
children around race and to examine the influence of various types of parenting
on child academic and social outcomes. Using multiple methods (surveys, family
diary studies, qualitative interviews, and observations), the research will show
how parents choose parenting strategies based on characteristics of their
communities (e.g., racial and economic diversity) along with their appraisals of
the racial, cultural, and class dynamics of their communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CSBYC research will contribute to understanding of
normative development of African American children within their varying family,
neighborhood, and school contexts, which has received relatively little
systematic attention. The study of Black youth from different social class
backgrounds is important for a number of reasons. First, despite the growing
Black middle class in America, a disproportionate number of studies have focused
only on low-income Black children in urban settings and/or on high-risk youth
populations. Consequently, race and social class often are confounded in
research and in its application to practices/interventions to enhance youth
development. There is less knowledge of family, educational, and social
development processes of African American children across different social class
groups and the implications of community social class and demographic diversity,
such as Black families' movement to, and increasing representation in, middle
class or suburban settings. For instance, studies show that parental education
is one of the biggest predictors of school achievement among African American
youth, yet even middle class African American students trail their European
American counterparts in academic achievement. Such patterns suggest that
parents of different social class backgrounds differentially negotiate the
schooling process for their children. It also suggests there still is much to be
learned about variation in family processes within lower and higher
socioeconomic levels. By examining Black families from diverse community
contexts, the CSBYC investigators will address important questions about the
nature of development among Black youth in ways that can support the efforts of
researchers, communities, schools, and families to encourage successful
development among children and adolescents.