* 0820557
* Indirect Aerosol Effects on Tropical Convection
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Susan van den Heever, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 07/31/2012
* USD 342,209.00

The impact of aerosols--both naturally occurring and anthropogenic--upon clouds
has been long recognized. In the case of more widespread stratiform type clouds
(e.g., subtropical stratocumulus) and isolated convective clouds, these impacts
have been rather extensively examined. Such is not the case for systems of deep
clouds over broad equatorial regions, which are subject to incursions of wind-
driven dust from emanating from continental deserts and urbanized areas.

Work supported by this grant will be unique in examining groups of deep tropical
convective cloud systems in considerable detail in order to better understand
their sensitivity to incursions of microphysically active aerosol including
cloud condensation nuclei (CCN) and ice nuclei (IN), which in turn influence the
precipitation development and cloud-radiation interactions. Model runs will be
conducted over large horizontal regions (~9600 km x 180 km at 38 vertical
levels) integrated over long periods (~100 days), which will allow the simulated
atmosphere to achieve a state of radiative-convective equilibrium and subsequent
assessment of responses to variable amounts and vertical distributions of
aerosols. Specific goals include analysis of the impacts that variable CCN and
IN concentrations have upon: (1) the tropical water budget, including
precipitation processes and distribution of latent heat release; (2)
differentiation between the so-called "first" and "second" indirect aerosol
effect, which relate to droplet sizes and number concentrations influencing
radiative transfer through cloud layers; (3) cloud dynamics, such as those that
may favor a previously noted tendency toward tri-modal distribution of
convective cloud depth and including updrafts, downdrafts, development of low-
level cold pools and other factors influencing cloud organization; (4)
radiative-convective equilibrium across the tropics; (5) partitioning of water
substance between liquid and ice; and (6) the anvil-cirrus properties of deep
tropical convection. Simulated cloud statistics will also be compared with
observed cloud properties emerging from NASA's CloudSat satellite to better
assess model performance and ultimately identify those physical processes
implicit in the observations.

The intellectual merit of this study rests in developing an improved description
of physics governing the behavior of tropical cloud systems and their role in
the global climate system via a combination of cloud microphysical and radiative
feedbacks. It will also advance understanding of the "radiative-convective
equilibrium" paradigm thought to characterize much of the tropical atmosphere,
and will facilitate extracting maximum value from newly emerging datastreams
such as provided by CloudSat.

Broader impacts of this work include improvement of techniques needed for
medium-range forecasts of tropical cloud systems (such as those that
occasionally engender tropical cyclones) as well as longer-term prediction of
the earth's climate, and include graduate student education and increased
involvement by underrepresented groups (viz. women in science).