* 0820870
* 2008 Thin Film And Small Scale Mechanical Behavior Gordon Research Conference; Colby College, Waterville, Maine; July 27 to 1 August, 2008
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2008,03/31/2009
* Richard Vinci, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Jorn Larsen-Basse
* 03/31/2009
* USD 16,000.00

The Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on "Thin Film and Small Scale Mechanical
Behavior" will be held from 27 July to 1 August 2008, at Colby College, in
Waterville, Maine. Financial support is requested to help to defray the travel
costs and conference fees for invited participants, graduate students, postdocs
and junior faculty members.&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the research is
twofold: the significance of the subject to the disciplines of mechanics and
materials, and the cross-disciplinary nature of the subject. The study of small-
scale mechanical behavior has been a critical link between fundamental research
in mechanics of materials and broad-ranging applications in modern technologies.
The impetus for the significant current activity in this area comes from the
need to understand the critical roles of elasticity, plasticity, time-dependent
deformation, and fracture in small structures used in many modern technologies,
including thin films for microelectronic, optical and MEMS devices, thermal
barriers in gas turbines, and tribological coatings. It is recognized that
material properties may change drastically when the specimen dimensions are
small compared to certain physical and microstructural length scales.
Furthermore, mechanical measurements at the nanometer or micrometer scale
present significant new challenges, but also opportunities for direct
comparisons to atomistic or micromechanical models. In addition, mechanical
phenomena in small-scale biological structures offer enticing opportunities to
researchers in materials science and applied mechanics who are investigating
these phenomena with concepts and methods originating in the conventional
materials community. As a result, the study of small-scale mechanical behavior
remains at the forefront of research in the fields of materials science and
applied mechanics.&lt;br/&gt;The topic of study is cross-disciplinary, resulting
in fluxes of people, ideas, and tools between the discipline of mechanics and
materials and neighboring disciplines, such as materials science, condensed
matter physics, microelectronics, and more recently, biology. As such, this
Conference draws together researchers who share common interests in the
deformation and failure of thin film systems, and in the fundamental differences
in the mechanical behavior of small-scale versus bulk materials. Prior meetings
initiated new, unexpected research directions for many attendees. The 2008
Conference will highlight topics of lasting significance to the field
(elasticity, deformation, and fracture in small structures), as well as topics
of growing importance (small-scale biomechanical behavior and emerging in-situ
measurement techniques).&lt;br/&gt;The GRC has a broad impact on knowledge
dissemination and stimulation of intellectual infrastructure. A typical GRC
brings together international experts on a subject from many disciplines and
countries. It also brings young scholars into direct contact with these experts
in an informal atmosphere. Effort is made to invite speakers and other
participants who are diverse in background, gender, and race. In 2008, all
speakers will be presenting at this meeting for the first time. Each invited
lecture will begin with a lucid description of the background, bring the
attendees to the forefront of research, and enable an extended period of
discussion. The discussion leaders will represent a seasoned group who can
provide overarching perspective. Finally, a group of rapporteurs very
experienced people who have done distinguished work and are good at raising
stimulating questions will lead summary discussions at the end of each session.
For a week, graduate students, young faculty members, and seasoned researchers
from academia, national laboratories, and industry will live in inexpensive
dormitories on a small New England campus, and discuss stimulating topics in the
lecture hall, over meals, and in front of posters. The GRC experience is unique
and unforgettable: it initiates and sustains lasting scientific friendship for
many people, and for quite a few it is the most stimulating meeting they attend.