* 0820411
* Phenotypic Integration During Development  and Evolution of Beetle Horns
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2008,12/31/2013
* Armin Moczek, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 12/31/2013
* USD 472,914.00

The complexity of organisms is the product of genes, environmental conditions,
and developmental processes. These interactions are central themes in many
biological and medical disciplines, and occupy a particularly prominent position
in evolutionary biology. Ultimately, all evolutionary diversification of
organismal form and function is only possible through changes in the nature of
at least some of these interactions. The research project will explore the
degree, nature and consequences of these interactions in the origin,
development, and diversification of a complex class of traits that is emerging
as a new model system in integrative organismal biology: beetle horns. Horned
beetles offer incredible organismal richness and diversity, as well as
accessibility to experimental manipulation. Using genetic, molecular, and
biochemical approaches this research project will 1) determine which genes
underlie the formation of horns, 2) explore which genes allow horn development
to be more or less responsive to nutritional conditions, and 3) explore how
genes and hormones interact during horn development and evolution. This research
will not only make a novel contribution to the fields of development,
physiology, and evolution, but also facilitate an integration of the evolution
of developmental processes with the behavioral and ecological mechanisms that
guide such evolution in nature. This research program also interfaces tightly
with several educational and outreach efforts. Firstly, six high school teachers
and three minority high school students will be recruited into the
investigators' laboratories during the summer to immerse them in research in
development, evolution, and ecology. Teachers and students will be recruited
through existing outreach programs with which both investigators are already
affiliated. Secondly, this project will help train at least seven young
scientists (6 undergraduate students, 1 postdoc) in intensive interdisciplinary
research integrating developmental biology, physiology, genetics, molecular
biology and evolution. Lastly, results from the proposed research will
contribute to course curricula and will be used as exemplars in two graduate
courses on Evolution and Development, and Developmental Plasticity and
Evolution.