* 0820506
* Materials Research Science and Engineering Center on Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2016
* Todd Emrick, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Cooperative Agreement
* Daniele Finotello
* 08/31/2016
* USD 14,654,596.00

The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) on Polymers at the
University of Massachusetts at Amherst will integrate the expertise of 27
faculty members and 26 graduate students from seven departments. Fundamental
challenges in polymer synthesis, physics, and engineering will be addressed in
Directed Polymer-Based Assemblies (Integrated Research Group, IRG-I), which will
seek hierarchically ordered polymer systems based on nanoscopic elements and
nanoconfinement relevant to functional nanodevices. Polymer Surface
Instabilities (IRG-II) will define a new materials design paradigm, one that
looks to elastic instabilities to control polymer surface morphology, arranging
structures resulting from instabilities into hierarchies and exploiting
instability dynamics to generate rapid and selective response. The Center will
support several Seed Programs. One large Seed effort, Polymers in Ionic Liquids,
will bring polymers and ionic liquids together in solid, fluid and interfacial
environments. The unique characteristics of ionic liquids will foster new
chemistries, materials, and processing strategies along with means to resolve
longstanding materials problems from across the polymer science field. Another
large seed on Polymer Surfaces for Bacterial Control and Amphiphilic
Polyelectrolytes, shows potential for rapid scientific growth, which should
mirror expansion of associated technologies in society. These research efforts
will be significantly enhanced by the Center's involvement in the Global
Research Laboratory at Seoul National University, the Advanced Institute for
Materials Research at Tohoku University, and collaborative efforts between the
Center and national laboratories. Strong ties have been established between the
MRSEC and undergraduate educational programs at Mount Holyoke College, Smith
College, the University of California at Riverside, the University of Vermont,
and Howard University. This sweeping expertise uniquely positions the Center to
address the proposed interdisciplinary research problems and ensures an
environment suited to educating and stimulating students at the forefront of
materials science and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center operates
twelve Shared Experimental Facilities to enable Center researchers to perform
forefront research on maintenance-intensive, state-of-the-art equipment at
minimal cost to the individual researcher. To stimulate research in energy
conversion, a pressing societal problem we face today, the Center opened a
Photovoltaics Facility, allowing researchers to fabricate and measure the
efficiency of photovoltaic devices under an inert atmosphere. Along with several
other MRSECs, the Center recently formed the Materials Research Facilities
Network, vastly expanding the instrumentation capabilities of any one Center and
promotes the greater use of NSF-funded instrumentation by researchers across the
U.S. The Center has multiple strong ties to industrial and government
laboratories. The Center benefits from close interactions with the Center for
UMass-Industry Research on Polymers and the Research Liaison and Development
Office, two effective conduits for technology transfer to the industrial sector.
MassNanoTech and Mass-Crest, two campus institutes, respectively focus on
nanoscience- and energy-related research projects of interest to industry.