* 0820016
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: A Divide-and-Conquer Experiment With Commitment
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2009
* Douglas Smith, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2009
* USD 10,392.00

This award funds a doctoral dissertation that uses lab experiments to study
decisionmaking. A topic of practical interest to both economics and
organizational studies is how individuals, when making decisions, take into
consideration the impact of their actions on others, as well as social norms
(such as fairness) that may apply. This project focuses on a particular question
within that topic: when an authority figure attempts to exploit one of the
subordinates over which he or she is an authority, when and why do other
subordinates, at a cost to themselves, choose to challenge that exploitation? If
they challenge the authority, is it because they think the victim of the
exploitation is being treated unjustly, or because they want to reduce the
likelihood of future exploitation that could target them, or is it to create (or
maintain) a beneficial relationship with the victim?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project uses experimental methods to explore this question using a stylized
version of the authority/subordinates scenario drawn from previous experimental
literature. Participants take on the role of either an authority or a
subordinate and interact repeatedly, each round being randomly and anonymously
regrouped with other anonymous participants. A novel experimental design allows
the selective removal of different incentives, thereby making it possible to
determine the relative strengths of the distinct (though not incompatible)
motivations listed above: acting out of a social preference, acting to influence
the authority's future behavior, or acting to influence the other subordinate's
future behavior. This project explores behavior and motivations in a setting
that has relevance to a range of political science and economic models. As well,
it provides new evidence on how sophisticated reasoning about others'
strategies, beliefs and learning factors into decision-
making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study?s research on the authority/subordinates
relationship has important implications for the design of political
institutions, as well as other hierarchical organizations (including firms,
political parties, and professional organizations). The evidence gathered
regarding individuals? social preferences has practical value for those involved
with distributional issues, including charities (which must understand what
motivates potential donors) and designers of social welfare policies. This
project also has a broad impact on participation and learning by
underrepresented groups, through their experiences as subjects in the
experiment. The project involves over two hundred participants, drawn from the
diverse student body at the University of Michigan and from a broad range of
majors including humanities and social sciences, to learn about modern research
methods through direct participation, and have the opportunity to ask questions
about research methods.