* 0820490
* Integrating Phylogeny and Ecology to Study Diversity Patterns of Andean Hummingbirds
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2008,01/31/2013
* Catherine Graham, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 01/31/2013
* USD 458,759.00

Broad geographic patterns of diversity are well documented for many groups of
species, but the mechanisms that create those patterns are not well understood.
This project addresses the challenging question of why some regions support
unusually high numbers of species by studying a highly diverse group of Andean
hummingbirds. Information on geographic range, morphology, ecology, and
evolutionary relatedness will be gathered for species that comprise local
hummingbird communities. These data will then be analyzed in the context of
gradients in habitat and climate, linking traditional approaches to studying
spatial variation in diversity with an understanding of the species'
evolutionary history. This research will extend existing theory and methods used
to evaluate how the composition and genetic relatedness of species change across
environmental gradients, enhancing understanding of factors that generate and
maintain diversity. &lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this project include
contributions to training the next generation of scientists, development of
tools for studying biological diversity, and enhancing international research
collaboration and capabilities. Graduate students and undergraduate interns will
be trained in the study of hummingbirds and the use of computer models to study
patterns of diversity. New theory and methods will have application to other
ecosystems in which mechanisms that contribute to high species diversity are not
well understood. Finally, educational activities are aimed at providing
researchers in Andean regions with tools to study and manage
biodiversity.&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded in part by the Office of
International Science and Engineering.