* 0820521
* Materials Research Science and Engineering Center: Quantum and Spin Phenomena in Nanomagnetic Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2015
* Evgeny Tsymbal, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Cooperative Agreement
* Daniele Finotello
* 08/31/2015
* USD 8,426,180.00

The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at the University
of Nebraska supports an interdisciplinary research program on Quantum and Spin
Phenomena in Nanomagnetic Structures (QSPINS). The MRSEC's research is centered
on studies of new magnetic materials and structures at the nanometer scale, with
the aim of developing fundamental understanding of their properties and related
phenomena important for advanced technological applications. QSPINS is organized
into two interdisciplinary research groups (IRGs). IRG1 'Nanoscale Magnetism:
Structures, Materials and Phenomena' focuses on fundamental physics, chemistry,
and materials issues in nanoscale magnets, addressing important quantum,
electronic structure, nanofabrication, high-sensitivity measurements, and
magnetization-dynamics problems. Nanostructuring has reached a length scale
where quantum approaches are needed, and this IRG brings a unique combination of
theory, modeling, and new fabrication and measurement methods to the study of
novel materials and phenomena. The expected outcomes are new insights into
phenomena and structures important for the development of novel cluster-
assembled materials, higher energy-density permanent magnets, and information-
technology materials. IRG2 'Magnetoelectric Interfaces and Spin Transport'
employs the electron spin in a synergistic combination with novel nanoscale
magnetic and ferroelectric structures to manipulate spin-dependent properties to
yield new scientific concepts and achieve enhanced functionalities. Designed
magnetoelectric and piezomagnetic heterostructures are to be investigated where
the interplay between electricity, elasticity, and magnetism across interfaces
manifests interesting unexplored phenomena, such as electrically-controlled
exchange bias and magneto-crystalline anisotropy, and ferroelectrically-tailored
spin transport. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;QSPINS's education and outreach programs
encourage gifted young people to pursue scientific careers, broaden the
participation of underrepresented groups in science through targeted programs,
and improve materials literacy among the general public. As an integral part of
the Center, QSPINS offers interdisciplinary training for the next generation of
materials scientists and engineers by providing regional four-year institutions
experience and tools to improve their materials science programs and curricula,
offering opportunities for middle- and high-school teachers and their students
to learn about materials science, and by addressing pre-college segments of the
educational pipeline via targeted outreach activities. QSPINS maintains shared
experimental and computational facilities and supports exploratory Seed Projects
to provide continual revitalization of the projects and investigators and
promote new interdisciplinary collaborations. QSPINS fosters interactions with
industrial companies to leverage the expected scientific innovations for
potential technological advances.