* 0820138
* Genericity in Network Software:   Using Type Systems and Formal Methods to Harness Diverse Theories and Calculi for Scalable and Safe Compositions of Network Services
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Assaf Kfoury, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2012
* USD 400,001.00

Proposal Number: 0820138&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Genericity in
Network Software: Using Type Systems and Formal Methods to Harness Diverse
Theories and Calculi for Scalable and Safe Compositions of Network
Services&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigators: Assaf Kfoury, Azer
Bestavros, and Abraham Matta&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research defines and
implements a generic formal framework for writing compositional network
specifications and programs; the latter can capture constraints on the contents,
form, and representation of communications and interactions. The project
contributions include the design of a polymorphic flow language and accompanying
algorithms for type-inference and type-checking. Concrete type spaces are
defined with which to instantiate this generic framework, reflecting sufficient
bounds to ensure correctness of composing systems that can be specified in the
framework; examples of such type spaces reflect useful results in coding theory,
scheduling theory, control theory, network calculus (among several other
disciplines) in which behaviors and properties can be structured into both
qualitative and quantitative hierarchies and bounding sets. The result
environment will enable network programmers to leverage useful results from
valuable but less accessible (to the average network programmer) approaches to
the safety and verification of composite software systems, and will integrate
these approaches into familiar specification and programming practices.