* 0820533
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Novel mechanisms of mate localization in plant-dwelling insects: an integration of behavior, neurobiology and biomechanics
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2008,09/30/2013
* Reginald Cocroft, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 09/30/2013
* USD 257,100.00

PI: Reginald B. Cocroft&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal #
IOS-0820533&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Novel mechanisms of
mate localization in plant-dwelling insects: an integration of behavior,
neurobiology and biomechanics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant-feeding
insects are among the most abundant and diverse organisms on earth, with a major
impact on both natural ecosystems and agriculture. For many of these insects,
survival and reproduction depend on the detection of low-amplitude vibrations of
the plant surface, generated by the activity of potential mates, competitors, or
natural enemies. However, in spite of the importance of plant-borne vibrations
for insect behavior and ecology, two fundamental questions remain unanswered.
First, how can a small insect determine the direction of a vibration source
elsewhere on the same plant? And second, can an insect use the complex motion of
plant stems and leaves during vibration transmission to estimate its distance
from the source? To answer these questions, an interdisciplinary team has been
assembled with expertise in behavior, neurobiology, mechanical engineering, and
computational modeling. The team will develop new research tools and use them to
understand how insect behavior is guided by mechanical vibrations, using
computational models to integrate the results of behavioral experiments, sensory
neurophysiology, and biomechanical measurements. Previous research by this team
has revealed surprising sources of information that insects may use in sensing;
for example, the motion of an insect body, resting on its six legs, can be
highly sensitive to the direction of travel of a plant-borne vibration. Results
of the proposed research will transform the current understanding of how
mechanical vibrations influence the behavior of one of the most ecologically and
economically important groups of organisms. &lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: Because
collaborative teamwork is increasingly important for scientific progress, a
major goal of the project will be to train graduate students in the skills
needed for a career in interdisciplinary research. Finally, insights gained
during the study could lead to the design of directional vibration sensors that
could have an impact on many
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;