* 0820941
* Collaborative research-MRI:  Development of the LSU-FSU Array for Nuclear Astrophysics with Exotic Nuclei
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Ingo Wiedenhoever, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 08/31/2012
* USD 252,000.00

This award supports the construction of an array of detectors that will be
optimized for studies of low-energy, charged-particle reactions. The reaction
studies to be conducted with the array will substantially improve our
understanding of energy generation and nucleosynthesis in novae and X-ray
bursts, impacting astronomical measurements and their interpretation. New low-
energy radioactive ion beam facilities at Florida State University (FSU) and at
the National Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory (NSCL) at Michigan State
University (MSU) promise to provide a wide variety of low-energy beams of short-
lived, proton-rich nuclei that have been previously unavailable. The instrument
will bring substantial, new capabilities to the laboratories at FSU and MSU, and
it will be a resource for the broader user base at those facilities. Similar
infrastructure does not exist at those laboratories. The instrumentation will be
developed and constructed at Louisiana State University (LSU) and FSU, and will
be deployed for experiments at FSU, the NSCL, and possibly other facilities in
the future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed instrument will have a great
impact on astrophysics, experimental nuclear physics capabilities in the U.S.,
and on the education and training of students. This project will heavily utilize
both undergraduate and graduate students and will provide an important
opportunity for these students to be involved in the hands-on development of
state-of-the-art instrumentation in an area of national need. The project will
also foster collaboration between the students and faculty at LSU, FSU, and MSU.