* 0820494
* Collaborative Research: How does Household Consumption Respond to Income Shocks? Evidence, Theory and Implications
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Dirk Krueger, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Niloy Bose
* 06/30/2012
* USD 188,529.00

How does Household Consumption Respond to Income Shocks? Evidence, Theory and
Implications &lt;br/&gt;SBE/SES 0820519, Perri and 0820494, Krueger:
Collaborative &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad goal of our project is to
understand the impact of income changes, deterministic or stochastic, on the
welfare of households in modern societies. For example, the project allows us to
give better answers to questions such as: What is the impact of a macroeconomic
recession on household consumption? Should the government provide transfers to
households facing a decline in their income? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
uses the only micro-level data set (the Italian Survey of Household Income and
Wealth) that follows individual households over time and records income,
comprehensive consumption, labor supply and wealth data in order to document how
households economically respond to a change in their income. Our study is the
first to systematically study the joint dynamics of income, consumption and
wealth in household micro data. The inclusion of wealth in the empirical
analysis is novel and allows us to effectively discriminate between different
economic theories that all predict that consumption responds to income shocks
less than one-for-one. It also allows us to explicitly study the impact on
consumption-savings decisions of changes in wealth that are independent of labor
income dynamics (for example the appreciation in value of owner-occupied
houses). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our empirical analysis uncovers evidence of
significant asymmetries (between income increases and income declines) in how
consumption and wealth respond to a given income change. Furthermore we show
that the magnitudes of consumption and wealth responses to income shocks have
changed significantly over time. These empirical findings are not only the
motivating stylized facts for the ensuing theoretical and quantitative analysis
of our study, but they also provide the broader research community with readily
available data against which it can test its micro-founded consumption-savings
models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We then determine which broad classes of
consumption-savings models are qualitatively and quantitatively consistent with
the facts established in the first part of our study. Important model inputs are
the risky wage or labor earnings process and the risky asset prices (including
property prices) that households face over their life cycle. Since the facts in
the first part of our project reject both the notion that consumption responds
to income changes one-for-one, and wealth not at all (as the hands-to-mouth
theory of consumption would predict) as well as the notion that consumption does
not respond to income shocks at all, with wealth taking up all the income
variation (as the full insurance-complete markets model predicts), we focus, in
our theoretical and quantitative analysis, on models that imply partial
consumption insurance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our results indicate that,
quantitatively, the most suitable consumption-savings model is one that implies
more consumption insurance than the standard incomplete markets model, but less
than models with limited commitment or private information. We use these
findings to determine the degree of financial market incompleteness that is
consistent with our stylized facts. The characterization of the appropriate
(relative to the data) financial market structure is of independent interest to
other researchers that want to use these models for applied policy analysis of
social insurance programs (such as social security, disability insurance or
progressive income taxation). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the last part of our
project we evaluate the theoretical and quantitative implications for asset
prices and asset returns of the model favored in the analysis in the second
part. As in any model with incomplete consumption insurance, the asset prices
and returns in the model depend on higher moments of the consumption growth
distribution. We first theoretically identify these crucial moments, then use
the Italian household data to construct the corresponding empirical moments and
finally evaluate whether the model-implied asset prices are consistent with the
actually observed Italian asset pricing facts. We find that our preferred
imperfect consumption insurance model predicts a significantly higher equity
premium (the expected excess return of stocks over risk-free bonds) than the
standard asset pricing model with full insurance. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;