* 0820492
* Constraints and Frustration in Nano-Structured and Bio-Molecular Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2015
* Robert Meyer, Brandeis University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Daniele Finotello
* 08/31/2015
* USD 7,900,000.00

The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at Brandeis
University supports innovative research and education in an exciting subject at
the interface between materials science and biology. The major research theme of
the Center is to develop fundamental understanding of emergent properties of
materials due to constraints similar to those occurring in biological systems,
and in understanding the role of constraints in the structure and function of
cells and cellular components. This is an interdisciplinary Center with twelve
senior investigators from four departments at Brandeis University, and one each
from Brown University and Olin College of Engineering. The MRSEC provides a
multidisciplinary education for students in physics, chemistry and biology, that
will contribute to the workforce at the research frontiers and to the needs of
emerging biomaterials industries. Other educational programs include research
experiences for undergraduates, and pre-college outreach through teacher
training. The MRSEC offers a program targeted to inner-city minority science
undergraduates at Brandeis. Scientists at the Center work with the Discovery
Museums in Acton, MA, to develop interactive exhibits in the area of biological
physics and materials science. The Center provides novel facilities for research
in the emerging area of microfluidics and is collaborating with industry to
develop microfluidics technologies. &lt;br/&gt;Research at the Center is
organized as a single Interdisciplinary Research Group with three main thrusts
that explore how the addition of constraints typically found in biology -
confinement, crowding, and local forces that compete with and sometimes
frustrate long range order - leads to emergent properties, in the realms of both
structure and dynamics. The research thrusts are structure and dynamics of long
polymer molecules, such as DNA, in tightly confined volumes; self-assembly of
"chiral" or twisted molecules that lead to unusual structures; and "active
matter" composed of organized assemblies of self-powered particles that move in
space or oscillate in time. &lt;br/&gt;