* 0820730
* Functional Genomics of Nectar Production in Brassicaceae
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* Clay Carter, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,356,627.00

An organ known as the floral nectary is responsible for producing nectar in many
plant families. Despite its central role in plant pollination, very little is
known about the molecular mechanisms of nectar synthesis and secretion. Indeed,
no genes have been shown to directly affect the production or quality of floral
nectar. The overall goal of this project is to identify key genes and cellular
processes required for nectar production in the agriculturally important
Brassicaceae family. In previous studies, seventy genes from the model plant
Arabidopsis thaliana were shown to be expressed at greater than 10-fold higher
levels in nectaries than in all other tissues examined. The roles these genes
play in nectar production will be systematically examined in both Arabidopsis
and Brassica rapa (oilseed rape) through gene knockout and overexpression
studies. Mutant plants will be subjected to thorough phenotypic characterization
that includes evaluation of nectary morphology and ultrastructure, global
changes in gene expression within nectaries, and overall impacts on nectar
volume and composition. It is expected that these studies will provide new
insight into the genes and pathways required for nectar production in plants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS&lt;br/&gt;Determining the molecular basis
of nectar production can have enormous impacts on U.S. agriculture, ranging from
increasing yields in a wide range of pollinator-dependent crop species to
targeted improvements of apiculture. Each year approximately 1.5 million acres
of Brassica rapa and related oilseed crops are planted in the U.S. alone.
Significantly, B. rapa is almost entirely dependent on the efficient attraction
of pollinators to achieve maximal yields. Indeed, poor pollinator visitation can
cut yields of Brassica oilseed, as well as unrelated crop species, in half. The
long term goals of this project are to elucidate the underlying mechanisms of
nectar production in the agriculturally important Brassicaceae family, and how
this understanding can be translated into higher yields in multiple crop
species. In addition, this project will provide significant research experiences
and educational opportunities to a large number of undergraduate students at the
University of Minnesota - Duluth, a primarily undergraduate institution. A
detailed description and results derived from this project can be readily viewed
at http://www.d.umn.edu/~cjcarter/carterlab.html. Microarray data will be
deposited at GEO, gene annotations at TAIR, and metabolomics data will be
integrated into the metabolomics database developed at Iowa State University
(http://www.plantmetabolomics.org). Seed stocks will be available through the
project and through the ABRC (http://www.biosci.ohio-
state.edu/pcmb/Facilities/abrc/index.html).