* 0820095
* Conference - Trace Element Metabolism: From Model Organisms to Humans, to be held at Snowmass, Colorado June 15 - 20, 2008
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2009
* Mary Lou Guerinot, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Mark R. Brodl
* 04/30/2009
* USD 14,250.00

The FASEB Summer Research Conference on "Trace Element Metabolism: From Model
Organisms to Humans" will be held at Snowmass, Colorado June 15-20, 2008. Trace
elements are essential nutrients and, as such, are of vital importance in
medicine, agriculture and the inter-relationship between agriculture and human
health. This conference will focus on topics covering the most exciting and
important breakthroughs in understanding both basic and applied aspects of trace
element metabolism. In this meeting, the focus will be on the trace elements
iron (Fe), copper (Cu), zinc (Zn), selenium (Se) and boron (B), as they
constitute a group of trace elements that serve critical roles in biology. As is
evidenced by the dramatic increase in the number of newly discovered biological
processes in which trace elements play pivotal roles as catalysts, sensors,
regulatory molecules and structural co-factors, this field of investigation is
expanding at an extremely rapid pace. The specific objectives are to (1)
organize and support a meeting on the latest scientific advances in the research
area of trace element metabolism (2) promote interactions between scientists and
trainees to share new discoveries in the field of trace element metabolism as it
relates to normal growth, development and nutrition and to enhance training and
new collaborations that will move the field forward and (3) to directly involve
newly independent scientists and trainees including graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows, women, minorities and the disabled in the conference.
&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the conference include providing access to
cutting edge science via oral and poster presentations, to allow opportunities
for interactions between trainees and established investigators and to encourage
and support long-term and significant advances in this important area of
research.