* 0820547
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Negotiation over Water Quality: Evidence from Brazilian Water Basin Committees
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Molly Lipscomb, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2010
* USD 4,000.00

The design of effective mechanisms for water management is a key component of
reducing pollution externalities across jurisdictional boundaries. Water rights
and management are an important issue at the local, national and international
levels. Cross border pollution spillovers have created political difficulties
between user groups from the Jordan River basin to the Colorado River. Enhanced
water management improves the quality of life of local populations and reduces
cross-border conflicts. Water basin committees are commonly advocated by
environmentalists as a method of improving the management of water resources.
This doctoral dissertation project takes advantage of the unique structure of
decentralized water management in Brazil to estimate the effects of water basin
committees and examine political mechanisms which enhance or reduce their
effectiveness. This paper uses over 40,000 water quality observations from 2000
water quality monitoring stations across Brazil to estimate the effect that the
112 water basin committees which were created between 1990 and 2007 have had on
the management of water quality in Brazil?s rivers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: Development of new management tools can improve cross-jurisdictional
cooperation over resources and improve the quality of life of the local
populations who depend on the resources. An additional impact of this project
will be to make available a large database which can be used to study additional
questions on water quality, water use, cross-jurisdictional bargaining, and the
health effects of water pollution in a developing country setting. &lt;br/&gt;