* 0820923
* SCREMS: Next Generation Parallel Computing Infrastructure for Numerical Relativity
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Joshua Faber, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2012
* USD 86,191.00

The Center for Computational Relativity and Gravitation in the
School&lt;br/&gt;of Mathematical Sciences at the Rochester Institute of
Technology will&lt;br/&gt;purchase a computer cluster which will be dedicated to
the support of&lt;br/&gt;research in the mathematical sciences. The equipment
will be used for&lt;br/&gt;several research projects including in particular:
the development of&lt;br/&gt;new, highly efficient, extremely high accuracy
numerical algorithms to&lt;br/&gt;solve the non-linear equations of general
relativistic&lt;br/&gt;magnetohydrodynamics (GRMHD). Magnetohydrodynamics
represents a&lt;br/&gt;difficult challenge numerically due to the small-scale
features&lt;br/&gt;introduced by shocks in the fluid material and the magnetic
fields.&lt;br/&gt;The problem can only be tackled efficiently using higher-order
finite&lt;br/&gt;differencing methods (greater than fourth-order), including
those&lt;br/&gt;designed to evolve conservative systems, in conjunction
with&lt;br/&gt;highly-scalable adaptive-mesh-refinement (AMR) algorithms. The
next&lt;br/&gt;generation of multi-core processors are expected to have up to
32&lt;br/&gt;individual cores in the near future, and computational nodes with
more&lt;br/&gt;than 64 cores will soon follow. The challenge, then, is
to&lt;br/&gt;efficiently parallelize the algorithm on these many-core systems.
We&lt;br/&gt;will do this by optimizing inter and intra-node communication via
a&lt;br/&gt;combination of openMP and MPI. The proposed cluster, which
will&lt;br/&gt;initially have 12 nodes (upgraded to 16 in year 2), each
containing 8&lt;br/&gt;cores and 16 GB of RAM, interconnected with a high-speed,
low-latency&lt;br/&gt;InfiniBand network, will model these future clusters so
that we can&lt;br/&gt;develop new algorithms. This cluster will act as the
central workhorse&lt;br/&gt;for developing numerical techniques and performing
GRMHD simulations&lt;br/&gt;for the next 3 years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partial
support for this award is from PHY, Gravitational Physics program.