* 0820777
* CRIF:ID- Development of an Ultrabroad Bandwidth UV-Visible Cavity Enhanced Spectroscopy Spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Kevin Lehmann, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2011
* USD 112,796.00

This is an award from the CRIF:ID program to Kevin K. Lehman in the Chemistry
Department at the University of Virginia, Azer Yalin, Mechanical Engineering
Department, Colorado State University and Sonia M. Kreidenweis, Atmospheric
Science Department, Colorado State University. In the development project
optical cavities based upon CaF2 prisms will be designed, fabricated, tested and
characterized. Because of the substantially lower Rayleigh scattering of this
material, it is anticipated that these prisms will be useful throughout the near
and much of the mid-UV spectral regions as well as the visible. This spectral
region covers the lowest electronic transitions of most molecules. The use of
these prisms will allow a dramatic improvement in sensitivity over conventional
absorption techniques and absolute concentration determination down to trace
levels for species of known absorption cross section. Further, the prism cavity
ring-down spectroscopy systems will be integrated with experiments targeted at
Molecular Spectroscopy (Lehmann), measurements of sputtering (Yalin), and
atmospheric aerosols (Kreidenweis). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spectroscopy is one of
the most widely used tools in physical science. Absorption spectroscopy in the
UV, visible, and IR spectral regions give information on the molecular and
electronic structures of molecules and their interactions with other molecules.
In cases where fluorescence is weak, absorption is the most straightforward and
practical way to detect optical transitions. While absorption spectroscopy is
widely used, it has long suffered from inadequate sensitivity for many
applications. In the past two decades, this sensitivity has been dramatically
improved, opening up many new applications, by the introduction of Cavity Ring-
down Spectroscopy and related methods that exploit low loss (high finesse)
optical cavities. The present work will lead to a substantial increase in the
spectral range and sensitivity of these methods, particularly in the UV spectral
region. The projects will be carried out by graduate students who will learn
valuable research and instrument development skills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;