* 0820152
* SRS: A Decentralized and Rule-Based Approach to Data Dependency Analysis and Failure Recovery in Service-Oriented Environments
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2008,05/31/2012
* Susan Urban, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 05/31/2012
* USD 354,581.00

NSF Proposal 0820152&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A Decentralized and Rule-Based
Approach to Data Dependency Analysis and Failure Recovery in a Service-Oriented
Environment&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Susan D. Urban &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this research is to develop a decentralized approach to data
dependency analysis and failure recovery among concurrently executing processes
in a loosely-coupled service-oriented environment. The approach involves
monitoring externalized data changes of individual service executions. Peer-to-
peer, decentralized communication among process execution agents is then used to
discover data dependencies among concurrently executing processes that may lead
to data inconsistencies during the recovery of a failed process. Process
interference rules of dependent processes are used to test user-defined semantic
conditions to determine if 1) critical data conditions have been affected by the
recovery of a failed process and 2) recovery procedures should be invoked for
dependent processes. The research includes the development of a methodology for
using process interference rules. The correctness and efficiency of
decentralized data dependency analysis and rule-based recovery procedures are
also demonstrated for concurrent processes in the context of a service
composition model that supports compensation, contingency, rollback, and retry
techniques. This research provides a new way of thinking about traditional
transaction recoverability concepts, providing a dynamic approach to discovering
data dependencies and responding to failures in a manner that guarantees user-
defined correctness conditions for concurrent processes that execute without
isolation guarantees.&lt;br/&gt;