* 0820993
* MRI: Acquisition of Equipment for Melt- and Solid-State Fabrication and Barrier Performance Evaluation of Polymer Nanocomposites
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2009
* Michael Malusis, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 07/31/2009
* USD 281,561.00

The instrumentation funded by this award will support a systematic investigation
of solid-state shear pulverization (SSSP) for creating polymer nanocomposites
with improved barrier properties relative to those fabricated using conventional
melt compounding. The innovative SSSP technique can overcome many of the common
challenges associated with conventional techniques for producing effective and
stable nanocomposites with well-dispersed and exfoliated nanofillers (e.g.,
clay, carbon nanotubes, and graphite). Thus, SSSP has significant potential to
advance fundamental structure-property relationship elucidation in
nanocomposites and facilitate development of superior hybrid materials for use
in new engineering applications. The main objectives of this research are: (1)
to understand the relationship between SSSP processing parameters and the
structure and properties of the resulting nanocomposites via a systematic
parametric study; (2) to develop novel high-performance polymer nanocomposites
tailored for specific industrial applications by controlling the solid-state
pulverization conditions; and (3) to evaluate the morphology and barrier
properties of the nanocomposites created by SSSP via direct comparison with
those of the unmodified polymer and nanocomposite specimens created by melt
compounding.

The instrumentation includes a bench-scale twin-screw extruder/solid-state shear
pulverizer that is custom designed for continuous fabrication of polymer
nanocomposites in the melt or solid state. The instrumentation also includes
precision analyzers for measurement of water vapor and oxygen permeability,
pellet and powder feeders for delivering polymer resin and nanofillers, and a
water trough/pelletizer system to cool, collect, and size melt-compounded
extrudate. This equipment will be used in conjunction with existing instruments
to conduct the proposed research and support a long-term research program for
both PIs. In addition, the equipment will enhance research and educational
opportunities for underrepresented groups and facilitate cross-disciplinary
collaborations and outreach both on and off the Bucknell campus. The PIs
represent different engineering disciplines and will work together with students
from different science and engineering concentrations. Moreover, a portion of
the research involves a multi-institutional partnership with a Research I
university and an exclusively undergraduate, technology-focused institution,
thereby stimulating cross-fertilization and promoting shared use of the
instrumentation. The outcomes of the research will be disseminated to the
international science and engineering communities and are expected to attract
interest from potential industrial partners.

