* 0820034
* Collaborative Research:   Design and Run-time Techniques for Physically Coupled Software
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Rajesh Gupta, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2011
* USD 225,000.00

Proposal Number: 0820061/0820034/0820230&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: Design and
Run-time Techniques for Physically Coupled Software&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PIs:
Ramesh Govindan (USC), Rajesh Gupta (UCSD), Mani Srivastava (UCLA), and Paulo
Tabuada (UCLA)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many real-
world systems are deeply embedded in the physical world and their operational
behavior is determined in large part by a tight coupling between the system
components and the physical environment. This project seeks to establish the
scientific principles governing software for such physically-coupled systems by
focusing on four challenges in the context of distributed sensing and control
applications: 1) Support for physical context in the form of programming
structures that enable application software to explicitly capture the state of
the physical world as an observable in an embedded computation; 2) Formal
methods for composing software modules that indirectly interact with each other
through the physical world, and a run-time safety supervisor that provably
enforces correctness of composition; 3) Programming structures to enable design
and verification of applications with resource provisioning that is driven by
and adapts to physical-world dynamics; 4) System software support for sharing
physically-coupled sensor and actuator resources in distributed settings. In
addition, educational techniques targeting the teaching of topics in physically-
coupled computational systems are being explored by creating shared educational
content in the form of self-contained reusable modules.&lt;br/&gt;