* 0820597
* Partial Support for Graduate Summer Institute on Complex Plasmas
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Jose Lopez, St Peter's University
* Standard Grant
* Arvind Atreya
* 06/30/2009
* USD 9,750.00

CBET-0820597, Lopez&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is presently a strong resurgence
of interest in the role of plasmas in particular complex plasmas that include
additional particle species of nanometer- to micrometer-size such as dust. Part
of the driving force for this interest is plasma uses in semiconductor plasma
processing and in large fusion devices. Whether desirable or undesirable, it is
often crucially important to understand the dynamics of dust particles, the
chemical processes at their surfaces, their interactions with the host plasmas,
and other factors. Microplasmas are at the center of another rapidly evolving
field because they can operate at substantially higher pressures than
conventional plasmas. Such an environment aids many interesting applications
including high-power lasers, opening switches, novel plasma processing
applications and sputtering, electromagnetic absorbers and reflectors,
remediation of gaseous pollutants, medical sterilization and biological
decontamination, and excimer lamps and other non-coherent vacuum-ultraviolet
(VUV) light sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides partial support
for American graduate and postdoctoral students to participate in an
international Graduate Summer Institute on Complex Plasmas, which will be held
from July 30 to August 7, 2008 at Stevens Institute of Technology in Hoboken,
New Jersey. The stated goal is educational advancement of the scientific
challenges and technological opportunities afforded by complex plasmas. Its
broad yet rigorous curriculum will lead to further advancement in this new and
emerging field by attracting young American researchers in significant numbers
since they will encounter scientific challenges as well as technological
opportunities in these areas upon which they can build a successful academic or
industrial career. Further, the emerging complex plasma applications appear to
be a remarkable fertile field for small, high-tech start-up companies which will
perceive this field as a favorable innovation source for marketplace realization
of basic plasma concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate and postdoctoral
students attending the school will be trained to work on plasma physics as it is
involved in technologically important areas where plasma processes are employed.
In addition to comprehensive and thorough introductions to the subjects
involved, there will be in-depth contributions at the summer school treating
particularly important topics, including experimental techniques and computer
simulations. The exposure to top European plasma researchers will also be of
great value to the American students involved.