* 0820687
* Genetic Ancestry, Race, and Health Disparities: A Biocultural Approach
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2015
* Clarence Gravlee, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 06/30/2015
* USD 391,586.00

Race and human disease are two issues in which genetics and culture play
critical and inextricably linked roles. Moreover, research on racial disparities
in complex disease is a central focus of the current debate on human genetic
variation. This project will investigate the genetic underpinnings of race and
disease within a biocultural context. The question driving the research is why
African Americans suffer an increased prevalence of hypertension. This is a key
test case since people of the African Diaspora suffer disproportionately from a
number of complex diseases, which some researchers attribute to a fundamental
genetic commonality. However, this view is problematic because of difficulties
in defining racial groups and because it minimizes environmental influences on
complex disease. This project adds a genetic component to ongoing research to
test social and cultural factors involved in hypertension and stress-related
phenotypes in African-Americans. DNA samples will be collected from 350 African
American individuals and those samples will be assayed for ancestry informative
genetic markers (for an estimate of genetic ancestry) and for candidate genes
involved in hypertension and related phenotypes. Three sets of questions will be
addressed: 1) What are the associations between different measures of race? 2)
What association exists between genetic ancestry and hypertension? 3) Are
associations between candidate gene polymorphisms and hypertension modified when
ancestry, measures of skin color, and novel sociocultural data, such as personal
social networks, are added to the model?

The proposed research is a unique biocultural investigation of race and human
disease in which the genetic and cultural components are addressed with equal
rigor. Racial inequalities in health are among the most hotly debated issues in
science. Often the debate is framed in terms of an opposition between genetic
and sociocultural factors, when it is more realistic to posit that that there
are complex interactions between genetic and sociocultural factors. However, few
studies are able to test the independent contributions of genetic and
sociocultural factors because ?race? is often used uncritically as a proxy for
unspecified genetic, physiologic, behavioral, or sociocultural factors. Thus,
this research has the potential to dramatically transform the ways in which we
think of race, self-identity and health, and the ways in which we study these
phenomena.