* 0820945
* MRI: Acquisition of an X-ray Photoelectron Spectrometer (XPS) for Research and Education at VCU
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Massimo Bertino, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 06/30/2011
* USD 590,552.00

The Department of Chemistry at Virginia Commonwealth University will acquire an
x-ray photoelectron spectrometer (XPS) with an ion sputtering system and direct
imaging capabilities with this award from the Major Research Instrumentation
(MRI) program. The research to be undertaken will expand the understanding of
nanoparticle and film surfaces with both materials and biomedical applications.
The synthesis of new magnetic materials for MRI applications and the study of
surface-catalyzed reactions are two areas of nanomaterial development that will
be undertaken. The determination of the biocidal activity of polymer films,
hybrid materials prepared via sol-gel methods, and thin film modification of
plastic surfaces are complementary areas of film-related research that will be
investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An X-ray photoelectron spectrometer probes
the surface composition and the oxidation state of chemical elements in
materials. The imaging resolution will be approximately 0.1 micrometers. This
allows researchers to correlate chemical and physical properties with chemical
composition. Undergraduate and graduate students from Virginia Commonwealth
University, Virginia State University and the University of Richmond will use
the instrument in their research. Potential long-range impact consists of the
possibility of developing new materials for drug delivery mechanisms, biosensors
which are capable of real time detection of pathogens, and catalysts which can
dramatically improve workplace atmospheres and employee health.&lt;br/&gt;