* 0820649
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Diffusion and the Law Formation Process -- A Comprehensive Analysis of the Spread of Rape Law Reform in the United States
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2010
* Jody Clay-Warner, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Christian A. Meissner
* 06/30/2010
* USD 9,030.00

PI and Co-PI: Jody Clay-Warner and Jennifer McMahon&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title:
Doctoral Dissertation Research: Diffusion and the Law Formation Process -- A
Comprehensive Analysis of the Spread of Rape Law Reform in the United
States&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0820649 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will explain the factors and
processes that affect the adoption of rape law reforms in the United States.
Specifically, this study examines how both state-level characteristics and
interstate processes affect a state?s likelihood of adopting the following rape
law reforms: 1) creating gender neutral rape laws, 2) redefining rape as sexual
assault, 3) eliminating the resistance requirement, and 4) passing rape shield
laws. By considering simultaneously multiple rape law reforms included within a
larger law reform movement, this study addresses several theoretically important
questions: 1) Does the process of adoption operate differently for more
controversial vs. less controversial legal reforms; 2) What are the effects of
incremental legal changes on passage of reforms; and 3) How does the adoption of
one law reform affect the likelihood of the adoption of other law reforms in the
same movement? To answer these questions, the session laws of each state will be
searched in order to gather original data on changes made to the rape laws in
the United States over the past 27 years. These data will be used to create four
dependent variables measuring the year that each state adopted the four rape law
reforms included in the study. Several secondary data sources will be searched
to collect data on the independent variables, which will measure social and
political characteristics of each state, previous rape law reforms passed by
each state, and several factors that tap into the process by which states may
influence each other (i.e. being in close proximity to a state that already
adopted a reform). The results from this study will greatly enhance our
understanding of the adoption of rape law reforms in particular and the law
formation process more generally. Since this project is the first study to
utilize longitudinal data to examine the adoption of multiple reforms included
in a larger law reform movement, this study is able to address several
unexamined aspects of the law formation process. Thus, this research
significantly advances our scientific knowledge and theoretical understanding of
the law formation process. In terms of the study?s broader impact, this research
addresses an important issue in our legal system as it seeks to determine what
processes facilitate the passage of laws that provide women with full legal
protection against rape. Thus, this research will enhance our understanding of
how laws protecting society from violence, especially in regards to violence
against women, are passed successfully in the United States. The results of this
research will be widely disseminated through scholarly publications and
conference presentations. As a likely consequence, legal scholars and
legislators may be able to use the study findings to advance legal protections
of women in a variety of domains.