* 0820404
* MRSEC:  Center for Nanoscale Science
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2015
* Moses Chan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Cooperative Agreement
* Daniele Finotello
* 08/31/2015
* USD 13,729,860.00

The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at the
Pennsylvania State University exploits unique capabilities in materials
synthesis and fabrication, microscopy, physical property measurements, molecular
synthesis and theory to attain materials with new properties and functions in
areas of fundamental scientific importance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center
includes several interdisciplinary research groups (IRGs). The Motors IRG
designs, synthesizes, and studies molecular, nano- and micro-scale motors that
employ chemical reactions to generate force at the nanometer scale. This IRG
constrains and controls motor movement via tethers, tracks, rotary bearings,
gradients in the fuel concentration, magnetic or electric fields, patterns of
light and interactions between motors themselves, to enable long-term
applications in systems that sense, respond, organize and adapt to their
environment. The IRG on Electrons in Confinement advances our understanding of
electrons that are confined to move within precisely defined, narrow one-
dimensional single crystals made from a wide range of metals and semiconductors.
Interactions between these confined electrons generate new phenomena involving
superconductivity, magnetism and the motion of electron spins. The IRG on
Electromagnetic Nanostructures organizes and integrates metals and
semiconductors in sophisticated patterns. By marrying the ideal media for
electrons and photons, it enables a new class of in-fiber devices for the
generation, modulation and detection of light. Patterned planar nanostructures
generate unusual optical properties such as low, zero and negative refractive
index, thereby enabling an unprecedented degree of control over the propagation
of light. The IRG on Multiferroics exploits strain, the ability to stretch or
compress the atoms within a lattice by depositing them layer-by-layer, to create
a new class of materials that couple together elastic deformation, electric
fields and magnetism, guided by computational modeling that can predict new
materials. Multiferroics promise a variety of new material applications, such as
electrically switched magnetic memories. Seed grants, selected through
competitive peer review, will lead the Center in new scientific directions by
nurturing high-risk, transformative research by both early-career and
established faculty. These projects include making new electronic materials by
connecting atomic clusters with conductive linker molecules and studying the
quantum mechanical aspects of electron transport in one-dimensional systems. All
research projects will be regularly competitively reviewed to maintain high
levels of innovation, collaboration, productivity and scientific impact.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MRSEC nurtures a broad range of partnerships with
national, international and industrial collaborators. Center research activities
are strongly integrated with educational and industrial programs, providing
interdisciplinary training within a culture of outreach for a diverse group of
students and postdocs. For maximum impact, the Center?s outreach activities
couple the scientific expertise and enthusiasm of its members with its partners'
expertise in reaching large audiences. The MRSEC develops content on topics of
public interest for K-8 summer science camps. With The Franklin Institute, the
Center designs and produces hands-on cart-based shows for distribution to a
national network of science museums. Center faculty will mentor high school
students from the Science Leadership Academy. The Center recruits and supports
students from under-represented groups at all levels through close ties with
institutions in Puerto Rico, Texas, Louisiana, and (through the NSF Discovery
Corps) Africa. The Center reaches a broad range of high schools and middle
schools through teacher training workshops and research experiences, and mentors
a diverse group of students through Research Experiences for Undergraduates. All
major outreach programs are regularly assessed for efficacy and
impact.&lt;br/&gt;