* 0820474
* Media, Talk, and Trust: The Social Amplification of Risk During Site Selection for a Bio-Research Facility
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2010
* Albert Gunther, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 09/30/2010
* USD 400,000.00

This project seeks to understand how science, public opinion, and media interact
in shaping public decision making. The context of inquiry for this project will
be the six communities currently being evaluated by the Department of Homeland
Security to host the National Bio- and Agro-defense Facility (NBAF). The design
incorporates public opinion survey methodology, in-depth interviews with
stakeholders and media content analysis. This multi-faceted design will provide
insights into both successful and failed communication strategies aimed at
engaging local residents, and help the research team develop a better
understanding of how public deliberation can help or undermine efforts to
meaningfully connect with various publics on risk-related issues. The research
will contribute to understanding the social amplification an attenuation of
risk. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, the PI is interested in two levels of
outcome variables. At a first level, the PI will explore how the interplay of
media coverage, interpersonal channels, and predispositional factors shape
feelings of trust toward various stakeholders, including executive and
regulatory bodies at the state and federal level, local agencies and
governments, and other regional players. This first outcome variable is likely
to directly shape a second-level outcome variable that this project examines
through comparative analysis of multiple communities: public perceptions of
risks and their dynamic nature over time. &lt;br/&gt;