* 0820747
* Sub-Surface Structural Damages in Laser-assisted Surface Nanostructuring: Experimental Characterization and Atomistic Modeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2008,07/31/2009
* Xinwei Wang, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 07/31/2009
* USD 101,323.00

As a top-down nanofabrication technique, the laser-assisted scanning tunneling
microscope (STM) provides a wide variety of potential applications in surface
nano-repair, fabrication and characterization of nano- to microscale integrated
nanoelectronics and nanophotonics, and machining and aligning of nanoparticles
and nanotubes/wires. The nanoscale residual stress/strain and structural damages
in surface nanostructures fabricated using laser-assisted STM can significantly
change the local mechanical, thermal, optical, and electronic characteristics,
thereby degrading the functionality and reliability of surface nanostructures.
Targeting this critical problem, the objectives of the project are to (1)
develop the knowledge base about the underlying physics in the formation of sub-
surface nanoscale structural damages in surface nanostructuring with laser-
assisted STM, and (2) explore and identify how and to what extent the
experimental parameters affect the formation of sub-surface nanoscale structural
damages. Significant insights into strain and structural damages at
molecular/atomic levels in nanostructuring by laser-assisted STM will be
attained using both scanning tunneling spectroscopy and high-resolution
transmission electron microscopy. This represents the early attempts to
quantitatively explore the characteristics of the residual strain and structural
damages at such a small scale. This large-scale molecular dynamics simulation
will provide fundamental and dynamic understanding of the development and
propagation/migration of both stress/strain and structural damages in surface
nanostructuring with laser-assisted STM. These strategically combined
experimental and numerical investigations will reveal the correlations between
residual strain and structural damages and varied experimental
parameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The anticipated outcomes are instrumental for
minimizing residual stress/strain and structural damages and improving the
function/performance and dependability of micro/nanoscale systems. Sufficient
insights into the mechanisms and driving forces behind the formation of
nanoscale structural damages will lead to the establishment of basic knowledge
building blocks required for successful development of the nanostructuring
technology with laser-assisted STM and its implementation to industries. Results
of the research will be broadly disseminated through presentations at
professional conferences, publications in highly visible refereed journals,
across-department seminars, and a dedicated project website. The research
results will be integrated into new courses "Heat Transfer at Nanoscales and in
Ultra-short Time Domain" and "Introduction to Nanotechnology." Extensive
undergraduate participation will be involved via summer research employment.
Special efforts will be taken to recruit graduate and undergraduate students
from groups traditionally underrepresented in higher education, particularly
women and minorities. A specially designed website will be developed for
instructional functions for K-12 students.