* 0820535
* Risk Analysis : Informing the Management of Nanoscale Materials (Workshop September 10-11, 2008)
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* JoAnne Shatkin, Society For Risk Analysis
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2009
* USD 51,612.00

The rapidly expanding development and use of nanoscale materials has generated
new challenges for the application of current risk analysis methods for
environmental, health, and safety concerns. The unique properties associated
with these materials potentially have significant implications for current
approaches to the hazard identification, exposure assessment and dose-response
components of the traditional risk assessment paradigm that informs risk
management decisions. These factors may confound the accurate assessment of
potential risks and may require changes in the ways potential risks are
communicated to stakeholders and managed by policymakers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address these challenges, the Emerging Materials and
Nanomaterials Specialty group (EMNMS) of the Society for Risk Analysis is
organizing a workshop, NanoRisk Analysis: Advancing the Science for Nanoscale
Material Risk Management, on September 10-11, 2008, in Washington, DC. The
workshop is intended to facilitate a multidisciplinary discussion to identify
approaches for risk analysis that assess the unique aspects of nanotechnology
and nanomaterials among experts in risk analysis, nanotechnology researchers,
environmental scientists, key stakeholders, and members of the public interested
in risk analysis, risk communication, and nanotechnology. To facilitate the
discussion, five topical white papers, each co-authored by a combination of
nanotechnology and risk experts, are being developed and will be presented on
topics of: hazard identification and uncertainty; toxicology; exposure
assessment; risk characterization; and risk communication. The goal is to
develop reference papers for publication on topics advancing the science of risk
analysis for nanomaterials and nanotechnology. Additionally, the workshop is
intended to form new networks and collaborations among multi-disciplinary
experts, junior and international researchers, and governmental, academic and
industry leaders in risk analysis and nanotechnology. &lt;br/&gt;