* 0820451
* Comparative Genomics of Phenotypic Variation in the Compositae
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2009,02/28/2015
* Steven Knapp, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 02/28/2015
* USD 8,892,307.00

PI: Loren Rieseberg (Indiana University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPIs: Richard
Michelmore and Kent Bradford (University of California ? Davis), Richard Kesseli
(University of Massachusetts - Boston), John Burke and Steven Knapp (University
of Georgia), David Still (California State Polytechnic University -
Pomona)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Senior Personnel: Zhao Lai (Indiana
University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Compositae (also known as the Asteraceae)
is one of the largest, most diverse, and most economically important plant
families. While lettuce, sunflower, and safflower are the three most valuable
members of this family, over 40 species have been domesticated for a wide
variety of uses. The Compositae also contains some of the world's most noxious
weeds, which cost the United States an estimated $35 billion annually. The
primary goal of this project is to develop genomic resources for the continued
study of this important plant family. This work will include: (i) sequencing the
gene-rich regions of the lettuce, sunflower, and safflower genomes; (ii)
generation of "gene catalogs" for 25 additional taxa, including six crops, three
weeds, the wild progenitors of ten crops and weeds, representatives of five
taxonomically important subfamilies within the family, and an outgroup (i.e., a
close relative of the family); (iii) analyses of the prevalence of variation in
gene copy number versus nucleotide variation; (iv) analyses of the effects of
whole genome duplications on diversification rates within the family; (v)
identification of parallel genetic changes across crop/weed lineages; (vi)
construction of ultra-high density genetic maps of lettuce, sunflower, and
chicory; (vii) development of permanent populations for genetic mapping in key
Compositae species; and (viii) the identification and validation of candidates
for genes underlying important crop- and weed-related traits. This research will
result in the generation of permanent resources for the Compositae research
community and will have a significant economic impact through its contributions
to both crop and weed science. This project will also result in the training of
students at all levels in genetics, biochemistry, physiology, comparative
genomics, and bioinformatics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project will have a major, lasting impact on both crop and weed
science through the production of permanent, publicly available genomics
resources. All results will be disseminated via publication in peer-reviewed
journals, presentations at national and international meetings, and the
resulting data will be made publicly available through the project website
(http://compgenomics.ucdavis.edu) and via deposition in GenBank and other
freely-accessible, online databases. In addition, all resulting germplasm
resources will be freely distributed to interested parties upon request. This
project also has a significant outreach component. Not only will it directly
support multiple postdoctoral researchers, graduate students, and
undergraduates, but it will also contribute to the training of many others,
including high school interns. Outreach efforts will be specifically targeted at
members of traditionally underrepresented and/or disadvantaged groups. Minority-
serving institutions California State Polytechnic University - Pomona and the
University of Massachusetts - Boston will serve as feeder institutions for
identifying and placing minority student in collaborating labs. Outreach efforts
on all participating campuses will also leverage existing, local programs to
ensure maximum effectiveness. Project members will also interact directly with
colleagues who are developing a plant genomics workshop to train high school
teachers. Finally, this project will result in the production of a plant
genomics text suitable for advanced undergraduates and/or graduate courses.