* 0820562
* Dynamics of gene expression during vegetative phase change in maize
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Erin Irish, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Amy Litt
* 08/31/2013
* USD 524,654.00

The life cycle of flowering plants features distinct, recognizable phases:
embryogenesis, seed dormancy, vegetative growth, and flowering, which gives rise
to the next generation. The transition from vegetative growth to flowering can
only occur in plants that are adults: plants in the earlier, juvenile phase are
incapable of responding to flower-inducing signals. The transition from juvenile
to adult is important not only because it allows the plant to become
reproductive, producing fruits and seeds, but also because in many species the
leaves and other vegetative organs develop differently while the plant is a
juvenile compared to those formed during the adult phase. In maize (or corn), a
prominent difference between juvenile and adult leaves is in the levels of
lignin, which can interfere with cellulosic ethanol production. This project
will examine vegetative phase change in maize using a unique technology in which
adult plants can be rejuvenated. This technology will allow for the
identification of genes that control phase-specific patterns of development,
with the ultimate goal of understanding how developmental state is interpreted
and expressed by differentiating cells. Microarrays will be employed to compare
patterns of gene expression in developing juvenile, transition, and adult maize
leaves, each at several different developmental stages, to paint a complete
picture of gene expression underlying phase-specific patterns of leaf
differentiation. Subsequently, patterns of expression of selected genes will be
examined in normal plants and also in both phase change mutants and in
rejuvenated plants to elucidate the genetic networks that regulate vegetative
phase change in an important crop plant in the US. The investigators will
continue their efforts to include females and underrepresented minorities in
research in plant developmental biology.