* 0820883
* MRI: Acquisition of an  Accelerator for Stellar Nucleosynthesis Measurements
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2013
* Larry Lamm, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 07/31/2013
* USD 2,464,379.00

This award will enable acquisition of a state-of-the-art 5MV Pelletron
accelerator to continue and significantly expand the broad portfolio of
experimental capabilities for the nuclear astrophysics program at the Nuclear
Structure Laboratory (NSL) at Notre Dame University. Over the last decades, the
nuclear astrophysics program at NSL has gained international prominence with its
scientific focus on the study of nuclear reactions at stellar burning
conditions. The main goal is to probe low energy fusion reactions critical for
stellar hydrogen, helium and carbon burning, using complementary experimental
techniques. The new accelerator will significantly enhance the present
experimental capabilities of the laboratory, complementing present and future
efforts in underground measurements.

The new accelerator also will enable the development of inverse kinematics
techniques at the newly designed St. George recoil separator using intense low
energy, heavy-ion beams. These techniques promise significant advances in
efficiency and background reduction for low energy reaction measurements,
emerging as a unique alternative or complement to the underground accelerator
approach. The 5 MV heavy-ion accelerator opens new research avenues and
opportunities that will significantly enhance the laboratory's capability to
measure key nuclear reactions at energy conditions close to stellar hydrogen,
helium, and carbon burning. A new accelerator, coupled to the recoil mass
separator, will make the NSL a unique and world-leading facility for the study
of the nuclear processes in all phases of stellar evolution.

The NSL operates one of the leading international experimental programs in
nuclear astrophysics. The program attracts many collaborators worldwide; in 2007
alone the NSL had 68 outside users from 17 US institutions and 15 foreign
countries. The laboratory provides training and education opportunities for a
large number of ND graduate students (presently 21) and undergraduate students
(15 annually) in nuclear physics with up to 30% minority and female students.
Direct access to the accelerator and the opportunity to perform or develop
small-scale experiments provides invaluable training. As a consequence, ND
students are extremely successful in the job market in industry, academia, and
national laboratories. During the summer months, the NSL hosts up to 10
additional undergraduate students and 2 high school teachers with approximately
10-15 high school students through the ND JINA outreach and REU/RET program. The
new accelerator also will strengthen the accelerator-based nuclear applications
program that was developed at ND over the last five years. This program
introduces non-physics faculty to the benefit of new analytical methods in their
fields and attracts their students into the NSL to take advantage of new
research opportunities.