* 0820877
* RUI:  Role of Rubisco Activase Gene Regulation in Acclimation of Photosynthesis to Heat Stress
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Benjamin DeRidder, Grinnell College
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 07/31/2012
* USD 148,469.00

High temperature inhibition of photosynthesis is recognized as a primary
limitation to the growth and productivity of plants in both agricultural and
natural environments. With global temperatures predicted to rise, research aimed
at understanding and reducing plant susceptibility to heat stress is likely to
have a significant impact on future crop yields. Heat stress appears to inhibit
photosynthesis primarily by impairing the activity of Rubisco during the rate-
limiting step of carbon assimilation in plants. Rubisco relies on an enzyme
called activase to maintain its functional potential. During periods of heat
stress, activase loses its ability to sustain Rubisco activity, resulting in
decreased rates of photosynthesis and plant growth. There is substantial
evidence that photosynthesis can acclimate to long term heat stress and that
activase may play a central role in the acclimatory response. However, the basis
for heat acclimation of photosynthesis is largely undefined. The current project
builds on recent work supporting the involvement of activase gene regulation in
the acclimation response. The focus of this research is to address specific
questions regarding activase gene expression and protein regulation in plants
exposed to elevated temperatures, and to begin to define the role of these
regulatory processes in acclimation of photosynthesis to heat stress.
Specifically, the project addresses the hypothesis that activase regulation
during heat stress is influenced by genetic elements in its 3'-untranslated
region, and seeks to evaluate activase protein turnover properties in vivo using
a unique approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Knowledge of the regulatory processes
that support activase gene and protein expression during heat stress will
greatly facilitate the design of effective strategies to promote heat stress
tolerance of photosynthesis in plants, including important crop species. This
project will be carried out at Grinnell College in close partnership with a
diverse group of undergraduate research students who will participate at all
levels in the gathering, analysis and communication of the results of the study.
By providing independent research opportunities within a biology curriculum
centered on inquiry-based skills, this project will maintain the institution's
proven tradition of integrating scientific research into a broad and
consequential liberal arts education.