* 0820780
* Collaborative Research: Environmental and Biogeochemical Reorganization During the Rise of Atmospheric Oxygen
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2010
* Lee Kump, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 09/30/2010
* USD 1,000.00

The establishment of an oxygenated atmosphere 2.4 billion years ago was heralded
by a progression of environmental changes over the next 400 million years that
permanently transformed global biogeochemical cycling. Newly obtained drillcore
from Fennoscandia provides an unparalleled opportunity to establish a more
continuous chronology of events through this interval. A team of investigators
with expertise in isotopic and geochemical analysis and numerical modeling will
produce a suite of environmental proxies of oceanic and atmospheric composition
through the cored interval and interpret them quantitatively through numerical
modeling in the context of a set of hypotheses concerning the pace of
atmospheric oxygenation and the establishment of a strongly redox-stratified
global ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this proposal
centers on the importance of reconstructing the sequence of global environmental
change during this critical interval of Earth history. Widespread, perhaps even
equatorial glaciation occurred as the deposition of banded iron formations, so
characteristic of the Archean, ceased. A protracted interval of 13C enrichment
in marine carbonates ensued, the first of its kind and the largest and longest
in Earth history, without the expected evidence for abundant organic matter
deposition.&lt;br/&gt;Paradoxically, as carbon isotopic compositions returned to
normal, tremendous quantities of organic matter and marine phosphorites were
deposited. Various proxies indicate that oxidative weathering only became
important toward the end of this interval of progressive biospheric change.
Drill core from South Africa, complemented by field studies there and in Canada,
the United States, Western Australia and Fennoscandia, have documented these
events but the records are incomplete. Fennoscandian drillcore presents the best
opportunity yet to fill these gaps, address the perplexing paradoxes of this
time interval, and, with the establishment of a precise chronology based on Re-
Os, assess the tempo of redox evolution of the atmosphere and
ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While there is general public interest in and
curiosity about the subsurface, most people have little appreciation for the
complexity of subsurface geologic structures and have no idea how geologists use
the subsurface as an archive of the history of Earth. To improve this situation
while addressing the broader impacts goals of the project, the investigators,
together with their students, and museum and professional outreach staff will
construct an interactive museum exhibit. The visitor will be able to extract
lengths of rock core from a complex geologic structure displayed in three
dimensions, and from these cores, reconstruct the geologic history of the area.
Understanding will be aided by 3-D displays on the Penn State GeoWall, together
with synthetic seismographs generated by the visitor at the push of a button.
Additional broader impacts of this project include strengthening industry
interests in the area of Re-Os systematics of organic-rich sedimentary rocks,
and the involvement of a team of students and researchers in a truly
international, interdisciplinary, multi-investigator project. Undergraduate
research assistants will be drawn from diverse pools of applicants to our
institutions? minority outreach program, e.g., the Big Ten Conference?s Summer
Research Opportunities Program.&lt;br/&gt;