* 0820918
* IRES:   Nanostructure and Nanomaterials Research Experiences for Students at University of Pittsburgh
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Minhee Yun, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Jong-on Hahm
* 07/31/2011
* USD 150,000.00

OISE-0820918 (Yun, M., PI, and Stanchina, W., Co-PI, University of Pittsburgh)
IRES: Nanostructure and Nanomaterials Research Experience for Students: This
International Research Experiences for Students (IRES) project will support a
total of ten students (one graduate and nine undergraduates) for international
collaboration between the University of Pittsburgh and three Korean institutions
(SungKyunKwan University, Seoul National University, and Chonbuk National
University). This IRES program consists of research activities, cultural
activities, student presentations, and networking opportunities that will help
students prepare for careers in the global workplace. During each of three
summers, a group of students will spend two weeks at the University of
Pittsburgh and ten weeks in Korea. The students will learn new micro-/nano-
fabrication techniques by investigating carbon nanotube assisted nanodevices,
and become familiar with state-of-the-art research equipment. Selected research
projects will be published in a peer-reviewed journal as well as oral
presentations and posters to the scientific community via submitted and invited
talks. The students will present their IRES experience to the annual Pittsburgh
Junior Academy of Science (PJAS) Nanotechnology workshop, which was designed for
junior and senior high school students.