* 0820585
* Chronic Stress and Decision Making: A Lifespan Psychology Approach
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Paul Slovic, Decision Science Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 08/31/2012
* USD 277,976.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Research suggests that chronic activation of the
stress response system may have deleterious effects on many of the neurological
structures that are believed to mediate decision-making processes. As a result,
in addition to the adverse consequences chronic stress can pose for physical and
mental health (e.g., cardiovascular disease, depression) it may pose a
significant threat to decision-making capabilities. These effects may be
especially detrimental at the extreme ends of the developmental spectrum. For
instance, in older adults, chronic stress may further tax systems that may
already be declining as a function of normal cognitive aging. At the other end
of the spectrum, the effects of early life stress may result in maturational
delays in the development of adaptive decision-making for young
children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This research examines the association between
chronic stress and decision-making. It combines research on the neural
structures that support decision-making with new techniques for studying risky
decision-making. It also examines the developmental trajectory of adaptive
decision-making (i.e., the ability to make choices that are more likely to
result in a gain/reward, and avoid ones which pose greater danger for
loss/punishment). The research will also identify individual difference
variables that may influence adaptive decision-making across the lifespan. Three
studies will be conducted. Study 1 investigates how age-differences in older
adults may influence risky choice behavior for decisions involving potential
gains and ones involving potential losses, and how chronic stress may further
compromise decision-making abilities. Study 2 examines the effects of chronic
stress on decisions posing extreme uncertainty. Study 3 examines adaptive
decision-making abilities of children currently in foster care, who were exposed
to significant early life stress. Together, these studies will provide insights
regarding the effects of chronic stress on human decision processes, both with
respect to cognitive aging and neuropsychological development. This increased
understanding may assist in identifying specific vulnerability factors
associated with age-related changes in decision-making abilities and provide
important insights that may help researchers develop interventions to promote
better decision-making in older adults and children. &lt;br/&gt;