* 0820496
* Temporal Discounting of Social Goals
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* David Krantz, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2012
* USD 644,335.00

Delayed benefits are usually valued less than immediate ones, for several
reasons. Such a reduction in value can be viewed as the result of applying a
temporal discount factor. There have been many studies of the observed
discounting of future receipts of money. For example, if a decision maker judges
that $100, to be received in 2 years, is equal in value to $70 right now, the
observed discount rate for this decision is about 30% for 2 years (or about 16%
per year). However, people also pursue goals other than money, including good
health, safety, leisure, belonging, status, well being of others, and a stable
and attractive environment. Such non-monetary goals may also be valued less if
their achievement is delayed, so the concept of a temporal discount factor can
be extended to these other goals. Different discount factors may apply for
different goal categories, and this, in turn, would affect how people make
tradeoffs among goals attained at different points in time. For example, if a
decision maker judges an environmental improvement 2 years hence to be almost as
valuable as the same improvement achieved now, the discount rate might be only
3% per year for the environmental goal even though it is 16% per year for a
monetary gain of $100. A person who is unwilling to give up $100 now, for
immediate attainment of the environmental goal, might be willing to make a
binding commitment to give up $100 with a delay of one year (worth only $84), in
order to achieve the same environmental goal with a delay of 1 year. Thus, it is
important to know how human temporal discounting varies across goal categories
in order to analyze the long-term benefits of public policies relating to
health, safety, and environment.

Our previous research showed the importance of affiliation and social goals
(such as status or adherence to group norms) for decisions concerning
environmental goals. Our new research will determine the best ways of measuring
temporal discount factors for different goal categories, and will then
quantitatively compare discount rates for a variety of economic, social and
environmental goals. We focus both on typical responses and on individual and
cultural variation. The research will advance the theory of decision making in
social and group contexts (temporal discounting of social goals has not
previously been considered), will develop methods for assessing temporal
discount factors, and will lead to better analysis of public policy costs and
benefits. For example, we will assess discount rates for some costs and benefits
of measures to prevent global warming, using a diverse national sample, to
inform policy on this critical issue. A field study will test applicability of
our findings in an international population and will provide data on effective
means of encouraging energy conservation.