* 0820805
* Bioarchaeological  Reconstruction of Early and Middle Holocene Human Adaptations Across the Sahara-Sahel Border
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2008,12/31/2013
* Paul Sereno, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2013
* USD 231,418.00

Human societies struggle to adapt to climate change, and decades of prehistoric
archaeological research has determined this is not a uniquely modern problem. In
fact, humans have been grappling with cycles of desertification and the
degradation of ecosystems for millennia and will continue to do so in the
future. Therefore, it is critical that inferences about past lifeways are used
to better inform decisions in the present and future. Using interdisciplinary
approaches, it is now possible to study the way of life of past peoples in
unprecedented detail, delineating diverse dietary and economic strategies,
community organization patterns and health experiences. Such inferences are
particularly powerful when informed by the deep time perspective that
archaeological investigations afford. While relevant to all societies, the
interaction of health and environment is particularly critical for disadvantaged
communities throughout the developing world, as in Niger (northwestern Africa)
where this research project is focused. This project assembles an international
team of collaborators to conduct bioarchaeological, geological, and
paleoenvironmental investigations of a newly discovered paleolake that was once
home to thousands of people during the Early and Middle Holocene (8,600 through
4,500 years ago) but is today in the middle of the Sahara Desert. The specific
focus of this research team is a series of cemeteries containing several hundred
human burials found within sand dunes that were once islands within the now
extinct lake. The investigators will reconstruct the nature of this lake and
surrounding habitat using sedimentological and zooarchaeological analyses and
correlate these data with two burial occupation phases distinguished by a
500-1000 year hiatus. Intensive excavation of human burials will implement
analyses of inherited osteo-dental markers, pathologies, biomechanical
properties and biogeochemical signatures which will be used to examine genetic
relationships between occupations, to infer how dietary quality and diversity
changed as the lake dried, to reconstruct residential mobility and seasonal
migration patterns, and to document patterns of sickness and population health.
By combining these datasets with reconstructed paleoenvironments and climates
this project will provide insights into the causes and repercussions of major
transitions in human organization strategies. In particular this research will
elucidate whether dietary diversity increased with increasing aridity and
whether human communities grew or decreased in size or became more or less
mobile both seasonally and over longer life course intervals. Until the
discovery of Gobero, much of the information necessary to inform biological and
cultural analyses was lacking due to the difficulties of archaeological research
in Niger, despite its critical position at the intersection of the Sahara and
Sahel regions. In particular, the density of human burials at Gobero is unique
for this time period and belies the importance of this extinct lake system to
peoples of North Africa for millennia prior to the onset of desert conditions
circa 4000 years ago. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Perspectives from the human past can
inform decisions in the present to improve human-environment synergy. This
project relies on the expertise and exchange of ideas of scholars from three
continents and will improve the infrastructure for training students about how
best to study and understand major changes in the human condition in the past
and present. The research and collections it produces will be shared with the
scientific community and public through online databases, academic publications,
and popular venues that promote interdisciplinary science. Collaboration with
scholars and students in Niger will develop research and training relationships
that will enable the establishment of an anthropological museum in Niger for
educational initiatives promoting cultural patrimony. This will be done as part
of a broader effort to establish World Heritage status for the endangered,
prehistoric resources of Niger, one of the world?s poorest countries.