* 0820779
* MRI: Acquisition of an Inductively Coupled-sector Field Mass Spectrometer to Extract Atmospheric Trace Element Histories from Ice Cores and Assess Contemporary Water Quality
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2010
* Paolo Gabrielli, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 07/31/2010
* USD 337,250.00

Mosley-Thompson&lt;br/&gt;0820779&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This MRI award supports
the acquisition of an inductively coupled-sector field mass spectrometer (ICP-
SFMS) to extract atmospheric trace element histories from ice cores and to
assess contemporary water quality. The intellectual merit and the scientific
motivation for acquiring this instrument arises from the urgency to document and
understand both contemporary and past Earth system changes. Trace elements are
exceptional tools for reconstructing past processes in the Earth?s system and as
some toxic species are produced by human activities, for monitoring the global
anthropogenic footprint. The ICP-SFMS allows simultaneous analysis of numerous
trace and ultra-trace elements from small mass samples and will allow new proxy
information to be extracted from both new and archived ice cores. The analyses
will make it possible to identify sources of impurities in ice cores and other
water samples from which knowledge about past atmospheric circulation patterns,
anthropogenic emissions, extraterrestrial contributions and volcanic circulation
patterns can be derived. The broader impacts of the work relate to the societal
relevance of the science and the strong education and outreach activities of the
principal investigators. Students will receive training on state-of-the-art
instrumentation which will support their graduate research
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;