* 0820996
* MRI: Acquisition of Tri-Institutional, Cyber-Enabled Chemistry MALDI-TOF Mass Spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Ivan Dmochowski, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2011
* USD 435,264.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation program (MRI), Ivan J.
Dmochowski from the University of Pennsylvania will acquire a matrix-assisted
laser desorption ionization, time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF) mass spectrometer that
will be shared in a cyber-enabled configuration with researchers at two
neighboring universities in West Philadelphia, Drexel University and University
of the Sciences in Philadelphia. The instrumentation will be used for research
involving biological and synthetic molecules of mid-high molecular weights.
Specific examples are studies of oligo-anthracycline complexing, chemoselective
ligations and controlled oligomerization reactions, development of chemical
tools for studying complex biological systems for study of organic synthesis of
biomacromolecules, as well as bacterial protein expression. Undergraduate and
graduate students from chemistry and biochemistry majors at the three
participating institutions will be able to conduct academic-year and summer
research. MALDI-TOF-mass spectrometry is the technique of choice for obtaining
accurate molecular weights of very large molecules, with extremely high
sensitivity. Use of a MALDI-TOF mass spectrometer has therefore become a
standard technique, especially in studies involving biomolecules. This research
will have a significant impact in a number of areas, especially chemistry and
biochemistry.