* 0820734
* Biochemistry and Physiology of the Rnf Complex From the Archaeon Methanosarcina Acetivorans
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* James Ferry, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2011
* USD 509,803.00

The majority of all life forms obtain energy for growth by transferring
electrons from one molecule (the growth substrate) to another (electron
acceptor). The electrons are carried through the membrane by proteins and small
organic compounds accompanied by the pumping of protons or sodium ions from
inside to outside the membrane. The resulting ion gradient drives the
phosphorylation of adenosine diphosphate (ADP) producing adenosine triphosphate
(ATP). The dephosphorylation of ATP back to ADP provides the energy for
reactions required for biosynthesis of cellular components leading to growth.
This process of electron transport phosphorylation of ADP is also how methane-
producing anaerobic (living without oxygen) microorganisms obtain energy for
growth. However, little is known of the membrane components that transfer the
electrons. An understanding of this important process is necessary to develop
processes for conversion of plant material to clean burning methane as an
alternative to fossil fuels. Recently, a complex of several proteins (Rnf) first
discovered in microorganisms from the Bacteria domain of life was shown to be
present in Methanosarcina acetivorans, a methane producing species from the
Archaea domain of life. Only recently discovered, investigations of Rnf
complexes are in their infancy and no Rnf complexes from the Archaea domain of
life have been investigated. The project involves an investigation of the Rnf
complex from M. acetivorans. The results are expected to initiate the
transformation from a cursory to a comprehensive understanding of the Rnf family
that will also advance a general understanding of diverse electron transport
process in organisms spanning all domains of life.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts.
The project provides an exceptionally fertile ground for training students that
will prepare them for a productive career and ensure a sound scientific
infrastructure. Minority and disadvantaged students will be actively recruited
with the goal of increasing vitality in the scientific enterprise through
diversity. The project will support outreach activities with pre college
educators with the goal of developing an interest in science among women,
minorities and disadvantaged students. Finally, undergraduates will be recruited
for a research experience that will prepare them for graduate school.