* 0820273
* ADVANCE Partnerships for Adaptation, Implementation, and Dissemination (PAID) Award:  PROMOTE -  Improving the promotion to full processes at western public universities
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Beth Montelone, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Beth Mitchneck
* 08/31/2012
* USD 441,994.00

Studies of science, engineering and technology point out the paucity of women at
the full professor level (18%) in four year colleges and universities (2003 NSF
Science and Engineering Indicators). This scarcity means there are few women
candidates for leadership positions since department chairs, deans, provosts,
and leaders of research teams are typically full professors. Because full
professors carry prestige and influence, and because the number of women in
those positions is lacking, we must understand and address the difficulties
women face in becoming promoted to full professor to break through the glass
ceiling that limits women's accessibility to administrative positions. The
PROMOTE project will both increase our understanding of the transition from
associate to full professor and address the difficulties through an
implementation phase. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In part one, we will study associate
and full professors at seven western public research universities to better
understand the factors associated with promotion - the first cross-institutional
study on this career stage. In part two, we will draw on the findings of this
study to adapt, implement, and disseminate a set of four key activities
identified as instrumental in increasing promotion rates. In this phase, Utah
State University will partner with six western public research universities
Kansas State, New Mexico State, University of Kansas, North Dakota State
University, University of Idaho and Oregon State University. The activities we
will implement are 1) promotion workshops held by the Provost's Offices on the
various campuses, 2) development and dissemination of clear guidelines on the
processes and expectations for promotion by deans and department heads (chairs),
3) development of review mechanisms for the promotion to full process and 4)
coaching for interested faculty. The partnering institutions bring a variety of
experiences to this project. Three of the universities, Utah State, Kansas State
and New Mexico State, have had ADVANCE-IT awards and have been working on
increasing the recruitment, retention and advancement of women STEM faculty.
Kansas State has developed innovative career planning and mentoring programs.
New Mexico State has developed a successful mentoring program, which they are
currently working to disseminate. Four of the universities have not received
ADVANCE awards but are committed to increasing the representation of women among
their STEM faculty. These universities are located in small cities in the
western United States and face challenges in recruiting senior women. As
evidenced by recruitment and promotion numbers, none of these institutions can
solve the shortage of senior women faculty through recruitment, they must "grow
their own" senior women. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of
PROMOTE reside in the increased understanding of the transition from associate
to full professor. In order to propose effective interventions, we must
understand the barriers to promotion and how best to ameliorate them. Although
the recruitment of faculty and the tenure process have been the subject of
numerous studies, there have been few studies of the next stage in an academic
scientist's career path. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of PROMOTE
are several. PROMOTE will develop, test, adapt, evaluate and disseminate a set
of relatively simple and inexpensive activities focusing on promotion to full
that could then be adopted by universities across the country. In this way, many
institutions can see the growth in senior women on campus that Utah State has
experienced. &lt;br/&gt;