* 0820709
* Comparative Primate Microbial Ecology
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2008,01/31/2015
* Brenda Wilson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 01/31/2015
* USD 299,998.00

The primate body hosts trillions of microbes. Interactions between primate hosts
and these microbes profoundly affect primate physiology, reproduction, health,
survival and ultimately, evolution. Because females are central to population
viability and because reproductive tract microbiota directly influence female
health, fecundity and pregnancy outcomes, understanding both primate variation
in microbial ecologies and what factors influence microbial variation is crucial
to understanding patterns of primate host-microbe relations. The goals of this
research are to define the microbial community compositions from a select subset
of wild primates differing by phylogenetic group, socio-ecology, mating system,
and morphology, and to test hypotheses that can explain microbial variation
among primates. Specifically, the researchers hypothesize that primate bacterial
patterns: 1) vary widely, both within and among species, and 2) co-vary with
size, reproductive, taxonomic and social factors. The researchers will apply
emerging genomic techniques to analyze, define, and compare both the composition
and dynamics of human and nonhuman primate microbial communities. The techniques
include culture independent, direct sequencing and analysis of 16S rDNA clone
libraries to generate microbial phylogenies that identify the microbes in
primate reproductive ecosystems. These phylogenies will illustrate microbial
community composition, and will be analyzed in the contexts of primate phylogeny
and reproductive and social behavior, both within and among species. Data from
this study will produce fundamental information about how microbes affect
primates through relationships that range from highly beneficial and codependent
to severely pathological. Diverse primate species are included, enabling
targeted hypothesis testing, statistical study and insights on causes of
microbial community differences among primate species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
analyses in this research will utilize cutting-edge molecular genomic analyses
that have not yet received wide notice or application in bioanthropology. The
researchers expect comparative microbial data to provide crucial insights into
the evolution of primate (including human) sexuality and reproductive health.
The broader impact of this transformative research will allow an understanding
of human-microbe interactions, both pathological and non-pathological, and will
have valuable implications for biomedicine, such as the relationship between
pathological microbes and human preterm birth, adverse pregnancy, and chronic,
debilitating health problems in women. In addition, improved data on microbial
forces that impact reproduction will benefit primate conservation efforts.