* 0820586
* Orographic Precipitation Processes in Midlatitudes and Tropics
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Robert Houze, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 08/31/2012
* USD 599,804.00

Orography strongly affects precipitation when baroclinic precipitation systems
pass over mountain ranges and when deep convection occurs in regions of terrain
modified flow. This research investigates both of these types of orographic
precipitation by focusing on: (1) Physical mechanisms by which the widespread
precipitation of a baroclinic storm system is enhanced on the windward slope of
a midlatitude mountain barrier; (2) Factors affecting the location, intensity,
and structure of heavily precipitating convective systems in the vicinity of
tropical mountain ranges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For midlatitude baroclinic
systems, the Principal Investigator (PI) will test hypotheses, derived from the
Mesoscale Alpine Programme (MAP, based in the Alps) and Improvement of
Microphysical Parameterization through Observational Verification Experiment
(IMPROVE, based in Oregon), that windward slope enhancement can occur either: 1)
when strong low level flow of near neutral or slight static instability rises
easily over orography such that cells form over the first sharp rise of terrain,
or 2) when weak low-level flow is bounded above by a layer of shear and
overturning cells. In either case, the cellularity leads to enhancement of
precipitation over the lower slope of the terrain. The PI will further examine
the MAP and IMPROVE data to better understand these processes, and expand the
investigation to include a dataset from the Hydrometeorological Testbed (HMT) in
northern California, which will help determine the broader applicability of the
processes identified in MAP and IMPROVE II to west coast U.S. storms in general.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For tropical convective systems, the PI will continue to
explore convection in the Himalayan region, which has a robust combination of
high mountains, well-defined upstream moisture sources, and different types of
land surface properties. In preliminary studies of a satellite database that
have been compiled and high-resolution model output, the PI has found that
extremely deep convection in the northwestern subcontinent is controlled by flow
down from high plateaus overriding low-level moist flow. The low-level flow is
channeled in long converging trajectories over dry, hot land surfaces by the
shape of the mountain barrier, and convection is released at the first sharp
peak of terrain, so that the heavily precipitating convective systems occur near
the base of the barrier. When large maritime convective systems come ashore over
the wet river delta of the northeastern subcontinent, it appears that the
stratiform components of these systems are enhanced by orographic uplift on and
ahead of the windward slopes of the terrain. The research will broaden the
satellite database to determine how these processes account for the
climatological precipitation pattern near the Himalayas and how they vary
diurnally and seasonally. In the latter half of the project the PI may develop a
satellite data base for the Andes to test the generality of concepts derived
from the Himalayas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In both the midlatitude and tropical
phases of this research the PI has established collaborations with groups
running high-resolution forecast models. The above described research will use
output from these models to test and extend the physical understanding gained
from the field project and satellite datasets. The PI also will be evaluating
the models' accuracy in representing the orographic precipitation processes in
both midlatitudes and tropics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: This
research builds on the PI's previously established expertise in the dynamics and
physics of precipitating clouds. It will help fill a knowledge gap in
atmospheric sciences regarding orographic effects on precipitating systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This study will contribute to the
societal goal of improving predictions of heavy precipitation and flooding in
mountainous regions. &lt;br/&gt;