* 0820405
* Arabidopsis 2010:  The Arabidopsis salicylic acid signaling network: A paradigm for phytohormone signaling
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2009,06/30/2017
* Sorina Popescu, Boyce Thompson Institute Plant Research
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 06/30/2017
* USD 2,478,777.00

The plant hormone salicylic acid (SA) affects many diverse processes in plant
growth and development and plays important role(s) in response to abiotic and
biotic stresses. Its role(s) in disease resistance has been the most extensively
studied but is still only partially understood. To obtain insights into how SA
carries out its varied functions, a large number of putative SA-binding proteins
(pSABPs) have recently been identified in Arabidopsis by affinity chromatography
using SA attached to a matrix. The investigators will use two powerful high
throughput screens, an Arabidopsis protein micro-array and a yeast three hybrid
system, to identify additional SABPs, as well as confirm the SA-binding activity
of the already identified pSABPs. These SABPs will be characterized using
biochemical, genetic, molecular, bioinformatic, and biophysical (X-ray
crystallography) techniques to decipher their functions in growth and
development and/or responses to abiotic and biotic stresses, and the effects of
SA binding on these functions. Based on current data and the results obtained,
an SA signaling network model(s) will be constructed, tested by more detailed
characterization of putative signaling or regulatory modules, and refined in
order to produce an exemplary model of the SA signaling network of SABPs which
may serve as a paradigm for other plant hormones (and other small ligands). The
project will also facilitate development of the two new, less proven approaches
for large scale identification of proteins that bind small molecules (like
hormones), for their use in characterization of other hormones or small molecule
signaling networks in animals as well as plants. Moreover, the SA targets
(SABPs) identified in plants may have counterparts in humans that are important
in mediating SA's and aspirin's (aceto SA) diverse therapeutic properties
including reduction in fever, pain, inflammation, and risk of heart attack,
stroke and cancer. The project will provide a stimulating training environment
for graduate and postdoctoral students, where they are exposed to a large
repertoire of biochemical, molecular, genetic, structural, and bioinformatic
approaches to address fundamental questions in plant biology. It also will
provide high school students and undergraduates with opportunities to experience
first-hand the excitement of discovery under the close mentorship of a
postdoctoral fellow, research associate or graduate student. Research results
will be disseminated widely through peer-reviewed articles in journals that
allow broad electronic access. Moreover, the identity of new SABPs (once their
binding is verified by two independent assays) and their possible involvement in
various plant processes will be made available through a new website before
publication in peer-reviewed journals.