* 0820608
* SGER: Initiated Chemical Vapor Deposition Synthesis and Design of Polymers for Alternative Energies
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Kenneth Lau, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/2009
* USD 100,000.00

CBET-0820608&lt;br/&gt;Lau&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Grant for Exploratory
Research (SGER) project is aimed at developing a new design and synthesis
methodology based on initiated chemical vapor deposition (iCVD) to make
semiconducting, conjugated polymers for use in solar cells with enhanced
efficiency and performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: In bulk
heterojunction polymer-based solar cells, inefficiencies are attributed to the
high band gap of polymers leading to a mismatch with the solar spectrum, and
generally poor charge generation and transport in the polymer due to structural
and morphological defects. In hybrid systems using inorganic, nanocrystalline
titania, with or without dye sensitization, solar cell efficiency has been
hampered by the poor filling of the mesoporous titania with the polymer. Some of
these issues stem from using liquid-based processing methods to form the
conjugated polymer thin films in the solar cell stack. Since unmodified
conjugated polymers are typically intractable and insoluble, addition of
solubilizing side chains on these polymers induce solubility and therefore
processability. However, addition of side groups may result in undesirable
changes in crystallinity, morphology and stability and lead to degradation of
the polymer. Further, polymer properties are often sensitive to the choice of
solvent and the conditions for solvent removal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;iCVD
relies on the direct polymerization of a solid polymer thin film on a surface
using monomers and thermally activated initiators/catalysts in the vapor form.
By circumventing the liquid-phase, there is no requirement for solvents, and
therefore iCVD gains significant processing freedom, not only in making
unmodified conjugated polymers tractable, but also opening up the possibility of
designing novel materials which would otherwise have been unattainable in the
liquid phase due to solvent constraints or incompatibilities. Further, without
the issues of macroscale phase separation and demixing from adverse solvent
interactions, iCVD as a solventless processing technique is expected to enable
intimate, nanoscale mixing of dissimilar phases between the conjugated polymer
and its counter-junction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific research objectives
are (1) to demonstrate the synthesis of conjugated polymers using iCVD for a
selected list of monomers and co-monomers, which will have viable properties as
solar cell materials; and (2) to demonstrate the tight contact between the donor
and acceptor phases by integrating iCVD and processing techniques like thermal
evaporation and spin coating to produce the heterojunctions, similar to the
paradigm that has been successfully applied in microelectronics fabrication
through the utilization of CVD and other processing
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: This program is motivated by
the need to discover alternative energy solutions to reduce our dependency on
fossil fuel, protect our environment from its damaging effects, and enable a
more sustainable Earth. With solar energy remaining a largely untapped resource,
this program is a first step that aims to fuel the technological development of
this alternative energy. Beyond this, well-designed conjugated polymers from
this work could find applications in flexible electronics, organic light-
emitting diode (OLED) devices, and biomedicine. This program will integrate a
strong educational component through mentoring high school and undergraduate
students from Drexel?s many outreach programs; by growing relationships with
area high schools to provide hands-on opportunities to test the long term
stability of solar cells as a way to inform students of responsible technology.
This program aims to actively recruit from minority and underrepresented groups.
Research results will be disseminated and are expected to germinate
multidisciplinary research because of the applicability and versatility of the
iCVD approach.