* 0820208
* Collaborative Research:   Scalable Knowledge-based Middleware for Networked and Mobile Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Boon Thau Loo, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2012
* USD 314,282.00

SRS-0820208/0819845

TITLE: Scalable Knowledge-based Middleware For Networked And Mobile Systems

PI: Boon Thau Loo (University of Pennsylvania) Co-PI: William C. Regli (Drexel
University) Senior Personnel: Joseph B. Kopena (Drexel University)

This research investigates scalable, knowledge-based middleware supporting
content-based addressing and routing in mobile, networked systems. It
incorporates and integrates two aspects: Ontological reasoning about system
resources and declarative networking within routing components. At the
application layer is OntoNet, a knowledge-based framework for representing and
reasoning on system elements. Declarative, formal techniques provide service
discovery and composition, content-based messaging, and distributed querying
using OWL-Net, a subset of the OWL description logic. This work includes
development of propagation strategies that are efficient and robust in mobile,
networked environments. Network layer support is provided by declarative
networks, a rule-based framework for compact, high-level protocol
specifications. Declarative networking enables rapid prototyping and
verification as well as online adaptation and meta-reasoning. This research will
include extension of declarative networking to more readily support highly
dynamic mobile wireless systems. The intellectual merit of this proposal is
development of a unified, declarative framework for distributed organization of
knowledge and information in real-world systems. It draws from many areas such
as the Semantic Web, databases, and networking. Potential broader impacts are
richer and more extensible platforms for real-world networks usable in emergency
response, logistics, infrastructure monitoring, and ubiquitous computing.