* 0820222
* Collaborative Research:   Recombinant Services -- Recasting the Web for Continuously Evolving Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2008,02/28/2013
* Richard Taylor, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 02/28/2013
* USD 367,283.00

NSF Proposals: 0820222/0820170&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Recombinant Services
-- Recasting the Web for Continuously Evolving Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PIs:
Richard N. Taylor and Nenad Medvidovic&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad features
of many real-world systems belie the assumptions of classical systems and
software engineering: there is no single overarching authority, change is
managed by many independent organizations, the many systems serve many masters,
and evolution is independent and uncoordinated. Ongoing improvements in the
scale and reach of pervasive network infrastructure and the brisk development of
diverse Web-accessible resources will play pivotal roles in future systems of
systems. Apropos of this future, this project offers a radical rethinking of
service abstraction that integrates modern network structures, computation as a
fundamental unit of network exchange, and network-wide system awareness to
deliver recombinant Internet-scale services for which service composition,
reuse, autonomy, context-free interaction, and monitoring are first-order
effects. This project pursues a set of architectural principles addressing the
challenges, then developing infrastructure consistent with those principles, for
the implementation, deployment, and operation of systems of systems. The
engineering methods reifying recombinant services---CREST---will refashion the
Web, from an architecture that is predominantly data-driven and reactive to one
that is computation-driven and autonomic. Our results will be given to the open
source community and external collaborating organizations, a technology transfer
with the potential of transforming the Web.