* 0820333
* Economic Theories of Intertemporal Choice and Media Proliferation
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Eddie Dekel, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2011
* USD 202,547.00

The project includes two research projects in economic theory. One concerns how
to model temptation and the second concerns polarization of beliefs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Temptation occurs in contexts where an individual
understands that he may make future choices that are not in line with his or her
long-run objectives. A simple example is food consumption; while someone may
decide today to lose weight, actually acheiving this objective means facing
daily temptation to eat unhealthy foods. While temptation is a universal
experience, the formal economic model of how individuals make decisions does not
include the possibility of temptation. Developing richer economic models that
includes temptation allows us to better understand a wide range of human
behavior that contributes to problems like obesity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One way
that individuals deal with temptations is by restricting the range of their
future choices through unbreakable commitments they make today. The principal
investigator builds and analyzes a formal mathematical model of how people make
such commitments assuming that individuals are fully rational. In the model,
there are two costs of temptation for individuals: the internal cost of
attempting to resist the temptation and the effect of temptation on actual
choice. The investigator analyzes the model under two different assumptions
about the size of these costs. He first examines the case where the cost of
resisting temptation is so high that the individual always succumbs to
temptation. He then considers the case where the cost of temptation is lower, so
an individual can resist temptation even without a commitment. In both cases the
model allows for uncertainty about the extent and type of temptation that might
occur. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second project is also formal economic theory
using mathematical modeling techniques. Here the PI develops and analyzes a
model of how media bias may affect viewers' beliefs and decisions. The model
starts with the assumption that individual voters are fully rational and seek
information. They have a variety of information sources. They know that these
sources (eg, the media) are biased, but they do not know the exact bias of a
particular source. The project analyzes how the proliferation of media, each
with a distinct bias, changes voter beliefs and decision outcomes. The goal is
to explore whether in general the social costs of the change in beliefs due to
media proliferation are not directly from the decisions made, but through losses
in the process: either through wasteful competition for control or less
efficient communication.