* 0820580
* The Generation of Complex Epistasis by Metabolic Networks
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2013
* Daniel Kliebenstein, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,314,084.00

Organismal phenotypes are controlled by complex networks that buffer against
mutation, environmental noise or error ensuring the proper phenotype is
produced. In contrast, most phenotypes vary between individuals of a species
allowing for evolution. This includes the plant metabolome that has complex
enzymatic interactions and is controlled by intricate signaling interactions but
also shows inter-specific variation. One poorly understood mechanism that can
allow networks to show extensive phenotypic variation is multi-locus epistasis
that simultaneously impacts multiple nodes of a network. Epistasis is frequently
found in naturally variable systems such as crop yield and human disease
susceptibility but the molecular mechanism is rarely identified. This project
will use natural variation in the rice and Arabidopsis metabolomes as model
systems to identify mechanisms by which metabolomic Quantitative Trait Loci form
an epistatic network that constrains potential variation present within the
metabolome. The project builds on previous studies in the model system
Arabidopsis thaliana that identified eight naturally variable loci that
epistatically interact in a genetic network to control swaths of Arabidopsis
primary metabolism. Specific allele combinations at four of these loci lead to
plants with 800% increases in steady state content of metabolites within part of
the TCA cycle. Specific objectives include cloning the genes underlying these
loci and manipulating the homologous genes in rice to test their ability to
control primary metabolism in a monocot crop. In addition, precise measures of
epistasis in the Arabidopsis and rice metabolomes will be made by analyzing a
large Recombinant Inbred Line population in each species. Finally the data
generated will be used to develop a metabolic network de novo using a logic
based algorithm that has identified novel metabolic networks in other
metabolomics data. In the future, this knowledge will allow for the development
of models that integrate natural variation in plant metabolic networks to
potentially predict phenotypic diversity.

Analysis of natural variation in most organisms focuses on single genes of large
effect due to relative ease of identification and modeling. However, this is
only one aspect of natural variation and organismal evolution. In contrast, most
traits are under complex control including significant epistasis with large
phenotypic consequences. This proposal will begin to provide insights into how
epistasis and biological networks may control complex traits. Understanding
complex epistatic interactions will provide insights into other complex traits
such as crop yield and human disease that are under epistatic control. The
proposed project will provide research opportunities for high school,
undergraduate, and graduate students. Students will be trained in modern
metabolic biochemistry and molecular genetics to prepare them for future careers
in industry or academics. The undergraduate students will be highly encouraged
and guided to develop and devise their own projects within the frame of this
proposal. Any publication likely to result from this proposal will likely
include at least one undergraduate student as a co-author who was integral in
designing and interpreting the experiments. Established outreach programs will
be used to recruit minority students from local high schools and colleges
throughout the USA for summer internships. In addition, the principal
investigator will be involved in teaching, both in a university classroom
setting and in ongoing outreach efforts to educate community members about plant
metabolism, quantitative genetics, biochemistry, molecular biology and their
integration in factorial experiments. All data will be available through the
project website and long-term through The Arabidopsis Information Resource
(TAIR: www.arabidopsis.org) and Gramene (www.gramene.org).