* 0820228
* SUMO-Dependent Control of an Extrachromosomal Genetic Element
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Erica Johnson, Thomas Jefferson University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2012
* USD 524,000.00

Posttranslational attachment of the ubiquitin-related protein SUMO to other
proteins participates in many vital cellular processes including transcription,
signaling and maintenance of genome integrity. However, the mechanisms by which
SUMO affects its substrates are poorly understood. This project will determine
the role(s) of SUMO in controlling the copy number of the 2 micron circle, a
selfish DNA element that resides in budding yeast. SUMO pathway mutants
accumulate such high copy numbers of 2 micron that it causes cell death.
Preliminary data suggest that this effect is caused by an aberrant activity of
Flp recombinase, a protein encoded by 2 micron. This results, at least partly,
from deficient SUMO attachment to Flp itself. Importantly, Flp sumoylation
requires not only SUMO pathway enzymes, but also other features of 2 micron.
This suggests that Flp may become sumoylated as a part of its functional cycle
at the DNA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This hypothesis will be tested by a) defining
the role of DNA binding in Flp sumoylation and b) determining whether
sumoylation targets a specfic subpopulation of Flp for ubiquitin-dependent
proteolysis via a SUMO-specific ubiquitin E3 ligase. This research will help
solve a basic question in the SUMO field: how can SUMO affect protein function
when most substrates are sumoylated at extremely low levels. Interdependency
between enzyme activity and sumoylation would explain this observation, as would
sumoylation-dependent proteolysis. A second set of experiments will test whether
Flp causes abnormal levels of DNA damage in SUMO pathway mutants. The results of
these experiments will shed light on the complex role of the SUMO pathway in
maintaining genome stability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One way that biological
processes are regulated is via attachment of certain small proteins, including a
protein called SUMO, to other proteins. SUMO is essential for cell growth and is
involved in almost every major nuclear process, but the means by which SUMO
alters the activity of the proteins to which it is attached is not clear. This
project will examine how SUMO attachment controls the activity of the Flp
protein and should provide insight into how SUMO acts in other crucial processes
as well. The investigator has received a Dean's Citation for her commitment to
education and through this award she will continue her contributions in that
area. Part of this project will be conducted by a graduate student as part of
her Ph.D. thesis research, and undergraduate students will participate in this
project through a summer research program. Students and postdoctoral researchers
performing this work will present their findings at departmental, city-wide, and
international meetings and through scientific publications.