* 0820612
* Tomato Chromosome 1 and 10 Sequencing, Coordination and Bioinformatics for the International Solanaceae Genome Initiative
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2015
* Stephen Stack, Boyce Thompson Institute Plant Research
* Cooperative Agreement
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 05/31/2015
* USD 10,407,225.00

PI: James J. Giovannoni (Boyce Thompson Institute for Plant
Research)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPIs: Bruce A. Roe (University of Oklahoma -
Norman), Lukas A. Mueller and Joyce Van Eck (Boyce Thompson Institute for Plant
Research), Stephen M. Stack (Colorado State University)
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The plant family Solanaceae includes tomato, pepper,
potato and eggplant and is the most important vegetable family worldwide in
terms of both economic value and volume of production. Tomato is also an
important model system for studying fruit biology and plant responses to disease
with discoveries impacting the production of many other crops. Recent advances
in DNA sequencing have made it feasible to sequence the entire genome of an
organism and an international consortium of 10 countries has initiated
sequencing of tomato as a reference genome for the Solanaceae family of crops.
This project represents the US contribution to the tomato genome sequencing
effort and specifically encompasses creation of: 1) a low resolution DNA
sequence of the entire tomato genome based on state-of-the-art sequencing
technologies, 2) high quality DNA sequence of two of the twelve tomato
chromosomes (chromosomes 1 and 10) to complement the remaining 10 chromosome
sequences being created by our international partners, and 3) creation and
enhancement of electronic web-based resources to allow characterization,
analysis and delivery of the tomato genome sequence to researchers who will
exploit it for biological discovery in tomato and additional crop species
important as sources of food, fiber and energy. Availability of a tomato genome
sequence will facilitate research and discovery leading to a broader
understanding of plant biology, biodiversity and domestication and will impact
agricultural improvement efforts directed toward crop sustainability,
productivity and quality of tomato and related
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project encompasses the US contribution to
the international tomato genome sequencing effort. Public access to a reference
genome sequence for tomato and related vegetable crops (potato, pepper,
eggplant) will support and accelerate research activities focused on both basic
understanding of plant biology and development of crop varieties with improved
yield, performance, quality and sustainability, thus enhancing US and world food
security. In addition to the impact of the resulting science, the project will
also provide education and training opportunities. Specifically, four Ph.D.
scientists (postdoctoral), two graduate students, approximately 20 undergraduate
students and 17 computer programmers, research technicians and other
professionals will receive training and employment under this project. The
project will provide public outreach activities including presentations to K -
12th graders at schools in the vicinity of the participating research
laboratories and summer research internship opportunities for ten undergraduate
students in addition to those mentioned above. The project partners with ongoing
USDA-funded research to convert output of the tomato genome sequencing effort
into tools to assist crop breeding in addition to the development of web-based
tools for their presentation to interested members of the research community and
the general public. Information developed through this project will be deposited
in the NCBI public DNA sequence database (GenBank), published in peer-reviewed
journals and presented through the Solanaceae Genomics Network database
(www.sgn.cornell.edu) that this project will support and expand.