* 0820057
* ADVANCE Partnerships for Adaptation, Implementation, and Dissemination (PAID) Award: Data Tools for Institutional Transformation: Collaboration, Synthesis, and Dissemination
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2008,01/31/2011
* Rachel Ivie, Commission on Professionals in Science & Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kelly M. Mack
* 01/31/2011
* USD 377,679.00

The Commission on Professionals in Science and Technology (CPST) will partner
with the American Institute of Physics (AIP) to: 1) Produce four white papers
reporting research findings from existing national data sources about career
paths of women, especially women of color with doctoral degrees to be
disseminated widely; and 2) Convene a national conference revisiting the
important report titled "The Double Bind: The Price of Being a Minority Woman in
Science" (Malcom, Hall and Brown 1975).

Intellectual Merit Nationally-available datasets like the National Study of
Postsecondary Faculty, the Survey of Earned Doctorates, the Survey of Doctorate
Recipients and the Scientists and Engineers Statistical Analysis System (SESTAT)
have not been sufficiently mined, yet these can provide larger-level comparator
information. Intellectually, the proposed project will involve careful work with
existing data that conforms to the highest standards of social science research
with the proposed white papers subjected to scrutiny by a panel of experts
(publications review board).

Broader Impacts The relatively small numbers of women of color combined with
their dispersion across fields and institutions have posed challenges to ADVANCE
efforts to date. By engaging in careful research on information from STEM
disciplinary societies and large, nationally-representative datasets, the
project will go far in describing the academic lives of women of color in
comparison to men of color, non-minority women, and non-minority men. These
datasets are available at multiple times therefore the project will document
trends for these groups to determine the extent and direction of change over the
past thirty years. Extensive dissemination is planned via multiple contexts
which will ensure that the information is distributed to key audiences.
Meetings, workshops, national conferences, and a targeted conference in the
project's final year along with the well-established CPST and AIP websites and
the ADVANCE portal will be used to access varied audiences with the results of
the work.