* 0820771
* MRI: Acquisition of a Multiple Collector ICPMS for Geochemical and Cosmochemical Studies at DTM
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2009
* Conel Alexander, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 06/30/2009
* USD 650,000.00

0820771&lt;br/&gt;Carlson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funds from this Major Research
Instrumentation (MRI) Program grant will support acquisition of a multicollector
inductively-coupled plasma mass spectrometer (MC-ICP-MS) and laser ablation (LA)
microprobe at the Carnegie Institution of Washington (CIW). The instrument will
augment and ultimately supplant two existing first generation MC-ICP-MS
instruments purchased 10 years ago with support from the NSF-MRI-EAR program.
These instruments are no longer supported by the manufacturer. A state-of-the-
art MC-ICP-MS and a 193 nm LA microprobe will allow for substantial improvements
in mass detection sensitivity, mass fractionation stability, detector accuracy,
reliability, and ease of use compared to existing first generation instruments
at CIW. A new LA-MC-ICP-MS would support a range of research in cosmo- and
geochemistry requiring microspatially resolved high precision analyses of
isotope ratios of alkali metals, transition metals, Platinum group (PGE) and
rare earth elements. The MC-ICP-MS will also allow for continuation of the
Carnegie isotope geochemistry postdoctoral program using the latest plasma mass
spectrometry techniques. Specific research areas that will be fostered with the
new instrument will include investigations of: 1) the degree of chemical and
isotopic heterogeneity in the early solar nebula and its influence on the bulk
composition of the terrestrial planets; 2) the timing of metal-silicate
fractionation on planetesimals and the degree of metal-silicate equilibrium
during formation of Earth?s core; 3) Re-Os isotopic and PGE abundance variations
as recorders of the history and processes of mantle differentiation in relation
to continent formation; and 4) processes that create compositional heterogeneity
in the
mantle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;