* 0820965
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Spectropolarimeter for Circular Dichroism and Magnetic Circular Dichroism Experiments
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2011
* James Larrabee, Middlebury College
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2011
* USD 76,748.00

The Department of Chemistry at Middlebury College will acquire a
spectropolarimeter with this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI)
program. It will be coupled to a variable field magnet to enable magnetic
circular dichroism (MCD) as well as circular dichroism (CD) measurements.
Studies by the principal investigator (PI) will utilize variable temperature,
variable field magnetic circular dichroism to determine the strength of the
magnetic coupling in a series of carboxylate-bridged Co(II) dimer complexes and
enzyme active sites which contain dinuclear Co(II). This will provide a more
detailed picture of the electronic ground state structure of this active site
motif commonly found in nature. MCD will be used by the co-PI to perform
exploratory experiments on the interactions of Ru(III) complexes with DNA
analogues. Two additional Middlebury biochemistry professors will use the
instrument to collect CD data for protein secondary structure analysis.

A circular dichroism spectropolarimeter will produce circular dichroism spectral
data that provides information on molecular structure and especially the
conformations of biomolecules such as proteins, enzymes and nucleic acids. In
magnetic circular dichroism, chirality is induced by a strong magnetic field
applied parallel to the direction of light propagation, a phenomenon known as
the Faraday effect. The behavior of MCD intensity with temperature and field
strength is dependent on the electronic ground state of the metal. Thus MCD is a
sensitive probe of the electronic structure associated with paramagnetic metals
ions in small complexes and protein active sites. The instrument will be used in
research by undergraduate students. This training will prepare students to
utilize this sophisticated technique in various careers, especially in chemical,
biological and health related fields.