* 0820033
* The Effects of School Desegregation on Crime
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2010
* Jens Ludwig, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2010
* USD 165,196.00

The 1954 decision of the Supreme Court in Brown v. Board of Education launched
one of the most important social policy changes of the 20th century. Most of the
research on school desegregation has focused on student academic outcomes. Yet
impacts on non-academic outcomes may be at least as important for understanding
social welfare or distributional consequences. Crime in particular is of central
interest given the enormous costs to society, perhaps as much as $2 trillion per
year. Ignoring this outcome may substantially distort benefit-cost analyses.
This is the first project to examine school desegregation effects on crime using
a plausibly exogenous source of identifying variation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to estimate the causal effects of
court-ordered school desegregation on crime. Theory yields ambiguous predictions
about the expected effect; desegregation orders could expose minority children
to more developmentally productive schools or peer groups, and some
desegregation orders required school districts to increase educational spending,
which together could reduce crime by black and white youth by improving
cognitive and non-cognitive skills and legal earnings prospects. On the other
hand court desegregation orders could also exacerbate racial tensions. To
examine this question the project exploits the fact that since the Supreme Court
transformative 1954 Brown decision, the majority of the largest school districts
were subject to mandatory, court-ordered desegregation plans. The timing of when
these plans went into effect is idiosyncratic and plausibly exogenous to other
determinants of youth outcomes. Support for this claim comes from preliminary
analyses of annual county-level homicide victimization data from the Vital
Statistics, which reveal no pre-existing trends in homicide before these court
orders went into effect. However preliminary analyses suggest that the
implementation of these orders reduce homicide victimization by around 25
percent for both black and white youth. Funding is requested to:&lt;br/&gt;(1)
Examine school desegregation effects on homicide offending as well as
victimization. While information about offenders is not available for crimes
without an arrest or at least identified suspect, these data still may help us
understand behavioral responses and distributional effects.&lt;br/&gt;(2)
Examine impacts on other types of crimes besides homicide. Since these offenses
are far more common, analyses of other crimes provide assurance that the
homicide results are not driven by small numbers of cases. Other crimes taken
together also impose large social costs.&lt;br/&gt;(3) Learn more about the
behavioral mechanisms through which school desegregation influences crime. For
example the preliminary analyses finds desegregation effects on homicide
victimization rates are about as large during the summer months as during the
school year, and impacts on homicide offending behavior may persist well into
adulthood. This project also examines how impacts vary by the design features of
the local school desegregation plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: Since the 1990s, federal courts have terminated many local
desegregation plans and in two major cases the Supreme Court recently struck
down plans in Seattle and Louisville. The findings on desegregation effects on
crime may help inform the litigation and legislative debates that are sure to
follow, and may help stimulate new research on how school desegregation impacts
a wide range of other non-academic outcomes. The results may also shed light on
the broader question about the degree to which social policies can provide cost-
effective alternatives to mass incarceration for crime control. The project will
produce a scientific paper targeted at a top-tier economics journal, a public-
use longitudinal dataset on crime and arrests going back to 1960, and an
accessible research brief.