* 0820307
* Empirical Studies of Production in Plants and Firms
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2011
* Chad Syverson, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2011
* USD 200,187.00

This project involves two empirical studies of plant and firm production
behavior. The first explores the production impacts of environmental regulation
on large segments of the U.S. economy. It uses factory-level data from the
Census of Manufactures to study several effects of pollution abatement costs
imposed by the Clean Air Act Amendments (CAAA). The second study investigates
why demand for the products of young plants (factories) is so small and slow-
growing relative to that of older plants in the same industry. The project uses
rarely available data on plants' physical quantities and prices for producers of
11 homogeneous manufactured goods to separately measure these demand- and
supply-side fundamentals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigation of
environmental regulation's influence on production studies impacts on plant
size, entry and exit, and productivity. It extends earlier work on the topic in
terms of both depth and scope. It accounts explicitly for the interrelatedness
of plant-level outcomes as well as interactions between regulatory effects and
pre-existing differences across plants. Further, while much research in this
area has involved case studies of a few industries or a small geographic area,
this project looks at the entire U.S. manufacturing sector (the source of a very
large share of the polluting activity regulated by the CAAA). The research
delivers sharply identified measurements of the sometimes costly consequences of
regulation, including costs of producer exits and productivity losses among
survivors. These are often missed in 'engineering cost' estimates of
regulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Knowing the full costs of environmental
regulations is necessary to determine optimal regulatory policy, as they are
balanced against the often substantial gains of reduced pollution.
Characterizing the nature and size of these full costs can inform not only CAAA
policy per se, but other environmental regulatory actions as well. The recent
policy debates about global warming, given the scale of some of the proposed
remedies, emphasize this point.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of new plants'
slow demand growth digs into specific explanations for the widely noted fact
that new plants are so much smaller than older ones. Differences in
productivity/costs have been proposed as an explanation in earlier work, but the
study shows this is not the case: new plants' productivity levels are just as
high as older plants'?. Instead, the explanation appears to lie in slow-acting
demand dynamics (customer base growth or reputation building, for example). The
uncertainties tied to these processes cause firms to wait to expand new plants
until further information is known about demand. These dynamic demand factors
are quantified using a model of plant growth that explicitly accounts for, and
helps identify, the intertemporal links that create the observed inertia-laden
demand growth paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Knowing why new plants look so much
different than older plants despite selling what are very similar products can
guide small business policy. Many of the new plants that will be studied are
owned by firms under the purview of the U.S. Small Business Administration.
These findings can supplement that agency's ongoing research program.