* 0820124
* Correlation and heterogeneity robust inference using conservativeness of test statistics
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Rustam Ibragimov, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2012
* USD 214,379.00

Empirical studies in economics and finance often face the difficulty that the
data is correlated and heterogeneous or heavy-tailed in some unknown fashion.
Many estimators of parameters of interest remain valid and interesting even
under the presence of correlation and heterogeneity or heavy tails, but it
becomes considerably more challenging to correctly estimate their sampling
variability. Several methods have been proposed in econometrics to deal with the
problem of heteroskedasticity and correlation. The typical approach is to use
consistent variance estimators. While powerful and quite general, in many cases,
the approach leads to tests that have poor finite sample properties. More
recently, a number of inference procedures have been developed that do not rely
on consistency of the variance estimator. In many settings, these procedures
have better finite sample properties than the methods based on consistent
variance estimation. However, their performance is still problematic in a number
of heteroskedasticity and dependence setups. Development of new robust
approaches to inference under heterogeneity and correlation with a wide range of
applicability is, therefore, of significant interest in modern econometrics.
This project focuses on further analysis and applications of the t-statistic
based approaches to robust large sample inference and on development of general
related procedures that rely on conservativeness of test statistics employed in
the analysis. In particular, it develops robust tests for equality of two or
more parameters of interest using general results on conservativeness of
Behrens-Fisher statistic for testing equality of two means and its extensions.
The project focuses on the analysis of conservativeness properties of ratios of
Gaussian quadratic forms, F-statistics, variance ratio statistics, empirical
autocorrelation coefficients and Dickey-Fuller and Phillips-Perron test
statistics under heteroskedasticity and dependence in observations. These
results are employed to develop robust approaches to testing equality of model
parameters, robust tests for random walks, uncorrelatedness, stationarity and
unit roots, and tests for structural breaks. The statistical approaches proposed
are used to develop robust inference procedures for various economic and
financial variables and indices. In particular, they are applied to analysis of
the asymptotics and robust confidence intervals for Sharpe ratio and other
financial indices and also for a number of commonly used poverty, inequality and
concentration measures under dependence, heterogeneity and heavy
tails.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project integrates research and
education by including research results into the syllabus of graduate and
undergraduate courses the investigator is teaching and by collaborating with
student research assistants on the numerical parts of the study. The results
obtained in the project will be disseminated broadly in publications in peer-
reviewed journals and in discussion papers. They will also be presented at
conferences and seminars on economics, finance and statistics and at meetings of
professional societies in these fields. The project benefits society at large in
several important ways. In particular, one of the main planned outcomes of the
study is a toolbox of statistical approaches that are of importance to
researchers and students in many different areas of knowledge where
heterogeneity and dependence in data are typically encountered. In addition, the
analysis provides reliable statistical methods for making sound economic and
financial decisions, including those related to poverty reduction and income
distribution.