* 0820088
* Collaborative Research: Passivity-based Architecture for Software Design of Dynamic Networked Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Xenofon Koutsoukos, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2012
* USD 600,000.00

NSF Proposals 0820088/0819865&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Collaborative
Research: Passivity-based Architecture for Software Design of Dynamic Networked
Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PIs: Xenofon Koutsoukos (0820088), Panos Antsaklis
(0819865)&lt;br/&gt;Co-PI: Janos Sztipanovits, &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Real-life
Cyber Physical Systems (CPSs), such as autonomous vehicles and building
automation systems, are monitored and controlled by networked control systems.
In CPSs, the overall system dynamics emerges from the interaction among physical
dynamics, computational dynamics, and communication networks. This project aims
at addressing the fundamental problems in constructing CPSs caused by network
uncertainties, such as time varying delay, jitter, data rate limitations, packet
loss and others, by exploiting the inherent safety of passive systems. The
project will develop (1) the theoretical foundations for passivity-based design
of networked control systems that provide an effective way to interconnect
multiple passive systems together and preserve stability and performance in the
presence of time varying delays and data dropouts and (2) model-based design
processes for developing and analyzing software utilizing the compositionality
and the orthogonality across design views stemming from the underlying passivity
principles. The research plan includes a software tool-chain for passivity-based
design, an implementation of the passivity-based architecture on a distributed
hardware platform, and experimental studies for demonstrating the approach. The
project serves as an excellent example for the rich societal context and
extensive interdisciplinary interactions that future computer scientists and
engineers will face as CPS technology is becoming increasingly pervasive.
&lt;br/&gt;