* 0820394
* A Multigenerational Longitudinal Study of Language Development: Insight from Autism
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2008,02/28/2011
* Thomas Wassink, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 02/28/2011
* USD 276,000.00

This project will investigate the genetic underpinnings of language development
by studying language-related abilities in families of children with autism.
Autism is a severe developmental disorder defined by profound impairments in
language, as well as social-emotional functioning and restricted, repetitive
interests and behaviors. Although evidence supports a role of genetic factors in
autism, the identification of susceptibility genes remains an elusive goal. This
project will characterize developmental language profiles present among
unaffected family members (parents and siblings), which may be linked to the
genes involved in autism. To do so, this study capitalizes on an unprecedented
opportunity -- the availability of archival childhood language testing records
from a large cohort of families with a child with autism. Using these valuable
data, the study will characterize language development of parents and siblings
longitudinally over the early school-age years, documenting these relatives'
developmental pathways of early language functioning that may be related to the
genes involved in autism. The study will also collect DNA from individuals with
autism and their family members so that their profiles may be applied to genetic
studies examining links to specific genetic variants. Finally, this research
will examine relatives' current language profiles and address environmental
factors that may protect or augment baseline genetic liability. This could
reflect gene-environment interactions, which are critical in understanding
factors that influence language development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Autism is a
major public health concern. Though once considered to be relatively rare,
striking new prevalence estimates of 1 in 150 recently prompted the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention to declare autism a national public health
crisis. Such reports underscore the pressing urgency for determining the cause
of this serious disorder. Information obtained from this study will help target
genetic research in autism via the study of genes differentially associated with
language functioning in families with a child with autism. That is, by examining
developmental pathways of early language functioning among relatives, the study
aims to identify developmental profiles that may reflect genetic liability to
autism and will be used in current and future molecular genetic studies. In
addition, results provide insight into the underpinnings of language development
more generally. The study of developmental growth in genetically-based disorders
such as autism can provide crucial insights into genetic and environmental
processes of healthy development. Findings from this research may therefore
provide a foundation for future work on the genetics of language.