* 0820568
* RIG/CAA: Development of Lateralized Gene Expression Patterns in the Rodent Brain
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/2007,03/31/2010
* Brenda Claiborne, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 03/31/2010
* USD 173,375.00

The overall objective of this Career Advancement Award is for the PI to learn
molecular techniques to enhance her research career and to improve her
capabilities for mentoring minority and female students in biology at the
University of Texas at San Antonio, a minority-serving institution.

Intellectual Merit: Lateralization of cerebral function is found in a variety of
species, ranging from amphibians to mammals, but the genetic basis of functional
asymmetry is not known. Recently the PI and her colleagues demonstrated
differential expression of functional genes in the right and left hippocampal
formation of the developing rat. Surprisingly, they found that differentially
expressed genes were more robustly expressed in the right hippocampus in the
first week of life but were more highly expressed in the left hippocampus in the
second week and in young adults. These are exciting and novel results. It is not
known, however, when lateralized expression first occurs during development or
whether the shift in lateralized expression can be modified by environmental
stimuli.

Here the PI will test the hypothesis that lateralized gene expression patterns
first occur in the embryonic hippocampus. Using microarrays and Real-Time (RT)
PCR, expression patterns of genes related to neuronal function will be compared
in the right and left hippocampi from embryonic and early postnatal rats. Data
generated here will serve as the basis for future experiments aimed at
determining whether developmental genes or environmental factors influence the
initial establishment of preferential gene expression. The PI will also test the
hypothesis that experience during early postnatal development affects
lateralized expression of synapse-related genes. Preliminary data indicate that
handling young animals may delay or prevent the right-to-left shift in
preferential gene expression in the hippocampus. If this is the case, the
present study will be the first to demonstrate that environmental factors can
influence the development of lateralized expression patterns of functional genes
in the mammalian brain.

The results of this work will provide novel insights into the development of
asymmetric patterns of gene expression in the brain and will lead to future
experiments by the PI on the genetic and environmental factors that contribute
to lateralized gene expression.

Broader Impacts: This project will both advance discovery and enhance the
training and education of students in the biological sciences. It will also
broaden the participation of minorities and females in biology and will enhance
the infrastructure for scientific research by increasing collaborative
partnerships. The PI is a senior investigator with a successful record of
mentoring minorities and women in neuroscience. Here she will advance her career
in biology by learning the molecular techniques necessary to complete the
proposed experiments in her lab at the University of Texas at San Antonio
(UTSA), a Hispanic-serving institution. To do so, she will collaborate with
investigators at an established research institution. She will spend time in her
collaborator's lab and will learn how to use microarrays and RT-PCR to analyze
gene expression patterns. In addition, she will audit courses on molecular and
cell biology at her home institution and will attend local seminars and symposia
at meetings related to the molecular aspects of brain development. The results
of the experiments will be broadly disseminated; they will be published in
relevant journals, and the PI will give seminars and informal talks on the data.

Both minority and female students will participate in all aspects of the present
project and will interact with the PI's collaborators, thereby enhancing their
chances of completing a degree in the biological sciences. At least 3 minority
students and 2 female students (undergraduate and graduate) will be recruited
for the project. Minority students currently make up 57% of the student
population at UTSA, and many students are interested in participating in
research. Students will learn basic lab techniques and the methodologies for
assaying gene expression patterns in the brain. They will learn to present data
and to write abstracts and manuscripts. The PI will provide informal counseling
about postgraduate and summer research programs, as well as career options.
Importantly, the PI will incorporate her new knowledge into her teaching
activities at both the undergraduate and graduate level. Because minority
students account for at least half of the students in her classes, this project