* 0820054
* Materials Research Science and Engineering Center
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2015
* Ka Yee Lee, University of Chicago
* Cooperative Agreement
* Daniele Finotello
* 08/31/2015
* USD 17,397,500.00

The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at the University
of Chicago supports innovative research to produce the design principles for the
next generation of materials. The research is focused on investigating materials
formed far from equilibrium, exploring new paradigms for material fabrication
and response, and exploiting feedback between structure and dynamics. Senior
investigators come from seven Departments and five Institutes of University of
Chicago and two Divisions at the neighboring Argonne National Laboratory. In
addition to training a diverse group of graduate and undergraduate students, the
Chicago MRSEC brings science inquiry experiences to underserved students in
neighboring communities on Chicago's South Side including programs for students
and teachers and after-school Science Clubs. The MRSEC provides summer research
opportunities to undergraduate students from all over USA. As part of its
outreach to the general public, the MRSEC collaborates with Chicago's Museum of
Science and Industry, the Exploratorium in San Francisco, and SciTech in Aurora,
IL to develop materials science exhibits and to introduce graduate students to
museum-exhibit development. The MRSEC is committed to increasing the Center
diversity as reflected in the significant participation by women in the Center's
investigators and leadership. The MRSEC has international collaborations with
universities in Chile and Holland.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research at this MRSEC
is organized in four Interdisciplinary Research Groups (IRGs): (i) The IRG on
Jamming and Slow Relaxation in Materials Far From Equilibrium considers the
factors causing flowing systems to become rigid and trapped far from
equilibrium. Its goal is to pursue new types of materials processing to exploit
effects of aging and memory common to jammed and glassy materials. (ii) The IRG
on Dynamic Transitions of Material Sheets focuses on the dynamics of interfaces,
such as on the surface of a droplet or a membrane. The goal is to use the
instabilities at interfaces to shape materials to create structure where
explicit shaping is impractical. (iii) The IRG on Rational Design of
Nanoparticle and Molecule-Based Functional Materials develops tools to create
new classes of materials based on the large assortment of nanometer-sized
particles now available. Goals include understanding the fundamentals of nano-
particle self-organization to tune array properties. (iv) The IRG on Macroscopic
Quantum Coherence seeks to establish control of materials by addressing
fundamental issues in quantum materials engineering. The goal is to create
macroscopically-coherent states by focusing on systems that can be finely tuned
to enable precise control of the complex quantum dynamics for the creation of
useful devices. &lt;br/&gt;