* 0820983
* MRI: Acquisition of Instrumentations for Studying Complex Contaminants in Water
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Clifford Bruell, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2011
* USD 100,304.00

CBET-0820983&lt;br/&gt;Lee&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Civil and Environmental
Engineering (CEE) department at the University of Massachusetts Lowell (UMass
Lowell) will use the funding from this MRI proposal toward the acquisition of
two complementary analytical instrumentations to study complex contaminants in
water. The instrumentation cluster consists of a highly sensitive Gas
Chromatography-Mass Spectroscopy (GC/MS) system and an Ion Chromatography (IC)
system. The requested GC/MS system is the Agilent Technologies 5975C Series
system and the IC system is the Dionex Corporation ICS-1000 system. The
requested instrumentations will also be used for several undergraduate and
graduate educational activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UMass Lowell CEE
faculty will use the requested instrumentations for student training, and to
study a variety of complex organic and inorganic environmental contaminants
including, but not limiting to, research projects on (a) water quality and
environmental impacts from alternative fuels such as the E85 fuel and coal-
derived liquid fuels; (b) groundwater contamination from coal tars; (c) iron
activated sodium persulfate for in situ chemical oxidation of groundwater
contaminants; (d) trace compounds in water such as medicines, cosmetic products,
hormones, and other personal care products; (e) phosphorus removal in
retrofitted wastewater secondary treatment systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UMass
Lowell is located in Lowell Massachusetts, approximately 25 miles northwest from
downtown Boston. UMass Lowell serves the educational needs for a diverse group
of students from Massachusetts as well as from other states and nations. The
Civil and Environmental Engineering department is committed to the University's
goal of attracting students from minority and underrepresented groups. The
requested instrumentations will be instrumental in training and preparing the
next generation of UMass Lowell engineering students, particularly CEE students,
for employment and advanced studies.