* 0820887
* MRI:  Acquisition of Step-and-Flash Lithography Tool for Nanometer-Scaled Surface Engineering
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2011
* James Coleman, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 07/31/2011
* USD 520,518.00

CBET-0820887&lt;br/&gt;Cunningham&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal was
submitted by 5 Investigators and 4 Senior Personnel from the departments of
Electrical and Computer Engineering, Mechanical Science and Engineering and
Bioengineering. The PI, Brian Cunningham, PhD in Electrical Engineering, UIUC,
1990, Associate Professor of Electrical and Computer Engineering, joined the
UIUC faculty after nearly 10 years in industry. His work is supported by SRU
Biosystems, NSF, DOD, NIH and the Beckman Institute and he has 23 patents
awarded for optical sensors and components and more than 20 patents pending. .
Rashid Bashir, PhD from Purdue, 1992, just moved to UICU in the fall of 2007 as
the Bliss Professor of Electrical and Computer Engineering % Bioengineering and
the Director of MNTL. Dr. Bashir has impressive credentials and support from
NSF, NIH and NASA. Ken-Yung Cheng, PhD in Electrical Engineering from Stanford,
1975, Professor of Electrical and Computer Engineering, is the Director of the
DARPA University Photonics Research Center for Hyper-Uniform Nanophotonic
Technology. Kent Choquette, PhD in Materials Science from the University of
Wisconsin-Madison, 1990, joined the UIUC Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering in 2000 after nearly 10 years of experience at AT&amp;T and Sandia
National Labs. His photonics research is supported by NSF and DARPA. James
Coleman, PhD in EE from UIUC, 1975, Professor of Electrical and Computer
Engineering and Materials Science and Engineering, has published extensively and
holds 6 patents. The Senior Investigators, Nicholas Fang, Milton Feng, Placid
Ferreira and William King (NSF CAREER and DOE PECASE awardee), are likewise well
funded. In general, the team leading this effort is outstanding. Ten research
projects, with all but one currently receiving support from NSF, NIH, NASA, ONR,
or DARPA, were described in some detail including information about how access
to the proposed lithography equipment, which would enable imprinting more
quickly and of larger areas, would benefit research efforts.