* 0820940
* Functional Analysis of an Indoleacyl-Modified Protein From Strawberry
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2008,02/29/2012
* Janet Slovin, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 02/29/2012
* USD 229,052.00

Award: IOS-0820940. Principle Investigator: Gardner, Gary M. Title: Functional
Analysis of an Indoleacyl-Modified Protein From Strawberry&lt;br/&gt;Award
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Strawberry fruit are a classic system for studies
of the signaling between adjacent tissues as the expansion of the receptacle
tissue is dependent on auxin released from the achenes. Within the last several
years significant genetic resources for Fragaria and other members of the
Rosaceae have been developed such that the diploid strawberry is now an
important reference species for molecular characterization of studies of
hormonal signaling within fruit tissues. Indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) is found in
plants in both free and conjugated form. Among the conjugated IAA forms, there
exists a unique class of proteins where IAA is a prosthetic group attached
directly to the polypeptide structure. The first gene, for a bean protein with
an IAA prosthetic group, has been cloned and a related protein and several
smaller peptides were identified in Arabidopsis. The work in this project
focuses on a unique IAA-modified protein found in the achenes and receptacle
tissue of strawberry that has been shown to be the beta subunit of ATP synthase.
This is the first IAA-protein with a predicted function to be described. While
we have a general interest in understanding indoleacylation of plant proteins,
the goals of the current project are focused on an indoleacyl-modified
mitochondrial F1-ATP synthase from the diploid strawberry, Fragaria vesca. The
project will focus on two main goals: 1. the use of mass spectral tools for
determination of the site of IAA attachment; and 2. determination of the
function of the IAA-modification on the ATP
synthase.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the project are as follows.
This project will directly support one postdoctoral scientist and one graduate
student who will be involved in this project that requires, in addition to plant
biochemistry and molecular biology, specific expertise in the use of modern
techniques of protein and small molecule mass spectrometric analysis to answer
fundamental questions in plant biology. It will also provide a resource for
others interested in studies of novel native modified peptides and studies of
plant hormone metabolism, either as visitors to the host laboratory or by
transfer of the methods to their own facility.