* 0820472
* Strategic Experts
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2008,12/31/2010
* Alvaro Sandroni, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 12/31/2010
* USD 212,675.00

Forecasting is a central activity to economic development. Consumers,
governments, and firms base their decision partly on professional forecasters.
In complex environments, self-declared experts both volunteer and sell
predictions on a plethora of subjects like health, the economy, the stock
market, politics, and the weather. However, it is not easy to determine whether
professional forecasts are a product of any relevant knowledge. Hence, a basic
question is whether (and how) it is possible to distinguish the predictions of
knowledgeable experts from the predictions of impostors.

This leads to the question of how to empirically test forecasts. This project
uses tools from economic theory to consider one particular problem with forecast
testing. If professional forecasts must be empirically tested, then this may
induce the experts to forecast strategically to pass the test. This is
problematic; testing forecasts (because we do not know the quality of the
experts) may induce the experts to misrepresent what they know. This research
project considers whether or not many empirical tests (including tests that are
frequently used in practice) can be manipulated by fraudulent experts.

In particular, the research studies whether or not it is possible to construct
forecasting strategies, based on no relevant knowledge, that are guaranteed to
pass the test no matter how the data evolves in the future. If such a strategy
exists, a fraudulent 'expert' can make this kind of forecast confident that he
will pass the test even though he has no real knowledge of the subject. A good
example of a manipulable test is the calibration test: it requires that the
empirical frequency of an event to be close to p in the days that the event in
question was forecasted to occur with probability p. However, the calibration
test is just one example of a manipulable test. Preliminary results suggest that
many empirical tests used in practice are manipulable. This shows that it is
difficult to dismiss fraudulent, but strategic, experts. In addition, the
project also constructs novel empirical tests that true experts will pass and
that cannot be manipulated by fraudulent experts. In the process, the project
delivers a better understanding of how data and theory must comply with each
other. Moreover, the project also delivers new insights on a series of basic
concepts in science such as the need for classification, falsification, the use
of priors, and the use of paradigms.

The intellectual merit of the project arises from the innovative ways in which
strategies for manipulating empirical tests are employed and also from the
development of novel empirical tests that are immune to manipulation. The
project may have a broad impact as it shows how ideas in economics and game
theory can be combined with concepts in probability and statistics to deliver a
formal analysis of several basic concepts in science. This leads to a better
understanding of these fundamental concepts and also to novels ways to test
theories.