* 0820456
* Mechanistic and Structural Studies of Novel Heme-Containing Enzymes
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* Bert Ely, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 08/31/2014
* USD 603,712.00

Intellectual Merit. Heme-iron containing peroxidases are enzymes that catalyze
organic substrate oxidation while reducing hydrogen peroxide to water. Two novel
heme peroxidases isolated from marine sea worms, one able to incorporate halide
ions such as chloride and bromide into aromatic molecules and the other able to
remove them, will be studied. The haloperoxidase, Notomastus lobatus
chloroperoxidase (NCPO), halogenates phenols and is unusual in requiring an
organic flavin component. Amphitrite ornata dehaloperoxidase (DHP) dehalogenates
halophenols. Surprisingly, the structure of DHP is that of a globin - the same
protein fold found in hemo- and myoglobin (Mb). It is the first known enzymatic
globin. The unique structural properties of these two peroxidases bring into
question whether they utilize a new peroxidase mechanism. A four-prong
hypothesis-driven experimental plan will be followed. First, rapid kinetics
experiments will probe the mechanism of DHP and NCPO catalysis and directly
determine whether the traditional or an alternative mechanism is employed.
Second, the ability of DHP and NCPO to carry out standard peroxidase reactions
will be extensively tested in order to advance our understanding of DHP and NCPO
function. Third, designed DHP and Mb mutants will be prepared to probe the
mechanistic role of specific amino acids near the DHP heme and explore factors
in the heme/globin environment that enhance DHP function relative to Mb. Fourth,
NCPO will be cloned, expressed and structurally characterized. Small NCPO
crystals have been obtained. NCPO is a complex multi-subunit hemoflavoenzyme;
the roles of its subunits are unknown. Such enzymes with peroxidase activity
have not yet been reported. Studies of its structure and mechanism will provide
new information about halogenation in higher organisms. Investigations of
complex multi-subunit-containing systems, such as those proposed herein, are at
the cutting edge of mechanistic enzymology. Overall, the two novel peroxidases
challenge the current view of how peroxidases function. The research will probe
how nature has redesigned small globin-fold proteins into peroxidases and
thereby will extend the boundaries of our understanding of structure/function
relations in such enzymes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The research
combines the diverse disciplines of chemistry, molecular genetics and evolution,
structural biology, and spectroscopy, and promotes interaction among chemistry
and biology faculty and students via regular meetings of the three research
groups. Students, from high school to post-graduate, will be trained.
Undergraduates will continue to make significant research contributions. The
three PIs have strong records training underrepresented minorities recently
including two African-American students. One of the PIs directs SCienceLab, an
outreach program for middle/high school science teachers and students. A
specific 'Enzyme-Catalyzed Toxic Cleanup' SCiLab designed around biological
dehaloperoxidases will provide a daylong hands-on, inquiry-based lab experience
and convey the excitement of interfacing biological, chemical and environmental
research. The goal is to show students how biological catalysts might be used in
bioremediation technology. Moreover, the research results will continue to be
used teaching graduate enzymology, crystallography and metallobiochemistry
courses. The fundamental chemical/biochemical progress achieved may lead to the
development of applications in the broader areas of biotechnology and
bioremediation and will impact related ecological and environmental research.