* 0820567
* Probing Dynamics Within an Enzyme Family
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Elan Eisenmesser, University of Colorado at Denver
* Standard Grant
* Michele McGuirl
* 07/31/2011
* USD 369,847.00

Intellectual Merit: Enzymes are proteins that must undergo complex movements in
order to catalyze their biological reactions. A relatively recent discovery is
that enzymes must be inherently flexible and that enzymes undergo motions that
are localized to their active sites even in the absence of substrates. These
inherent movements have, in a sense, been pre-programmed for their catalytic
function, but exactly what this relationship is and how they relate across a
family of enzymes remains unknown. Although the genomics era has provided both
sequence and structural information, little has been learned with regard to
enzyme dynamics. Such knowledge will be instrumental in understanding the
evolutionary pressures that dictate protein dynamics in addition to those that
dictate both sequence and structure. Thus, the focus of this research is to
understand how enzymes, and proteins in general, have evolved to undergo their
dynamic movements by investigating the relationship between sequence, structure,
dynamics, and function among a family of enzymes. The current project involves
the first investigation comparing dynamic behavior on the same timescales as
biological processes (micro-millisecond timescales) within a family of human
enzymes. The dynamics behavior of multiple human cyclophilin family members will
be compared using recently developed nuclear magnetic resonances (NMR)
techniques. These enzymes catalyze the reversible isomerization of proline
peptide bonds and play numerous biological roles, including aiding in protein
folding, signal transduction, and protein trafficking. The reversible nature of
this reaction is a critical aspect of this study, since the active enzyme
complexes will be directly probed during turnover and the relationship between
their inherent movements associated with catalytic motions will be directly
determined. Moreover, when combined with mutagenesis, the site-specific roles of
both conserved and non-conserved residues to the overall dynamic behavior across
a family of enzymes will be assessed. Thus, these studies will determine for the
first time whether there are preferences for interactions that lead to dynamic
flexibility within enzymes or, conversely, interactions that limit motions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This research will include the mentoring
of both graduate and undergraduates students with a fundamentally different
approach to characterizing macromolecules that looks beyond static structural
descriptions. The project also includes activities aimed at stimulating
undergraduates, especially members of underrepresented groups, to engage in
biological research. Furthermore, the study of macromolecular motions on the
same timescales as biological processes opens a new window to directly studying
conformational events broadly applicable to other biological systems. Thus,
inspiring a young generation of researchers to begin asking an entirely new set
of questions at the atomic level is a fundamental aspect of this work.