* 0820668
* TRMS:  An Integrative Study of Plant Mitochondrial Biology
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Sally Mackenzie, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2011
* USD 1,420,753.00

PI: Sally Mackenzie (University of Nebraska) CoPIs: Alan Christensen (University
of Nebraska), Tom Elthon (University of Nebraska), Dong Wang (University of
Nebraska) Collaborator: Andrew Benson (University of
Nebraska)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant mitochondrial genomes have undergone a
number of changes in their structure and maintenance properties that distinguish
them from their mammalian counterparts. Most plant genomes characterized to date
are a complex collection of linear and circular interconverting molecules that
display evidence of recombination, foreign DNA integration and changes in
relative copy number. These genomic activities are controlled by nuclear genes
that can be manipulated in their expression to cause mitochondrial genome
instability. Using this approach in tomato, tobacco, millet, sorghum, soybean
and Arabidopsis allows for cross-species comparison of mitochondrial genome
disruption. This project exploits this system to identify cellular and
developmental pathways that are directly influenced by mitochondrial genome
status, conserved across plant species, and evidenced by changes in plant
phenotypes. The central hypothesis of the project states that mitochondrial
status in plants is integrated into discrete pathways for plastid development,
pollen development, cell cycle control and particular plant stress responses.
The project provides unique entry to these pathway integration points by
combining Arabidopsis mutant analysis and cross-species comparisons with
mitochondrial and gene expression analysis. While it has long been known that
plant mitochondria play distinct roles in metabolism, growth and development,
direct mitochondrial manipulations prior to this study were largely restricted
to inhibitor studies with limited opportunity for extrapolation to whole plant
phenotype. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the study. &lt;br/&gt;Plant
mitochondrial genome rearrangement can lead to altered plant phenotypes of
agricultural importance. For example, these studies have already produced
evidence of cytoplasmic male sterility, a trait useful in hybrid seed production
and transgene containment, and of enhanced crop thermotolerance. Both valuable
traits are difficult to attain using conventional crop breeding approaches. With
regard to training opportunities, the Center for Plant Science Innovation (PSI)
at University of Nebraska sponsors an undergraduate summer internship program
that integrates to the proposed project; through this program, four minority
students have already been recruited into graduate programs in the past two
years. The PSI also directs the Nebraska Molecular Plant Breeding Graduate
Program; this project sponsors at least two plant breeding students on the
proposed project. Currently, the US faces a critical shortage of plant breeders
with cross-cutting expertise in field management of transgenic crops, DNA
marker-based selection, statistics, and comparative genomics. This project
provides fertile ground for such training, in cooperation with plant breeders on
campus and in industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project data will be accessible via
http://psiweb.unl.edu/mackenzie/ and gene expression data released to
ArrayExpress (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/microarray-as/ae/).