* 0821863
* MRI: Development of Single-Molecule NEMS Mass Spectrometry
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Michael Roukes, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Vicki Martin
* 08/31/2011
* USD 620,000.00

A grant has been awarded to California Institute of Technology under the
supervision of Professor Michael Roukes to develop instrumentation for next-
generation mass spectrometry based on nanoelectromechanical systems (NEMS). NEMS
devices, given their extremely minute size, are exquisitely sensitive to added
mass -- even down to the addition of individual molecules. These sensors now
form the basis for a new approach to molecular identification, NEMS-based mass
spectrometry (NEMS-MS), for resolving vast numbers of molecules, one-by-one.
This project will culminate in assembly of benchtop NEMS-MS systems and their
automated control electronics. In domestic and international collaborations with
leaders in proteomics mass spectrometry, these systems will enable pioneering,
benchmarking studies of NEMS-MS proteomics, ultimately carried out on individual
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research in the life sciences and medicine now
requires significant technological innovation to proceed from the post-genomics
era to new frontiers in single-molecule proteomics. Especially important, and
especially challenging, is research in ?systems biology?, which strives to
elucidate the deterministic biochemical ?circuit diagrams? for living systems.
These ?circuits? hierarchically encompass the entire organism -- from organs, to
individual cells, down to cascades of individual molecular processes within
cells that give them their function. Through advanced and, of necessity,
massively-detailed measurements it will ultimately become possible to assemble
complex blueprints for living systems, down to their fine details, routinely.
This will provide an unparalleled window into how living systems function and,
thus, provide unprecedented predictive power. Such deterministic research on
biological systems will ultimately help engender predictive and personalized
medicine based upon a person?s genetic predispositions and present physiological
state. NEMS-MS promises a new paradigm that is essential for such research:
high-throughput biological mass spectrometry with single-molecule resolution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;