* 0821599
* MRI:  Development of PAEROS (Portable AERosol Observing System) for Global Observations
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2008,04/30/2013
* Gregory Roberts, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 04/30/2013
* USD 1,247,692.00

The Portable AERosol Observing System (PAEROS) is a development project for a
miniaturized instrument package that, when deployed, is expected to provide
worldwide observations of aerosols and cloud condensation nuclei (CCN). Small
autonomous networks are the future of in-situ atmospheric observations and will
dramatically increase spatial coverage, reliability and cost efficiency. The
development of PAEROS utilizes techniques developed by the PI to miniaturize and
automate payloads for unmanned aerial systems (funded by NSF and NOAA). The
compact instrument package (suit-case size and less than 20 kg -an order of
magnitude smaller and lighter than current systems) will be designed to operate
unattended for up to two months at a time for deployment on research vessels
managed by Scripps Institution of Oceanography (SIO) as they traverse the
world's oceans. Once built, PAEROS is expected to be used at selected
observatories, such as Observatoires de Recherche en Environnment (ORE) and
Global Atmospheric Watch (GAW) sites. Long-term data sets of CCN are virtually
non-existent because of the past need for frequent user intervention and high
overhead costs associated with the large infrastructure to house the
instrumentation. The science benefits of autonomous miniature systems will be
potentially numerous as the applications can be extended to remote-ground
observations, lightweight unmanned aerial vehicles, interchangeable wing pods,
oceanographic vessels and buoys - ultimately improving our science. It is the
PIs' goal that this new system serves as a reliable and observationally-based
characterization of aerosols that will be used for climate studies and as model
input for Global Climate Model simulations of climate change. &lt;br/&gt;The
fundamental objectives of this research are to:&lt;br/&gt;- develop miniature
autonomous aerosol packages for continuous measurements of CCN (0.1 to 2%
supersaturation; miniature CCN instruments under development by PI at SIO),
aerosol number (condensation particle counter) and size distribution (10 to 1000
nm; scanning mobility particle sizer and optical particle counter), absorbing
aerosols (single particle soot photometer), temperature, relative humidity,
pressure, wind speed and direction. The goal is to achieve a weatherproof
observing system the size of a small suitcase (ca. 60 × 40 × 30 cm) which weighs
less than 20 kg.&lt;br/&gt;- extend the operation of the CCN instrument to
measure continuous supersaturation spectra with a single column. &lt;br/&gt;-
couple the electrostatic classifier with CCN and absorbing carbon (AC)
measurements for CCN and AC size distributions (as well as traditional number
size distributions) to extract chemical information of the aerosols as a
function of supersaturation and size. &lt;br/&gt;- operate PAEROS on the Scripps
Pier and R/V Horizon (Scripps) during local experiments to verify instrument
performance and prepare package for continuous observations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Intellectual Merit: Robust instrumentation and long-term
observations of aerosols (especially cloud condensation nuclei) are essential to
unraveling aerosol-cloud interactions and their effect on the earth's radiative
budget. SIO research vessels provide critical access to the world's oceans for
studying natural and anthropogenic sources of aerosols and their effect on
clouds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Broader Impact: The development of PAEROS
addresses all five components of Broader Impacts as defined by the National
Science Board. PAEROS will dramatically expand the capability of the atmospheric
research community to measure aerosols and CCN, transcending the limitations of
current technology. Through direct involvement of students and interns in the
research, and PI involvement in a workforce initiative, this project promotes
teaching, training and learning with special attention to broadening the
participation of groups underrepresented in science and engineering. The PIs'
work will enhance the infrastructure for research through development and broad
dissemination of next-generation technology and instrumentation. Used by
experimentalists and modelers alike, the data collected will lead to
increasingly robust global climate models, enhance understanding of natural and
anthropogenic climate change, and ultimately inform critical environmental
decision-making.