* 0821062
* MRI: Acquisition of Controlled Environment Plant Growth Chambers For Research And Teaching In The Plant Sciences
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Jennifer Ward, University of North Carolina at Asheville
* Standard Grant
* Vicki Martin
* 08/31/2010
* USD 127,487.00

National Science Foundation funding will allow the purchase of four controlled
environment plant growth chambers for the University of North Carolina at
Asheville?s Biology Department. This equipment will enhance the quality and
quantity of both teaching and research for professors and undergraduate students
in the natural sciences. Use of these chambers will be fully incorporated into
the Biology Department?s undergraduate science curriculum, with students first
exposed to the chambers in our sophomore-level plant biology class. Cohorts of
talented students, particularly those from underrepresented groups, will then be
recruited to participate in undergraduate research with the three principal
investigators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By controlling variables such as light
intensity, day length, temperature, and humidity, students and faculty will be
able to investigate how genetic differences among plants explain differences in
growth, development, and reproduction. Growth chambers will also allow
researchers to change environmental conditions to elucidate plants? adaptations
to a shifting global climate. Finally, the growth chambers will be used in
exploring the biology of exotic-invasive plant species. These non-native plants
pose particular threats to the health of native plant communities and high
quality natural areas, and understanding the ways in which they interact with
abiotic environmental factors will help control their spread.&lt;br/&gt;