* 0821750
* MRI:  Development of an Always-Available Testbed for Underwater Networking Research
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Urbashi Mitra, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 07/31/2012
* USD 500,000.00

Proposal #: CNS 08-21750&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Ye, Wei&lt;br/&gt; Heidemann, John S.;
Mitra, Urbashi&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Southern
California&lt;br/&gt; Los Angeles, CA 90089-1147&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Dev.: Dev.
of An Always-Available Testbed for Underwater Networking
Research&lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project, developing an
underwater networking testbed instrument (DATURN) that will be always-available
and remotely accessible through Internet as a shared infrastructure for the
community, aims at supporting research across the whole network stack. The
testbed satisfies the need for frequent iteration on algorithms and experiments
required by researchers in the areas of MAC protocols, networking, and
applications. Two kinds of acoustic modems are planned allowing future modems
from external users to be added later. Although the fixed testbed cannot
represent all kinds of acoustic channels, the capability to support different
and future modems enables researchers to explore how the acoustic channel
affects upper layers and to compare protocols over different modems. A pluggable
software architecture is envisioned permitting algorithms to be dropped into an
existing protocol stack and reuse components that are outside the research
focus. Standard APIs will be defined for different layers and at least one
reference protocol; implementation will be provided at each layer, allowing, for
example, a researcher with a new transport protocol to leverage routing or MAC
protocols contributed by other researchers. A library of protocols will be built
over time, enabling comparative study of alternatives. At present there is lack
of common means to evaluate and compare protocols. Since no consensus currently
exists on analytic and simulation models, this project provides a better
experimental tool that enables community collaboration, protocol comparison, and
reuse of prior work through experimental iteration and researcher
iteration.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;This project provides an
essential infrastructure to the underwater networking community that is likely
to rebound in benefit to society overall. The always-on nature of the testbed
instrument also enables significant educational impact. At present, students can
only carry experiments on occasional deployments. Hence, this project will
accelerate research and education in underwater networking.&lt;br/&gt;