* 0821284
* MRI: Acquisition of a Cryogen-Free Physical Property Measurement System for Research and Education at University of Puerto Rico at Mayaguez
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Yang Li, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2012
* USD 376,700.00

Technical Abstract

We propose to acquire a cutting-edge commercial multi-function instrument for
electrical, magnetic, and thermal measurement of nanostructured materials. The
establishment of this Cryogen-free Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS)
for research and education will support and enhance the rapidly expanding
research infrastructure in the field of nanostructured materials at the
University of Puerto Rico at Mayagüez (UPRM). The proposed PPMS is an automated
cryogen-free system for the measurement of a variety of physical properties,
over a range of temperatures from 1.6 ? 325 K, and with magnetic fields up to 8
Tesla. The instrument provides for measurement of the magnetic moment, AC
susceptibility, electrical transport, magnetoresistance and Hall effect. These
are physical property measurements and materials characterizations which are
relevant to most fields in materials science and engineering. This cryogen-free
system will incur low operating costs in low temperature measurements. Usually
for such measurements, the cryogenic liquid helium must be conveyed from the US
mainland, since no local source is available in Puerto Rico. The long distance
transport by sea results in high cost and wasted research time. The cryogen-free
PPMS is a good match for our existing research infrastructure at UPRM, and will
provide significant cost savings in the long term while also providing a great
opportunity for new research directions and for the education of our students.
The proposed instrument will support diverse and interdisciplinary ongoing
research projects. Specific research activities supported by the proposed PPMS
system include: 1. Magnetism and thermoelectricity of clathrate materials with
magnetic nanostructured arrays. 2. Nanostructured materials for spintronics
applications. 3. Nanostructured magnetic materials for data storage media of
high-coercivity metallic and ferrite nanostructures. 4. Magnetocaloric effect
using a magnetic monodisperse nanofluid with a Low Curie temperature for
electronic cooling applications 5. Magnetic nano-composites for electro-magnetic
interference applications. 6. Biomedicine application of magnetic nanoparticles.
7. Structure-property relationships of surface modified carbon nanotubes. 8.
Two-gap superconductivity in MgB2: doping and disorder effects. 9. Flux pinning
in the rare-earth doped high-Tc superconducting single crystals. 10. Response of
magnetic nanoparticle suspensions to oscillating and rotating magnetic fields.
The proposed education activities aim to increase and enhance the education and
participation of Hispanics, especially undergraduate and graduate students
attending the UPRM. Research activities requiring PPMS are intimately linked
with teaching at UPRM. This instrument will immediately support the
interdisciplinary research and materials science and engineering training for
over 20 undergrads, 20 graduate students, 2 postdoctoral researchers and 7
faculty. Pre-existing courses and new developed courses will immediately benefit
from the instrument. Approximately 15% of the instrument operating time will be
dedicated to education and training. In addition this proposal will generate a
broader impact on education of pre-college students and their teachers in
underserved Puerto Rico areas.

Non-technical Abstract

We propose to acquire a multi-function instrument for electrical, magnetic, and
thermal measurement of nanostructured materials. The establishment of this
Cryogen-free Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS) as a facility for
research and education will support and enhance the rapidly expanding research
infrastructure in the field of nanostructured materials at the University of
Puerto Rico at Mayagüez (UPRM). The proposed PPMS is an automated cryogen-free
system for the measurement of a variety of physical properties over a wide range
of temperatures and magnetic fields. The instrument provides for physical
property measurements and materials characterizations which are relevant to most
fields in materials science and engineering. This cryogen-free system will incur
low operating costs in low temperature measurements. Usually for such
measurements, the cryogenic liquid helium must be conveyed from the US mainland,
since no local source is available. The long distance transport by sea results
in high cost and wasted research time. The cryogen-free PPMS is a good match for
our existing research infrastructure at UPRM, and will provide significant cost
savings in the long term while also providing a great opportunity for new
research directions and for the education of our students. The proposed
instrument will support diverse and interdisciplinary ongoing research projects.
Specific research activities include: 1) magnetism and thermoelectricity of
clathrate materials with magnetic nanostructured arrays, 2) nanostructured
materials for spintronics applications, 3) nanostructured magnetic materials for
application on the data storage media, 4) magnetocaloric effect using a magnetic
nanofluid for electronic cooling applications, 5) magnetic nano-composites for
electro-magnetic interference applications, 6) biomedicine application of
magnetic nanoparticles, 7) structure-property relationships of surface modified
carbon nanotubes, 8) doping and disorder effects in MgB2 superconductors, 9)
flux pinning in the rare-earth doped high-Tc superconducting single crystals,
and 10) magnetic nanoparticle suspensions in polymer solutions and liquid
crystals. The proposed education activities aim to increase and enhance the
education and participation of Hispanics, especially undergraduate and graduate
students attending the UPRM. Research activities requiring PPMS are intimately
linked with teaching. This instrument will immediately support the
interdisciplinary research and materials science and engineering training. Pre-
existing courses and new developed courses will immediately benefit from the
instrument. Approximately 15% of the instrument operating time will be dedicated
to education and training. In addition this proposal will generate a broader
impact on education of pre-college students and their teachers in underserved
Puerto Rico areas.