* 0821597
* MRI:   Development of Instrumentation for an Autonomous Underwater Sensor Network System
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Thomas Torgersen, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 07/31/2012
* USD 516,000.00

Proposal #: CNS 08-21597&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Cui, Jun-Hong (June)&lt;br/&gt; Babb,
Ivar G.; Shi, Zhijie; Torgersen, Thomas; Zhou, Shengli&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Connecticut&lt;br/&gt; Storrs, CT 06269-1133&lt;br/&gt;Title:
MRI/Dev.: Dev. of Instrumentation for an Autonomous Underwater Sensor Network
System&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project, developing
instrumentation for a scalable autonomous underwater sensor network (UWSN)
system, contributes better sensing and surveillance technology to acquire better
data to understand the spatial and temporal complexities of the oceans. The
instrumentation includes the development of high data rate acoustic modems
(Aqua-Modems), energy efficient integrated underwater nodes (Aqua-Motes), and
experimental underwater sensor network (lab and field) testbeds. The Aqua-Modems
lead the new generation of acoustic modem design supporting two features:
&lt;br/&gt;- High data rate and robust data transmission and &lt;br/&gt;-
Advanced networking functionalities.&lt;br/&gt;The aqua-Motes will be the first
generation of 'true' integrated underwater sensor nodes, similar to Berkeley
Motes for terrestrial sensor networks. The two types of Aqua-Motes will be
constructed with different processors for easy adaptation to a wide range of
applications. The lab and field testbeds with Aqua-Modems and Aqua-Motes will be
used to test various algorithms and protocols designed for UWSNs. UWSNs are
novel and significantly different from any terrestrial sensor network. Due to
the high coefficient of electromagnetic absorption, radio does not work well in
water. Instead, acoustic communication is usually employed. The unique
characteristics of acoustic underwater communication, such as low bandwidth,
long propagation delay, and high error rate, pose grand challenges to underwater
acoustic modem and network designers as existing terrestrial wireless sensor
network techniques cannot be applied. New research at every level of the
protocol suite and new experimental instrumentation are needed to implement,
test, and compare design alternatives and potential solutions. This instrument
enables the latter to address the continuing and growing interest in observing
oceanic processes as they evolve. There is an increasing need to monitor the
marine environment for commercial exploration, coastline protection, and
tracking processes that contribute to the observed complexity. By deploying
distributed and scalable sensor networks in a 3-dimensional underwater space,
each underwater sensor can monitor and detect environmental parameters and
events locally. Processes occur within the water mass as it advects and
disperses within the environment in the dynamic ocean system. Therefore a
langrangian observation system with passively mobile sensors (with water
currents) allows observation of oceanic processes in situ on appropriate time
and space scales. A self-organizing network of lagrangian sensors also provides
better support for sensing, monitoring, surveillance, scheduling, underwater
control, and fault tolerance. Thus, the UWSN will provide this
support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt; This project promotes
progress on the multiple issues facing UWSNs towards practical solutions in a
wide range of applications. Furthermore, it impacts education in several fronts:
supporting graduate students in their advanced research and undergraduates
summer interns (including community college students participating in programs
that promote STEM disciplines to underserved minorities) and bringing together
investigators from different disciplines (e.g., ocean science, sensors, low
energy, and networking) to learn from each other and collaborate across
departments and campuses.