* 0821646
* MRI: Acquisition of an Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometer for Geochemical Biological and Petrologic Research, Education and Training at Southern Illinois University
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2013
* Gregory Whitledge, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 05/31/2013
* USD 407,335.00

0821646&lt;br/&gt;Lefticariu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks funding
(69%) to acquire an IRMS system and three sample preparation peripherals for
research, education and training. The instrument will support multiple
disciplines (geology, zoology, wildlife science, fisheries, chemistry,
biochemistry, plant biology, anthropology, coal research, engineering and
microbiology). Specific are: 1) Thermo Delta V with dual inlet, 2) Gasbench II,
3) an EA and 4) a TC-EA for compound-specific and &amp;#61540;D analysis.
Specific science questions to be addressed include: Radiation chemistry studies
involve the study of energy transfer from radiological particles to water
procuring ionic and hydrated and radical forms. These oxidizing species form be
the basis of chemoautotrophy. This process may leave a fingerprint in terms of
oxygen and sulfur isotope fractionation. Results may lead to better predictions
for uranium deposits. Illinois is a large supplier of coal, but it is relatively
high in sulfur content (&gt; 2%). The PI intends to perform representative
analyses of (C, N, H, and S isotope) Illinois coal deposits. Benthic
foraminifera O and C isotope ratios will be assessed and used to define
paleoclimate proxies in Antarctica (specifically the Larsen Ice Shelf). IRMS
resources will be used for elemental rock geochemistry, fluid inclusion
thermometry, and radiometric dating. In-house instrumentation will allow more
rapid production of preliminary data ? feeding more timely proposal and paper
submissions and greater graduate student training and support. Stable carbon
isotope analysis would be applied to samples from the event horizon coinciding
with human settlement into sub-Arctic North America. Isotopes would be able to
differentiate between natural and extraterrestrial carbon species in the
sedimentary record. Stable isotope analysis in otoliths will be used to
understand fish diets and environmental history. Emphasis will be on the impacts
of agricultural runoff on fish diets. 15N will be used to study food web
dynamics in streams and its relation to amphibian extinctions Trophic structure
will be elucidated relative to primary plant producers (C3 vs C4).
Colloid/particle partitioning of contaminants will be studied taking advantage
of the natural variations in stable isotope ratios in contaminants. The
management plan the IRMS housed in the SIUC Mass Spectrometry Facility. A
dedicated staff scientist will be hired to support the instrument. A salary
support commitment for the technician (3 years) has been offered by the
administration. The staff scientist will be responsible for supporting
instrument maintenance, scheduling, training, and collaboration. Sample
remuneration will be one means of in-house support. Charges will be based on the
level of sample pre-preparation. In-class lecture/lab will be supported. The
acquisition would support 20 projects supported y 10 different agencies spanned
over 9 PIs and their 45 students. The instrument will be incorporated into
Research Experiences for Undergraduates and SIUC-Undergraduate Workshop
programs. Support will be given to 23 female and 7 underrepresented students.
The IRMS is planned to support 18 courses within 4 departments at SIUC.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;