* 0821858
* MRI:   Development of the Allosphere, an Immersive Instrument for Scientific Exploration
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Matthew Turk, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 07/31/2012
* USD 500,000.00

Proposal #: CNS 08-21858 PI(s): Turk, Matthew Hollerer, Tobias H.; Hu, Evelyn
L.; Kuchera-Morin, JoAnn C.; Wolski, Richard Institution: University of
California ? Santa Barbara Santa Barbara, CA 93106-2050 Title: MRI/Dev.: Dev. of
the Allosphere, an Immersive Instrument for Scientific Exploration Project
Proposed: This project, contributing in the development of an advanced
multimedia immersive environment and scientific instrument for large-scale data
visualization and exploration, aims to provide powerful methods for detail
analysis, synthesis, and manipulation of complex multi-dimensional data where
the observed phenomena range from the very big to the very small. The instrument
integrates the multimodal representation of large-scale data with human-scale
visualization and interaction techniques in a novel immersive environment known
as the Allosphere. The Allosphere is a three-story cubic space in the new
California NanoSystems Institute, housing a large perforated metal sphere that
serves as a display surface. A bridge that can hold 25 participants cuts through
the center of the sphere from the second floor. The final Allosphere
instrumentation design is expected to include 14 resolution stereo video
projectors to light up the complete spherical display surface, 256 speakers
distributed outside to provide high quality spatial sounds, a suite of sensors
and interaction devices to enable rich user interaction with the data and
simulations, and the computing infrastructure to enable the high volume
computations necessary to provide a rich visual, aural, and interactive
experience for the user. When fully constructed, the Allosphere is expected to
be one of the largest scientific instruments in the world. It will serve as an
ongoing research testbed for scientific visualization, numerical simulations,
large-scale sensor networks, high-performance computing, data mining, knowledge
discovery, multimedia systems, and human-computer interaction. This unique
immersive exploration environment, with a full surrounding sphere of high
quality stereo video and spatial sound and user tracking for rich interaction
will support rich interaction and exploration. Partnering with faculty from
several disciplines, it will also serve as a key tool for exploration in
molecular dynamics, brain imaging, nanomaterials, earth science, and many other
scientific fields. For example, navigating through fMRI data and exploring live
geospatial datasets.

Broader Impacts: This project benefits many important fields that have wide
impact on society. The Allosphere will be made available to researchers and
partners beyond the institution and will leverage local outreach programs to
attract K-12 students involving them early in scientific exploration projects
that utilize the environment. The Allosphere is likely to draw students of all
ages and interests.