* 0821180
* MRI: Acquisition of an Electron Probe Microanalyzer for Innovative Geological, Biogeochemical, and Material Science Applications
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Desmond Cook, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 08/31/2011
* USD 500,000.00

Funds are provided to acquire a modern electron probe micro-analyzer (EPMA) to
support several Old Dominion University (ODU) research programs, as well as
activities at Norfolk State University (NSU) and Hampton University (HU), both
minority-serving institutions, and the College of William and Mary (W&amp;M).
These research programs include the pioneering iron grain tracer technique,
which employed the existing EPMA to measure grain chemistry over the last 16
years for research on Arctic sea ice and climate change, research on fish
population dynamics using detailed (&lt;10 Ã¬m) otolith-layer chemistry that is
essential for future management of fish stocks, metal restoration for priceless
marine artifacts such as the USS Monitor, investigations of delamination in
Aluminum-Lithium alloys important to space exploration, studies of electrodes
used in large particle accelerators (e.g., Jefferson Lab and Fermilab and the
prospective International Linear Collider, a nine billion dollar project), and
calibrations of new laser analysis techniques with wide applications for
research and industry. The growing list of innovative research projects at ODU
and other local institutions requiring an EPMA and other types of microanalyses
has prompted a commitment by ODU to expand the building space and support for
such equipment. ODU is committed to ensuring that a qualified, experienced EPMA
operator is available full-time to facilitate this research and that the new
EPMA is maintained properly. The requested EPMA will replace a 39 year old ETEC
EPMA that is now well beyond retirement age. Recent developments in EPMA
instrumentation has made extended overnight and weekend automated operation
possible and safe with offsite monitoring. This allows for expanded usage of an
EPMA because much of the currently funded iron grain work can largely be done
after normal work hours, opening the instrument to greater daytime usage
requiring hands-on operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The requested EPMA is part of
a major research infrastructure plan at ODU. The new Research Facility that will
house the EPMA and other microanalysis instrumentation is under construction and
scheduled for completion in early 2009 and will be a regional microanalyses
facility. The EPMA will provide ?hands-on? research experience for graduate and
undergraduate students at ODU, NSU, HU, W&amp;M, and other institutions. An
estimated 12 faculty researchers, 21 graduate and 58 undergraduate students from
these institutions will use the new EPMA in the first few years. Besides
research, the EPMA will be used for classroom demonstrations and exercises for
both graduate and undergraduate courses. The management plan provides for usage
charges to cover a maintenance contract, supplies, and an experienced operator
well beyond the three years of the grant. The long-term operation and
maintenance is guaranteed by the College of Sciences as part of the College?s
research infrastructure improvement plan.&lt;br/&gt;