* 0821202
* Expression of Large Genes: Functions and Mechanisms of Recursive Splicing in Drosophila
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* A. Javier Lopez, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2012
* USD 480,000.00

Intellectual Merit: This project will elucidate the biological roles and
mechanisms of recursive splicing, a recently discovered process that is specific
to genes that are interrupted by very large introns. Such introns are an
important component of many vertebrate and invertebrate genomes and they must be
removed accurately from the pre-mRNA transcripts during gene expression to avoid
introducing mis-sense or nonsense mutations that preclude correct protein
production. Extremely large introns are frequently found in genes with key roles
in development and cellular regulation. Current evidence indicates that
recursive splicing has a widespread role in promoting the proper expression of
genes with large introns, but the underlying mechanisms remain to be elucidated.
This process may facilitate efficient and accurate removal of the introns, or it
may stimulate other steps in gene expression through interactions mediated by
the splicing machinery. Splicing is coupled physically and functionally to
transcription and other processes in mRNA biogenesis, and emerging evidence
indicates that splicing itself can enhance gene expression through effects on
transcript elongation, re-initiation of transcription, polyadenylation, and
export of mature mRNA from the nucleus. The experimental system used in this
project is the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster. Recursive splicing has been
characterized most extensively in this organism but suggestive evidence that it
also occurs in higher animals has been presented. In addition, Drosophila
provides powerful genetic and molecular resources for analysis of recursively
spliced transcription units. The specific aims are: (1) Characterize the roles
of recursive splicing in gene expression. Allele substitution techniques will be
used to delete non-exonic recursive splice sites in selected but diverse genes
at their native chromosomal locations. The effects on developmental phenotypes,
transcription and RNA processing from the corresponding genes will be
determined. (2) Characterize auxiliary elements and mechanisms for correct use
of a non-exonic recursive splice site. Mutational analyses in a Drosophila cell
transfection system will be used to dissect and characterize the function of
sequences on the RNA that direct the use of recursive splice site RP3 in the
Ultrabithorax gene. (3) Identify trans-acting factors that mediate the activity
and functions of recursive splice sites. Genetic approaches will be used to
identify factors required for correct recursive splicing at Ultrabithorax and
frizzled and/or to mediate its role(s) in gene function. Biochemical and
molecular approaches will be used to further characterize the mechanisms of
identified factors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This project will lead
to a better understanding of pre-mRNA splicing mechanisms and strategies and
their relation to other aspects of gene expression and gene structure. This is
important for developing integrated models of genetic control that can have
practical impact in agriculture and animal breeding, pest control, and
understanding the consequences of mutation and variations in genome sequence
within populations. Information generated by this project will be incorporated
into an existing electronic database on recursive splicing as a publicly
available resource. The project will provide research training for 2-4 graduate
and 6-8 undergraduate students over a three-year period. At both levels, this
will involve integrated training in experimental, computational, and comparative
approaches. Three undergraduate researchers have already contributed importantly
to published studies leading to this project (4 undergraduate co-authorships on
2 papers during the past two years). They have gone on to top Ph.D. programs in
experimental and computational biology. Additional undergraduates will be
involved, including students recruited through programs to enhance diversity.
The principal investigator integrates research with education and outreach by
teaching undergraduate and graduate courses in related subjects and by
participating as an instructor in the Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center's
Minority Access to Research Careers Summer Institute In Bioinformatics.