* 0821517
* MRI: Acquisition of a Digital Imaging Correlation System to Advance Research, Training and Education in Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2011
* Igor Tsukrov, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Martin L. Dunn
* 07/31/2011
* USD 103,099.00

Through this major research instrumentation grant, a Digital Imaging Correlation
(DIC) system, which provides non-contact, full-field 2D or 3D strain or
displacement measurements, will be acquired. Such data provides essential
knowledge for several scientific and engineering research applications and thus
will advance the state-of-the-art in various fields. Faculty members from
Mechanical, Ocean, Civil, Electrical and Materials Engineering will use the
system to conduct experiments under both quasi-static and high deformation rates
and at multiple size scales, from the macroscale to the nanoscale through the
integration of the system with a Scanning Electron Microscope or an Atomic Force
Microscope. Through each project, extensive intellectual merits will be created,
from characterizing the behavior of various metallic, structural, and
biomechanic materials, to structural health monitoring of bridges on U.S.
roadways, to evaluating deformation at the micro- and nanoscales. The projects
combine both fundamental and applied research approaches to advance the current
knowledge base in the given fields. &lt;br/&gt;Several broader impacts will be
created through this grant. First, graduate and undergraduate research students
will be trained on and use this advanced equipment. Furthermore, the results
from projects and the DIC system will be incorporated into several engineering
courses from various disciplines. Graduate courses on quantitative image
visualization and non-destructive testing are planned. As a shared instrument
between several engineering departments, the DIC system will promote
interactions amongst faculty members and students with respect to both research
and teaching. The societal benefits from the various research efforts are
eclectic from increasing whale populations, to assisting surgeons with large
vessel sealing during surgeries, to enhancing the ability of disabled
individuals to communicate. Finally, women faculty members and Research
Experience for Teacher participants from minority high schools will attempt to
address diversity issues in engineering through outreach activities which focus
on this equipment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;