* 0821924
* Processing Mixed Language
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2008,01/31/2013
* Paola Dussias, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* William Badecker
* 01/31/2013
* USD 280,000.00

Code-switching, the alternating use or mixing of two languages in bilingual
communication, is often assumed to be a sign of defective language use, and is
therefore likely stigmatized because people incorrectly conclude that speakers
who code-switch are limited to producing an amalgam of broken bits of each
language. In reality, a general characteristic of mixed utterances is that they
are produced fluidly, without hesitation, pauses, or corrections, reflecting a
systematic and exquisitely controlled integration of two linguistic systems.
This project will collect eye-tracking data to examine code-switching during
bilingual language reading and spoken language comprehension. The approach is
cross-disciplinary, building on and bridging advances in both linguistic
approaches to code-switching and experimental psycholinguistic work on language
processing. The proposed experiments are motivated by two central questions: 1)
Are there syntactic contexts that facilitate the processing of code-switched
language?; and 2) How does the proficiency of speakers in both of their
languages modulate language processing during comprehension?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The answer to these questions will contribute to the
advancement of knowledge in several ways. With demographic changes in the US and
more communication between individuals here and in other countries, the number
of people communicating in writing is increasing at an extraordinary rate. Code-
switching is ubiquitous in bilingual communities and it is becoming increasingly
more present in its written form, especially in the case of Spanish-English
speakers. Given the rapid growth of Spanish-English bilingualism in the US, it
is increasingly important to improve understanding of how bilinguals process
mixed language discourse. Second, the project evaluates proficiency in a second
language more rigorously than past studies. Therefore, the results will provide
valuable information for assessing second language proficiency, which is crucial
in contexts in which proficient bilingual communication is required for
successful cross-cultural interactions. In addition, this project will support
bilingual graduate student researchers and bilingual undergraduate research
assistants from underrepresented populations in the US, including Chicanos and
other US Latinos, thus promoting the inclusion and training of individuals from
traditionally underrepresented groups in scientific research both at the
graduate and undergraduate levels.