* 0821220
* Molecular Basis for the Specificity of Acyl-homoserine Lactone Production
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Mair E. Churchill, University of Colorado at Denver
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2012
* USD 433,222.00

Quorum sensing is a regulatory mechanism used by bacteria to control a variety
of processes in response to cell densities in bacterial communities. The acyl-
homoserine lactone (AHL) dependent quorum-sensing system is found in over 90
gram-negative bacterial species, and is responsible for regulating processes,
including bioluminescence, antibiotic production, plasmid conjugal transfer,
biofilm production, and pathogenesis in plants and animals. This project focuses
on understanding how the enzymes known as AHL synthases make the AHLs in the
cell. It will provide new insight into the mechanism by which AHL synthases
select and act on substrates with different acyl-chain lengths to produce
different forms of AHLs. It will also determine the degree to which the acyl-ACP
pool modulates the types of AHLs produced, which may be a crucial aspect of
controlling the behavior of bacterial communities in response to environmental
stimuli. This research will also have a broad impact of a practical nature
because AHL mediated quorum sensing contributes to agricultural crop losses,
damage to industrial equipment and aquaculture though marine biofouling, and
loss of human and animal lives through bacterial infections. Broader Impacts
This project will provide training and education to several early-stage
scientists, including undergraduate researchers and graduate level trainees from
under-represented groups in the Denver area. One undergraduate student comes
from the Community College of Aurora through the Stride Toward Encouraging
Profession in Science (STEPS) program. This project will provide education and
training of students from under-represented populations who have not had any
research experience as undergraduates, but who need this experience in order to
move into graduate or professional schools. These students will come from
institutions where there was little opportunity for research for them in the
Denver area and from a collaborator at a primarily undergraduate institution.
The project will also provide valuable research experience for both Masters and
Ph.D. graduate students. Therefore, through several avenues, this project will
introduce new people from diverse backgrounds to research, help the development
of new graduate students, and generate additional diversity among the scientific
community.