* 0821783
* MRI: Proposal to Purchase a ESEM with CL, STEM, and EDX, at Idaho State University
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2010
* Michael McCurry, Idaho State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2010
* USD 372,230.00

Idaho State University created the Center for Archaeology, Materials, and
Applied Spectroscopy (CAMAS), an interdisciplinary research facility dedicated
to the integration of social, natural, and physical analytical sciences.
Critical to the success of this center, and an important need for Idaho State
University, is access to an environmental scanning electron microscope (SEM) for
research and student training. This award will allow the acquisition of a
scanning electron microscope with scanning transmission microscopy, energy
dispersive x-ray spectrometry capability, wavelength dispersive X-ray
spectroscopy capability, and cathodoluminescence imaging capabilities
(SEM/STEM/EDS/WDS/CL). The proposed SEM will be a significant research tool in
archaeology, geology, biology, materials science, and related fields. ISU is a
growing research institution that currently has limited or no opportunities for
research or education in modern scanning electron microscopy. Researchers and
students interested in elemental analysis, materials analysis, structural
analysis, and the gamut of analyses currently critical to the advancement of
research in a suite of disciplines including archaeology, the earth sciences,
ecology, and chemistry will now be able to conduct advanced SEM research at
Idaho State University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-destructive analysis
techniques are critical to the development of modern archaeological and physical
sciences. The capabilities of SEM for whole artifact analysis, nano-technology,
paleontology, and other areas will make ISU scientifically competitive. The
built in EDS and WDS analysis systems, with the addition of Cathodolumenescence
(CL), will allow us to conduct imaging of structural variation and quantitative
elemental analysis, as well as micro-structural morphological studies of
geological and archaeological materials using EDS/WDS and backscattered electron
imaging (BSE). CL imaging and analysis functionality provides the much-needed
ability to map chemical and phase zonation critical for constructing geological
mineral histories and for compositional sourcing of mineral tempers in
archaeological ceramics. The imaging capabilities of the SEM will be used for
taxonomic identification of biological microfossils such as pollens, phytoliths,
diatoms and bryozoans, will be central to the work of the paleontologists,
geobiologists and archaeologists contributing to the project, and will open up
new fields of chemical research and analysis. &lt;br/&gt;