* 0821206
* MRI: Acquisition of a high-sensitivity low energy ion scattering (LEIS) spectrometer for research into the nature of functional surfaces and interfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Israel Wachs, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 07/31/2011
* USD 844,800.00

CBET-0821206 Koel

Lehigh University has a long history of research and investment in studies of
the science and technology of surfaces and interfaces. This effort, along with
more recent major commitments to advanced materials and nanotechnology, has
often necessitated pushing the frontiers of surface analysis. An accurate,
quantitative knowledge of the surface layer composition or monolayer film
coverage at a solid surface is required in a wide range of applications such as
catalysis, sensors, fuel cells, microelectromechanical systems (MEMS), coatings,
adhesion, self-assembled monolayers (SAM), membranes, and biocompatibility to
design advanced materials. This proposal seeks funds for acquisition of a high-
sensitivity low energy ion scattering (HS-LEIS) spectrometer that will meet
these needs and enable new research. LEIS is known as the only technique that
provides quantitative elemental analysis of the outermost, top layer at
surfaces. This can be compared to x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS or ESCA)
that furnishes near-surface (top few nm) information. A new instrument with
unprecedented capability has just become available as the QTAC 100 system from
ION-TOF. Specifically, a unique double toroidal electrostatic energy analyzer
based on the advanced Calipso technology provides 3,000 times higher sensitivity
than conventional ion scattering spectrometers. This spectrometer will be
integrated into a system that will enable a wide range of studies of surface
spectroscopy, surface imaging and non-destructive depth profiling. This system
also has superior capabilities for analyzing insulating samples and for serving
many users by incorporating a rapid sample introduction loadlock and sample
transfer system fully integrated into the system.

The intellectual merit of the proposed activity. The fundamental research and
development activities performed by using this new instrument will push the
limits of understanding of key technological problems involving surfaces and
interfaces. In particular, it will enable previously unobtainable information
about the elemental composition in the topmost surface layer of a wide range of
practical materials. For example, it will play a key role in an emergent theme
at Lehigh on "Designed Active Interfaces", where active interfaces refer to
surface phases that undergo dynamic molecular and/or electronic structural
transformations when placed in reactive environments. Research is proceeding in
three thrusts: heterogeneous catalysis, optical and biosensors, and new
functionality glasses. The requested HS-LEIS system can analyze a broad range of
samples, including metal single crystals, semiconductor wafers, powders,
insulators, glasses, polymers, biomaterials, and rough samples, and analysis can
be carried out at high temperatures. Clever design of this instrument also
enables depth analysis with extreme resolution (layer-by-layer) up to a depth of
10 nm, charge compensation for insulators, sample heating in controlled
environments, and secondary electron imaging.

Broader impacts resulting from the proposed activity. The HS-LEIS instrument
will be the only one of its kind in the U.S., and it will be the first one in
the world to be dedicated solely to research. This will provide opportunities in
cutting-edge research at Lehigh, and also for a broader community. The Center
for Advanced Materials and Nanotechnology (CAMN) at Lehigh operates and
maintains the Surface Analysis Facility, which has the only Scienta ESCA 300
instrument in the U.S., and the Nanocharacterization Laboratory, with the
largest academic collection of electron microscopes in the U.S. These facilities
bring many undergraduate and graduate students from universities, along with
researchers, technicians, and engineers from government and industrial
laboratories to Lehigh each year. The HS-LEIS system will enable this large
community to work with this state-of-the-art equipment and address new research
projects. Also, the instrument will be available to international visitors to
the NSF International Materials Institute. It will be utilized immediately in
several science and engineering courses at LU, ongoing REU programs, and will be
showcased at the annual Lehigh Microscopy School. Outreach will also include
high school students participating in the annual summer Materials Camp, along
with involvement in activities of the Materials Instructional Technology Lab - a
K-12 outreach program run by CAMN.