* 0821214
* MRI: New Instrumentation for High Resolution 4D Imaging
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Richard Briggs, Smith College
* Standard Grant
* Vicki Martin
* 09/30/2011
* USD 617,662.00

A grant has been awarded to Smith College under the supervision of Dr. Michael
J. Barresi and Co-PI, Dr. Richard Briggs to acquire high-resolution microscopy
for research in live cell imaging. The Center for Microscopy and Imaging at
Smith will house the NSF supported acquisition of Leica?s SP5 Laser Scanning
Confocal Microscope with live cell imaging capabilities. Researchers at Smith
College, as well as the other institutions participating in the Five College
Consortium (Amherst, Mount Holyoke, and Hampshire College, and the University of
Massachusetts), will enter a new frontier of biological research, studying
molecules, cells and tissues in the living state. The remarkable flexibility of
this confocal microscope will support a diverse array of research topics that
represent three unifying themes of investigation based on scale: the study of
specific molecular mechanisms; understanding unicellular structure, function and
behavior; and analysis of whole organism development and physiology. The
proposed instrumentation will directly impact the research programs of 18
faculty from the Five Colleges listed above as well as an estimated 30 graduate
students and 80 undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Smith College is the
nation?s largest liberal arts college for women and is among the top schools
producing the greatest number of woman pursuing careers in science. Therefore,
one of the main purposes of this newly funded instrumentation will be training
highly motivated, diverse undergraduates, many from underrepresented groups,
including first-generation college students. This modern microscope system will
also serve as a focal point for various outreach activities to area schools and
summer science programs targeting young women from underrepresented minority
groups. Lastly, because of the strong Five College support for this instrument,
this confocal microscope will be an important catalyst for inter-college
collaborations that would not typically develop. Such interactions can help
stimulate new directions and open doors for students to pursue careers in
science and research. Because this instrumentation will provide whole new levels
of analysis previously unavailable, the most exciting impacts will probably be
those scientific findings that cannot even be predicted.