* 0821622
* MRI:   Acquisition of Instrumentation for Coupled Experimental-Computational Neuroscience and Biology Research
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Justin Sanchez, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 06/30/2012
* USD 516,000.00

Proposal #: CNS 08-21622&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Fortes, Jose A.&lt;br/&gt; McIntyre,
Lauren M.; Moroz, Leonid L.; Principe, Jose C.; Sanchez, Justin
C.&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Florida &lt;br/&gt; Gainesville, FL
32611-2002&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Acq.: Instrumentation for Coupled Experimental-
Computational Neuroscience and Biology Research&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project, acquiring a virtualized multicomputer
instrument with shared-memory subsystems and storage capacity, intends to use
this instrument as a shared instrument whose resources can be virtualized,
reserved, and configured on demand for different research activities related to
neuroscience, computational biology, and cyberinfrastructure. Its configurations
can also be dedicated and tightly coupled to in vivo experiments using network
connections to in situ instrumentation used for experiments. It can
simultaneously support multiple research activities because of its unique
capability to support real-time computer-in-the-loop experiments, its ability to
run many concurrent computation threads, its shared memory and storage
subsystems, and its use of virtualization technology to manage the coexistence
of multiple computing environments. To develop and validate autonomic computing
nodes and techniques for multiuser virtualized computational systems, the
instrument provides traces of performance and other needed monitored data.
Research activities in brain-machine interfaces, neurogenesis, genomics,
bioinformatics, signal processing, cyberinfrastructure, autonomic computing and
other areas include:&lt;br/&gt;- Brain-machine interfaces where cortex models
for motor control are dynamically learned and applied in real-time,&lt;br/&gt;-
Experimental drug discovery through real-time analysis of large amounts of
genetic data and many thousands of compounds,&lt;br/&gt;- Analysis of Terabytes
of genetic data captured in real-time as a neuron grows, learns, and remembers,
and&lt;br/&gt;- Online learning algorithms using dynamic filter topologies with
online computation requirements that increase over time.&lt;br/&gt;The
activities have transformative goals, including the introduction of real-time,
and address the high performance computation into closed-loop experiments and/or
systems whose behavior is driven by complex processing of sensed data. Another
goal involves providing off-line computing capabilities to match the
unprecedented rate and volume of genetic data produced by massively parallel DNA
sequencing technology.&lt;br/&gt;