* 0821155
* MRI:   Development of Instrumentation for Project GreenLight
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2012
* Larry Smarr, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 06/30/2012
* USD 2,062,500.00

Proposal #: CNS 08-21155&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): DeFanti, Thomas A.&lt;br/&gt; Krueger,
Ingolf H.; Papadopoulos, Philip M.; Smarr, Larry L.; Vahdat, Amin
M.&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of California ? San Diego&lt;br/&gt; La
Jolla, CA 92093-0934&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Dev.: Development of Instrumentation
for Project Green Light&lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project,
developing an instrument called GreenLight, measures, monitors, and optimizes
the energy consumption of large-scale scientific applications from many
different areas. The work enables inter-disciplinary researchers to understand
how to make ?green? (i.e., energy efficient) decision for IT computation and
storage. Consequently, an experienced team might be able to make deep and
quantitative explorations in advanced architecture, including alternative
circuit fabrics such as Field Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs), direct-graph
execution machines, graphics processors, solid-state disks, and photonic
networking. The enabled computing and systems research will yield new
quantitative data to support engineering judgments on comparative ?computational
work per watt? across full-scale applications running at-scale computing
platforms, thus helping to re-define fundamentals of systems engineering for a
transformative concept, that of green CyberInfrastructure (CI). Keeping in mind
that the IT industry consumes as much energy (same carbon footprint) as the
airline industry, this project enables five communities of application
scientists, drawn from metagenomics, ocean observing, microscopy,
bioinformatics, and the digital media, to understand how to measure and then
minimize energy consumption, to make use of novel energy/cooling sources, and
employ middleware that automates optimal choice of compute/power strategies. The
research issues addressed include studying the dynamic migration of applications
to virtual machines for power consumption reduction, studying the migrations of
virtual machines to physical machines to achieve network locality, developing
new power/thermal management policies (closed loop, using feedback from
sensors), classifying scientific algorithms in the context of co-processing
hardware such as GPUs and FPGAs, and developing algorithms for resource
sharing/scheduling in heterogeneous platforms. The full-scale virtualized
device, the GreenLight Instrument, will be developed to measure, monitor, and
make publicly available (via service oriented architecture methodology), real-
time sensor outputs, empowering researchers anywhere to study the energy cost of
at-scale scientific computing. Hence, this work empowers domain application
researchers to continue to exploit exponential improvements in silicon
technology, and to compete globally. Although the IT industry has begun to
develop strategies for ?greening? traditional data centers, the physical reality
of modern campus CI currently involves a complex network of ad hoc and
suboptimal energy environments in departmental facilities. The number of these
facilities increases extremely fast creating campus-wide crisis of space, power,
and cooling due to the value of computational and data intensive approaches to
research. This project addresses these important issues offering the possibility
to improve.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project enables
researchers to carry-out quantitative explorations into energy efficient
CyberInfrastructure (CI) and to train the next generation of energy-aware
scientists. It enlists graduate students from five disciplinary projects,
involves minority serving institutions, and is likely to have direct impact on
commercial components of the nation?s CI.&lt;br/&gt;