* 0821292
* MRI: Acquisition of a Modulated Differential Scanning Calorimeter and Spectroscopic  Ellipsometer for Characterizing Complex Fluids
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Rafael Garcia, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2012
* USD 233,194.00

NON-TECHNICAL:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rarely in the study of complex fluids such
as biosystems does one technique suffice to illuminate their true complexities.
Ideally, both thermodynamic and structural information is needed under near
identical conditions to describe such systems. This proposal seeks to acquire
two state-of-the-art instruments that complement each other in exactly this way.
These instruments will be used within a focused multidisciplinary center for
experimental soft-condensed matter physics.&lt;br/&gt;The Modulated Differential
Scanning Calorimeter (MDSC) measures how small amounts of heat are absorbed as
the temperature of milligrams of material is varied and determines important
thermodynamic characteristics. The Spectroscopic Ellipsometer (SE) measures the
polarization and color of reflected light from a thin film, determining the
film's detailed structure, composition, and uniformity. Used together, MDSC and
SE provide an extraordinary view of the structure and phase behavior of a wide
variety of thin films and small systems. Our initial research plans include
using these two instruments to obtain both structural and thermodynamic
information of thin films of large bio-macromolecules such as DNA,
polysaccharides, and membrane proteins. Other research directions will include
various complex fluids (liquid crystals), water remediation studies, and wetting
properties of polar liquids, which would additionally complement other
experimental techniques. This proposal will greatly impact and expand
educational activities across many disciplines, from bioengineering, chemistry,
biochemistry, chemical engineering, mechanical engineering, as well as physics.
Through our comprehensive and unique undergraduate project-based curriculum, WPI
is ideally poised to use these instruments and facilities to make first-rate
research activities accessible to all students at every
level.&lt;br/&gt;Additionally, the diversity of the team brought together in
this work will enhance the mentoring of students from all
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF-MRI
proposal seeks the acquisition of a modulated-differential scanning calorimeter
(MDSC - TA Instruments Q200) and a spectroscopic ellipsometer (SE - Woollam
M-2000). Together, these two instruments will provide an extraordinarily
detailed view of the structural and phase behavior of thin films of a wide
variety of complex and bio-fluids that is essential for the understanding of
such important systems. The MDSC provides specific heat, enthalpy, and phase
transition temperature data from small samples, e.g. films, in a timely fashion,
while the SE provides key data on film thickness, uniformity, and structure.
These data will complement other existing experimental facilities at WPI
including atomic force microscopy, scanning electron microscopy, x-ray
scattering, surface plasmon resonance, to name a few. Along with the current
facilities, the proposed instruments will provide the foundation for a first-
rate center for experimental soft-condensed matter within the department of
physics. This center will impact activities across many disciplines and is a
major goal of the department.&lt;br/&gt;Projects that will immediately benefit
from the acquisition of the proposed instrumentation are: wetting and de-wetting
behavior of polar and non-polar liquids, such as water and liquid crystals;
structural and thermodynamic studies of biological thin films, such as proteins,
polysaccharides, and DNA; characterization of nano-heteroepitaxial growth of
semiconductor thin films; studies of membrane protein unfolding to illuminate
factors important to protein stability. The broader impacts of this proposal
are: to enhance a wide collaborative effort spanning physics, chemistry,
biochemistry, mechanical engineering, chemical engineering, and biomedical
engineering; to support educational experiences for undergraduate students
through our project-based curriculum; to foster synergistic research and
educational work in soft-condensed matter/complex fluids; to provide
comprehensive educational and mentoring opportunities across a diverse spectrum
of undergraduates, graduates, and post-doctoral associates allowing for a
significant contribution to the advancement and dissemination of science.