* 0821939
* Collaborative Research: Evolutionary Genetics and Genomics of Cave Adaptation
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Richard Borowsky, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 08/31/2013
* USD 550,000.00

Cave fishes differ from surface fishes in numerous ways because of their
evolutionary adaptations to life in the dark. Most noticeably, they have smaller
eyes and less pigmentation, but they also have better senses of smell and taste,
and are more efficient metabolically. All of these differences are under genetic
control; the gene copies in the cave populations affecting important
developmental systems differ from those in the surface populations. The Mexican
Tetra is unique in that the species has both cave and surface forms. Because
they can hybridize, they afford the opportunity to investigate the differences
through genetic analysis. In this collaborative research project, the genes
responsible for these differences will be identified by genetic mapping and
functional analyses of selected candidate genes. The results will lead to a
better understanding of the genetic pathways that control the development and
maintenance of: (1) the visual system; (2) pigmentation; (3) metabolic
efficiency; and (4) various other physiological and anatomical systems. In terms
of Broader Impacts, the work on cave fishes has been well covered by the media,
and the extraordinary ability of this system to engage people's interest and
attention will have broad positive impacts on public education in biology,
genetics and evolution. The research will also impact the training of
undergraduate and graduate students and postdoctoral fellows, particularly in
novel concepts of evolution and development (evodevo). In terms of societal
impacts, the results may also contribute to a general understanding of the
causes of eye degeneration and metabolic disorders and could lead to a better
insight into how environmental changes (i.e., the shift from surface to cave
environments) can modulate the direction of evolutionary change.