* 0821703
* MRI: Aquisition of a Molecular Ecology and Systematics Laboratory at Cincinnati Museum Center
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Herman Mays, Cincinnati Museum Center
* Standard Grant
* Vicki Martin
* 08/31/2011
* USD 100,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;The ability to analyze life?s genetic code has revolutionized
biology. Ecology and evolutionary biology in particular have experienced a
renaissance during the past two decades due to the application of molecular
genetic tools. Cincinnati Museum Center (CMC) is well poised to enter the modern
age of molecular-based studies in ecology and evolution. Dr. Herman Mays Jr.,
CMC zoology curator, will develop a working molecular genetics laboratory at CMC
through a Major Research Instrumentation award from the National Science
Foundation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educators and researchers from a consortium of
local institutions including public and private high schools, small colleges and
universities including Xavier University and Thomas More College, and other
institutions such as the Cincinnati Zoo and Botanical Garden will utilize this
facility at CMC in education at every level, from high school to graduate
students, and use these instruments to employ molecular genetic tools in basic
and applied research in ecology and evolutionary biology. Additionally, these
instruments will allow a myriad of research projects to be conducted on the
nearly 300,000 zoology specimens at CMC and used to educate the general public
about genetics, ecology and evolution through exhibits and programming tied to
the laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;