* 0821129
* MRI:   Acquisition of Networking Equipment to Establish a High-Performance Computing and High-Bandwidth Research Network at an HBCU
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Al-Sameen Khan, Delaware State University
* Standard Grant
* robert pennington
* 06/30/2011
* USD 365,573.00

The proposal requests networking infrastructure to establish a high-performance
computing, high-bandwidth, robust, and intelligently managed converged data
research network; to be utilized as a shared resource in the College of
Mathematics, Natural Sciences, and Technology (CMNST) at Delaware State
University (DSU), a Historically Black University (HBCU). The network
infrastructure will support and enhance the research, research training and
education activities and capabilities in the Departments of Applied Mathematics
and Theoretical Physics, Biological Sciences, Chemistry, Computer and
Information Sciences, Mathematics and Physics and Pre-Engineering.The requested
infrastructure will support research, research-training, and education at an
HBCU where the vast majority of students are from underrepresented groups. It
will contribute to the Nation?s global competitiveness by providing
cyberinfrastructure at an HBCU that will be utilized to educate and prepare
underrepresented groups for the 21st century scientific, engineering, and
technical workforce. In addition, it would close the digital divide at this
institution and provide the advanced networking infrastructure necessary to
fulfill the CMNST and University?s research and educational mission well into
the 21st century. Establishing a robust advanced high-speed and high-bandwidth
networking infrastructure would give the CMNST the capability to establish more
meaningful research collaboration especially with colleagues at larger research
institutions, and facilitate access to geographically distributed computing
resources, data repositories and digital libraries. It will enable high-quality
computational research, video conferencing, the ability to move large data sets
and work remotely. In addition, it will give us the capability to make our
resources available to others via the network and allow the CMNST to more
effectively recruit and maintain faculty and students.