* 0821969
* Metals in Environmental and Biological Systems. A Rational Approach to Sample Pretreatment and Analysis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Purnendu Dasgupta, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 07/31/2012
* USD 500,000.00

The Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program in the Division of Chemistry
supports the research groups of Professors Purnendu (Sandy) Dasgupta, Xiyun
Guan, Subhrangsu Mandal, and Kevin Schug at the University of Texas - Arlington
for collaborative research with scientists at the Northeastern University in
Shenyang, China, to design, test, and implement field-portable and affordable
metal detection systems involving novel nanopore sensing and charge detection
technologies and unique metal-selective sample preparation techniques, utilizing
room temperature ionic liquids and novel nanosorbents. The researchers use mass
spectrometry techniques that they have developed for rapid characterization of
binding of metals to other agents, including proteins. If cell-secreted specific
metal binding agents are found, they will be used as gateways to otherwise
nonspecific sensors. The derived ability to selectively detect and measure both
harmful metals such as arsenic and essential nutrients such as zinc may have
important applications in environmental, medical, and biochemical research. This
international collaborative research project is supported jointly by NSF and the
National Science Foundation of China. The study is also supported by the Office
of International Science and Engineering (OISE) at NSF.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Resulting instrumental advancements will be incorporated
into teaching curricula. Cross-disciplinary training of engineering
undergraduates, minority participation, and the annual participation of 4-5
competitively chosen high school students are an integral part of this project,
designed to convey both the experience and the pleasure of carrying out
meaningful frontline research and applying it to real samples in a useful
manner.