* 0821008
* MRI: Acquisition of a Dual Focued Ion/Electron Beam (FIB) Imaging and Nano-Fabrication Tool
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Shouheng Sun, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2011
* USD 810,000.00

Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This MRI proposal by Brown University
requests support for the acquisition of an FEI NOVA 600i Nanolab DualBeam
SEM/FIB for nanoscale prototyping, machining, characterization and analysis of
structures in the sub-100-nm regime. Research at Brown spanning engineering,
physics, chemistry, geology, and medicine is focused on research that has, at
its core, the manipulation and characterization of materials on the nanoscale.
Some ongoing research that will make use of the new Dual Beam instrument
includes: studies of high strain rate deformation of steel where nanoscale
features of highly localized adiabatic shear bands (ASB) will be extracted for
TEM analysis; creation of nanopore-based prototype device structures for
biomolecule analysis that require the selective metallization of e-beam created
pores; generation of initiation cracks in multiphase structural materials, in
situ monitoring of crack propagation, and the reconstruction of the crack path
by serial-sectioning and electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD); manipulation
of nanoparticle arrays for patterned magnetic media applications; and minimally
invasive, selective removal of inclusions for the identification of the origins
of priceless archeological glass samples. More broadly, the selected instrument
will provide Brown researchers with the ability to create, modify, and
characterize complex structures on the nanoscale, e.g. to extract TEM samples
from specific morphological features, to produce three-dimensional serial
sections for EBSD analysis of microstructure, and to fabricate unique test
structures for examining physical properties of nanomaterials. The growth in
nano-materials research at Brown has strained the existing capacity of our
Electron Microscope Central Facility (EMCF) and has exposed an urgent need for
the capabilities that can only be provided by a Dual Beam FIB/SEM instrument.
When added to the Brown EMCF user facility, this tool, the only one in Rhode
Island, will be available to all researchers in the state and southeast New
England. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
the acquisition of a new dual beam SEM/FIB, Brown University researchers will
now be able to both see and manipulate nanomaterials in a way that will allow
the creation of prototype nanomachines and structures on the nanoscale. In the
last century, the electron microscope allowed actual photographic images to be
formed of features in materials that are just a few atoms or molecules in size,
and impossible to see by other means. Now, a new type of tool (the dual beam
SEM/FIB) uses electron beams and focused ion beams to simultaneously see and
touch on the nanoscale, allowing scientists to assemble new materials and
devices with tailored mechanical, chemical, and/or optical properties.
Researchers at Brown in Engineering, Physics, Chemistry, Geology, Biology, and
Archeology will use the capabilities of the new dual beam SEM/FIB (the only one
in Rhode Island) to create, modify, and characterize nanomaterials in a wide
array of applications, including devices for the detection of DNA and other
biomolecules, new magnetic storage devices, and design of stronger and lighter
materials.