* 0821585
* MRI:   Acquisition of Equipment to Establish a Distributed Intelligent Agent Systems Infrastructure for Research and Education at Trinity University
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Christine Drennon, Trinity University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 07/31/2011
* USD 139,222.00

Proposal #: CNS 08-21585 PI(s): Zhang, Yu Drennon, Christine; Lewis, Mark C.;
Massingill, Berna Institution: Trinity University San Antonio, TX 78212-7200
Title: MRI/Acq.: Equipment to Establish a Distributed Intelligent Agent Systems
Infrastrcuture for Research and Education Project Proposed: This project,
acquiring a computing cluster, a file serve, workstations, and a geographic
information systems (GIS) server for the Distributed Intelligent Agent system
(DIAS) Lab, enables multi-agent simulation of social systems research and
education. Aiming to serve as a national model for undergraduate research in
multi-agent systems (MAS) and related fields, the following projects will be
conducted: - Cognitive Agents for Social Environments (CASE), - Multi-Agent
Simulation for Social Agents (MASSA), - High Performance Computing in Parallel
and Distributed Multi-Agent Systems, and - Enabling Multidisciplinary
Applications. The former captures the force that makes society and agents evolve
as well as the highly cognitive decision-making process for an individual agent
that sometimes follows intuitions and bounded rationality. The second provides
various services such as representation and visualization of large sets of data
of varying types. A multi-agent simulation, called MASSA for the CASE system
will also be developed. The third involves the design of load balancing and
communication schemes to spread work efficiently among multiple computers,
processors, and hard disks. The latter utilizes CASE and MASSA to explore
multidisciplinary applications that include urban dynamics, GIS, multi-scale
interaction, emergent behaviors, pattern formation, self-organization, and
others. This work fosters collaboration of various fields: computer science,
sociology, economics, neuroscience, and engineering.

Broader Impacts: This project ushers opportunities for undergraduate research,
curriculum and course development, recruitment of underrepresented and female
students, and local economy. The institution has developed approaches to engage
and retain students early on in their studies. The instrumentation strengthens
this effort. Revamping the curriculum a senior capstone course on multi-agent
systems and a First-Year Seminar course for non-CS students will be created. The
institution was awarded a McNair Scholars Program to establish support for
first-generation, low-income, and underrepresented minority students. Impact
will be felt in the local economy by furthering a partnership with the County
and the City to utilize the infrastructure as a tool for understanding urban
dynamics.

