* 0821304
* MRI: Acquistion of Femtosecond UV-Laser Ablation System for Elemental & Isotopic Mapping by Hyphenated Sector Field ICP-MS
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Lee Goldstein, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 07/31/2011
* USD 200,000.00

CBET-0821304 Goldstein

This NSF Major Research Instrumentation project requests funding for a
femtosecond laser ablation (LA) solid sampling system for analytical coupling
("hyphenation") to a newly-acquired magnetic sector field inductively-coupled
plasma mass spectrometer (SF-ICP-MS). The grant hyphenated LA-SF-ICP-MS system
is intended for high-resolution two-dimensional elemental and isotopic profiling
in a diverse range of materials and research applications. The system will
greatly expand the analytical capabilities of the recently-established Center
for Biometals and Metallomics (CBM), a unique multidisciplinary analytical
facility at the Boston University School of Medicine and College of Engineering.
The CBM is the only dedicated facility of its kind in the nation. The
centerpiece of the facility is a stateof- the-art SF-ICP-MS instrument acquired
through a Shared Instrument Grant funded by the National Center for Research
Resources, NIH. This powerful instrument is the gold standard for definitive
ultra-trace elemental and isotopic analyses in a wide variety of matrices.
Deployment of the proposed hyphenated analytical instrumentation will provide
researchers locally and throughout the region with an unparalleled analytical
resource that will accelerate lead-edge discovery in a wide range of fields.

Funds are requested for instrument acquisition to hyphenate the SF-ICP-MS
instrument with a powerful and complementary technology, high-resolution laser
ablation solid sampling. The proposed system couples definitive elemental and
isotopic analysis with high-resolution femtosecond laser-assisted spatial
sampling for wide-ranging application involving a variety of material
substrates. The application proposes to address new questions with new
technologies coupled in new ways and capitalizes on presently available
analytical capabilities and interdisciplinary expertise. Collaborations that
will benefit through use of the hyphenated analytical instrumentation include
the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Museum
of Ireland, Harvard and Boston University Schools of Public Health, and the US
Geological Service, amongst others. Access will be open to qualified students,
staff, and researchers throughout the region who require this advanced
analytical instrumentation for scientific inquiry. Senior scientists,
postgraduate researchers, graduate students, undergraduates, and facility staff
will be directly involved in utilizing the requested instrumentation.

The hyphenated system will be managed as a shared-collaborative user resource
allied to other significant institutional analytical facilities, including the
Boston University Mass Spectrometry Resource. A strong emphasis will be placed
on interdisciplinary interaction as well as education and training. Facility
staff will develop training courses, facilitate analytical protocol development,
assist collaborating scientists with experimental design and execution, and
organize internal and external conferences to promote the use of advanced mass
spectrometry instrumentation and allied hyphenated technologies for application
in a wide array of research programs and applications. Educational activities at
the high school, undergraduate, graduate, and post-graduate levels will be
integrated with ongoing analytical operations to facilitate both formal and
informal interaction amongst students, trainees, senior investigators, and
resource staff. Regional, national, and international scientific exchange is
already operative and is expected to expand with project funding. Novel
utilization, pilot experimentation and technology development will be encouraged
to open new and expanded research opportunities using LA-ICP-MS instrumentation.