* 0821296
* MRI: Acquisition of Surface Plasmon Resonance and Calorimetry Instrumentation
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Bruce Armitage, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2011
* USD 429,200.00

The Department of Chemistry at Carnegie-Mellon University will acquire a surface
plasmon resonance (SPR) instrument, an isothermal titration calorimeter and a
differential scanning calorimeter with this award from the Major Research
Instrumentation (MRI) program. These instruments will be used to address
questions in fundamental biology, biotechnology and nanotechnology, unified by
the theme of molecular recognition and bonding based on noncovalent
interactions. Some of the projects to be investigated include developing new
compounds that bind to specific sequences of DNA and RNA with high affinity; how
enzyme dynamics and function are coupled with thermodynamics in the context of
glutathione S-transferases, an important class of detoxification enzymes;
developing fluorescent biosensors that rely on RNA and protein recognition
elements that bind to specific targets and fluorogenic indicator
dyes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These instruments are used to study how molecules,
especially biologically important ones, bind to one another. Surface plasmon
resonance (SPR) allows both kinetic and equilibrium constants to be determined
at low nanomolar concentrations where biological activity is most desirable.
Isothermal titration and differential scanning calorimetry provide detailed
insight into the thermodynamics of these noncovalent interactions. These
instruments will be used by graduate and undergraduate students in their
research and in laboratory courses. They will receive sophisticated training
using modern instruments basic to understanding biochemical systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;