* 0821454
* MRI: Consortium Proposal: Acquisition of a Dual Beam Focused Ion Beam System to Support Transformative Device and Materials Research in the Greater Houston Area
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Alex Ignatiev, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2010
* USD 386,000.00

The objective of this research is to enhance science and engineering programs in
the Greater Houston area, one of the largest metropolitan complexes in the US
with a vibrant economy stimulated by the presence of major research
Universities, the Texas Medical Center, the NASA, and active industrial
research. The dual-beam focused ion-beam system will support a range of research
programs from energy research to nanoscience to nanoelectronics to astrobiology.
These include advanced data storage systems for information technologies;
biosensors for medical diagnostics, rapid drug development, and biodefence
applications; silicon-based drug delivery systems; and identification and
characterization of biomarkers in extraterrestrial
matter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the acquisition is to
leverage the existing fabrication toolset to gain great flexibility in
nanofabrication and in device and materials metrology. The instrument will
enable significant enhancements to a wide range of materials and device programs
including studies of resistive memories, fuel cells, high-temperature
superconductors, nanowire interconnect, nanoscale light sources, biosensors,
drug delivery systems, nanoelectro-mechanical system, and spintronics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the program is to bring together a
diverse group of institutions including the University of Houston, a prominent
urban university, the University of Texas Health Science Center, a premier
medical research institution, Rice University, the top-tier private school, and
NASA, a federally funded center. The partnership and new technical capabilities
will aid in the development of new collaborative programs, enable exploration of
new scientific frontiers that otherwise would not be possible, and to enhance
the educational experiences of the students involved.&lt;br/&gt;