* 0821606
* MRI: Acquisition of an Inductively Coupled Plasma (ICP) Etcher for Nano/Micro Device Fabrication
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Frank Fisher, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2011
* USD 190,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to achieve uniform and highly
selective anisotropic etching capabilities for research and training in
fabrication of micro/nanoscale sensors, actuators and devices at Stevens. To
achieve this objective we request funding for the acquisition of a state-of-the-
art Inductively Coupled Plasma (ICP) etching system. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit. The requested ICP etching system will greatly augment existing micro/nano
fabrication capabilities within the MicroDevices Laboratory at Stevens. Current
research projects directly benefiting from the requested system include: 1).
Nano and micro devices for sensing, communications and medicine; 2) Single-
electron carbon nanotube memory devics; 3) Nanoengineered surfaces for
microfluidic and nanobioscience applications; and 4) Bottom-up prototyping of
microchemical systems. Further, this ICP Etcher will promote and foster a
multidisciplinary research-intense learning environment in microsystems and
nanotechnology at Stevens.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. This ICP etcher is
essential to complete the fabrication process chain for micro/nano fabrication
capabilities at Stevens. Its capability will greatly impact research projects in
a number of multidisciplinary areas, many of which have significant broader
impact, including: new methods for thrombus retrieval from stroke patients,
novel memory and waveguide devices, biomolecular sensing, and nerve regeneration
and wound healing. This instrumentation request will also support two
educational initiatives underway at Stevens: a new cross-disciplinary PhD
program in Nanotechnology and an NSF Nanotechnology Undergraduate Education
grant, by increasing the number of students exposed to the proposed ICP Etcher
and the research projects leveraging its capabilities. Research results will
also be made available to K-12 students through the outreach
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;