* 0821619
* MRI: Acquisition of a FE-SEM to Enhance Research and Student Training in Biology, Chemistry, Geosciences, Physics, and Engineering at San Francisco State University
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Andrew Ichimura, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2011
* USD 783,210.00

The Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the San Francisco State
University will acquire a high resolution scanning electron microscope (HR-SEM)
with this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program. Diverse
research areas form the scientific thrust of this proposal. Topics in the
Chemistry/Biochemistry department include (a) fundamental studies of charge
transport within alkali metal-doped silica zeolite films; (b) the reactions of
inorganic environmental pollutants (As, Cr, Pb, Se, and Zn) with metal and metal
oxide surfaces. In the Biology department, SEM imaging will be used to study
tissue morphogenesis and molecular signaling for early skeletal muscles
(myotome) in chicken embryos. In the Geosciences department, SEM will facilitate
the study of mineral growth textures, compositional variations in minerals and
identification of inclusions to estimate pressures and temperatures of
growth/reaction, and zircon growth zoning for UPb dating on an ion microprobe.
In the School of Engineering, SEM is an indispensable tool in the research on
nanofabrication and characterization of smart nanomaterials with applications in
micro/nanoelectromechanical systems (M/NEMS).

A scanning electron microscope is a powerful tool for imaging a wide range of
materials including biological specimens (bacterial cells, organelles, plant
fibers and tissues), inorganic solids (crystals, minerals, and rocks), and a
range of modern synthetic and industrially-derived materials (nano-structured
materials, surfaces, thin films, and circuitry). The instrument provides
topological and compositional information of these materials. It is an essential
analytical tool in research of the properties and behavior of such materials.
This instrument will be used by BS and MS students in their research and in
laboratory training preparing them for careers in science and engineering with
state of the art technology.