* 0821856
* MRI: Acquisition of a Stable Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometer for Analyzing Specific Organic Compounds to Promote a Vigorous Isotopic Research and Teaching Program
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Matthew Wooller, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Steven E. Ellis
* 08/31/2009
* USD 237,452.00

This National Science Foundation award covers the acquisition costs of a stable
isotope ratio mass spectrometer (IRMS) system that will be used for analyses of
specific compounds (e.g. amino acids, fatty acids, plant lipids and methane) at
the University of Alaska Fairbanks (UAF). IRMS are used to analyze the stable
isotope ratios of a wide array of materials to investigate a broad suite of
research topics, including animal migration, elemental cycling, environmental
change and animal and plant physiology and biochemistry. Some federally
supported projects that will directly benefit from this instrumentation include
using compound specific isotope analyses to track the flow of carbon through
Arctic and Antarctic habitats, for analyzing compounds preserved in the fossil
record to reconstruct past environmental conditions and for identifying methane
sources in the Arctic, which could serve as a future alternative energy source.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Faculty and students from a broad range of departments and
institutes will use the new instrumentation. There are few other laboratories in
the U.S. that offer these types of analytical services. Graduate and
undergraduate educational activities will be improved by allowing students to
explore advanced technologies through the numerous classes and seminars
currently offered at UAF involving stable isotopic techniques.&lt;br/&gt;