* 0821162
* MRI: Acquisition of a Nanocoating System for Engineering Surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Eric Hequet, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 07/31/2011
* USD 275,000.00

CBET-0821162&lt;br/&gt;Dallas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL
MERIT&lt;br/&gt;The ability to engineer surface properties is critical to the
functionality, usefulness, and long term performance of a host of technologies
with important applications. In a number of technology areas, Texas Tech
researchers have developed testing and characterization systems that allow a
detailed, quantitative understanding of surface characteristics and performance.
These techniques have and will be used to establish benchmarks, thereby allowing
systematic performance comparisons to be made between coatings exposed to
various conditions. However, Texas Tech lacks a flexible deposition tool that is
capable of applying a wide variety of coatings to meet numerous application
goals. This proposal discusses Texas Tech's needs and plans for a Molecular
Vapor Deposition (MVD) system (Applied Microstructures MVD 100 system) for the
application of nanoscale coatings for applications that include micro/nano
devices and sensors, textiles, and bioengineering. The modification of intrinsic
surface properties is the key to higher performance devices and systems. This
tool has the capability to significantly impact diverse research areas and
educational endeavors through its addition to a multi-user facility and will
fill a critical void in our infrastructure. Transformative results are
anticipated that will have important technological and societal impact. The
physical properties of a material's surface govern many important aspects of how
the material interacts with the world. Specialized coatings can be as thin as a
few molecular layers, providing a usually negligible increase in mass, but
drastically changing the surface characteristics and hence the ability to
interact with other surfaces and vapors. This system will be used to conduct
basic and applied research on how and why specific nanocoatings perform the way
they do. This will promote the expansion of current research and scholarship
while opening the door to many new funding opportunities and research
interactions. The merits of the MVD technology include the precise injection of
specially tailored precursor and catalyst vapors into the vacuum chamber
allowing an adhesion layer and nanoscale molecular coatings (self-assembled
monolayers, etc.) to be applied to many different materials for a wide variety
of applications with almost zero waste. Because of the relative newness of this
technique, there is still much research that needs to be done to determine the
optimal molecular coating process for many important
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS&lt;br/&gt;The
acquisition of the MVD system will allow research and development activities
that have significant societal impact, including microdevices with longer
lifetimes and better performance, textiles with enhanced functionality, and
biomedical devices with improved
biocompatibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scholarly dissemination will be
accomplished through the many different journals and technical meetings
representative of the diverse research groups participating in this proposal.
The placement of the tool in a multi-user facility will promote numerous
additional applications as the pool of scientists and engineers interested in
utilizing its capabilities grows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The nanoscale coatings
produced by this system will be used in educational programs that span grade
school through graduate school. Utilization of the system will be incorporated
into three established graduate level classes (MEMS, AFM, and Textile Finishes)
that integrate research and education. A new short course will be developed to
introduce the technology to potential&lt;br/&gt;users from Texas Tech and
partner institutes (including Angelo State University). The striking contrast in
the wetting of surfaces with different surface characteristics allows nanoscale
effects to be readily discernable by the general populace. This feature will be
promoted by K-12 educational initiatives in chemistry and physics that will
reach many teachers and hundreds of students on a yearly basis. This is one
facet of reaching under-represented groups with the excitement of science and
technology, especially at the nanoscale. On-campus talks to women and minority
serving technical societies will increase the list of potential users and help
educate&lt;br/&gt;many college students on the importance of surface properties
in many technical areas.