* 0821799
* MRI: Acquisition of Integrated Small and Wide Angle X-ray Scattering Instrumentation for the Rocky Mountain Region
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Eugene Chen, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 09/30/2011
* USD 630,000.00

Abstract for a Technical Audience&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integrated
2D-SAXS/WAXS instrumentation requested will serve as a shared resource for the
academic institutions of the Northern Colorado Rocky Mountain region. These
include five major research universities (Colorado State University (CSU),
University of Colorado, Colorado School of Mines, Denver University, and
University of Wyoming) and two national labs (NREL and NIST ? Boulder), all
within an hour?s radius of CSU. The integrated 2D-SAXS/WAXS instrument will be
housed in the shared multi-user Central Instrument Facility (CIF) at CSU, a
24-hour open access facility for trained users. This instrumentation is expected
to have immediate usage by the research groups of 21 faculty originating from 10
departments spanning four of these universities. Among these are eight new
faculty for which local access to integrated 2D-SAXS/WAXS would play a deciding
role in the development of their emerging research programs. The integrated
2D-SAXS/WAXS instrumentation will be applied to the analysis of a tremendously
varied collection of research projects. Examples include the development of
nanostructured hydrogel networks and organic photovoltaic materials; the
characterization of morphology in stereo and DNA-like block copolymers; the
development of nanofiltration and reverse osmosis membranes from polymerizable
lyotropic liquid crystals; the mechanisms and roles of RNA folding in
translation and other biological activities; the role of structure on stability,
catalytic activity, and lifetime of transition-metal nanoparticle nanoclusters;
the mechanical and wear property improvement of joint replacement technologies;
the synthesis of biologically active materials from polyelectrolyte assemblies;
and the generation of polymer composites using renewable polymers. The
uniqueness of this instrument to the region, combined with the open-access
policies of the CIF will play a key role in maximizing our ability to develop
relationships with prospective students and faculty from all over the region,
including minority serving institutions in Colorado for which CIF usage at CSU
is encouraged through 100% subsidy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract for a Non-
Technical Audience&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoscience and nanotechnology research
in the Northern Colorado Rocky Mountain region has grown intensely in the last
decade, spurred on by the research activities at five major research
universities (Colorado State University, University of Colorado, Colorado School
of Mines, Denver University, and University of Wyoming), two national labs (NREL
and NIST ? Boulder), and political initiatives that entice emerging
nanotechnology companies to make Colorado their home. The integrated small and
wide angle X-ray scattering instrumentation sought in this proposal will be
housed within the multi-user Central Instrument Facility (CIF) at CSU, and
openly shared among region to advance the research programs of over 21 faculty
spanning 10 different departments across these institutions; research programs
that are developing next-generation materials for a rich and diverse collection
of applications, including organic solar cells, water filtration membranes,
chemical and drug delivery, nanoparticle catalysts, joint replacement
technologies, renewable polymer composites, artificial muscles and tissue growth
scaffolds. We anticipate a direct and significant impact on key infrastructural
goals and projects consistent with CSU?s educational mission for excellence and
innovation in teaching, and in particular our active efforts to broaden
participation of underrepresented groups in the sciences and engineering. The
uniqueness of this instrument, combined with the open-access policies of the CIF
will play a key role in developing relationships with prospective students and
faculty from all over the region, including several very important minority
serving institutions for which use of all instrumentation in the CIF is strictly
gratis. In addition, the inclusion of this instrument in our research and
curricular based education mechanisms will ensure our graduate and undergraduate
training programs are preemptively adapting to skill set demands consistent with
Colorado?s changing economic landscape.