* 0821256
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Pressure Oxygen Sputtering System for Research and Education in Oxide Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Bethanie Stadler, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2010
* USD 161,548.00

TECHNICAL ABSTRACT: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Minnesota proposes
acquisition of a multi-user, high-throughput, oxide thin film deposition system
to fuel a large interdisciplinary research effort in the field of oxide
heterostructures. This effort spans numerous areas of basic and applied research
including magnetism, superconductivity, correlated electrons, mechanical
behavior, solid-state chemistry, and magneto-optics. The users of the instrument
include four primary principal investigators, a total of seven principal
investigators (from four departments), an external national laboratory
collaborator, and ?î 15 undergraduates, graduate students, and post-docs. The
proposed instrument employs high pressure oxygen sputtering, a recently
developed method for fabrication of epitaxial multilayered oxide films with
exceptional control over crystalline and interfacial perfection. Following
acquisition of the system (the first of its kind in the US) it will be employed
in a wide variety of collaborative research including; (i) spin transport and
interface magnetism in perovskites, (ii) high-k dielectrics for
electrostatically tuned charge doping in organic semiconductors, high
temperature superconductors, and perovskite magnets, (iii) fabrication of
integrated magneto-optical devices, and (iv) atomic resolution electron
microscopy of oxide interfaces. Broader impacts are considerable and include the
potential societal benefits associated with advancement in this technologically
important area, broad dissemination of important basic research results,
enhancement of the inter-disciplinary educational opportunities provided to
young researchers, education of a skilled workforce in this technologically
important area, and essential improvements in instrumentation
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oxygen is an element that is very familiar to us in our
daily lives. Perhaps less familiar are the chemical compounds formed by reacting
simple metallic elements with oxygen to form a class of materials called the
solid oxides. In terms of their physical and chemical properties, these oxides
are some of the most versatile, useful, and rich materials of current scientific
interest. They find application in diverse areas, from simple household items
such as ceramics, to high-tech applications like computer processors, hard disk
drives, and environmentally friendly fuel cells. The majority of the more
demanding applications (in areas such as computation and information storage)
require that multiple different oxide materials are layered together to form the
nanometer-scale equivalent of a laminate. Such ¡§multilayers¡¨ or
¡§heterostructures¡¨ are also very important in basic science. In this project,
scientists at the University of Minnesota will acquire an instrument (the first
of its kind in the US) capable of layering together these oxide materials with
an unprecedented level of control over their atomic structures. Researchers from
the Materials Science, Chemical Engineering, Physics, Chemistry and Electrical
Engineering departments will then use these materials in a wide variety of basic
and applied scientific investigations in fields such as magnetics,
superconductivity, and semiconductors. The acquisition of this instrument will
also provide new training and education opportunities to many students and young
scientists, a vital contribution to the education of a skilled workforce in
these important and highly competitive areas of technology.