* 0821172
* MRI: Acquisition of a Powder X-ray Diffractometer for Research and Teaching
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* William McCarroll, Rider University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2011
* USD 155,291.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation program (MRI), Feng Chen
and colleagues Jonathan M. Husch, William H. McCarroll, Gary A. Pajer, and
Hongbing Sun from Rider University will acquire a powder X-ray diffractometer
(XRD) system to support multidisciplinary research and education programs. The
XRD will serve faculty members and students from four disciplines. The
instrument will provide a focus for the integration of materials science with
the fields of chemistry, physics, geology and environmental sciences at Rider
University. It will enhance research in nanotechnology, solid state chemistry,
non-linear optics, and the study of garnet compositions and soil mineral
patterns for geology and environmental science.&lt;br/&gt;The X-ray
diffractometer allows accurate and precise measurements of the three dimensional
structure of a molecule, including bond distances and angles, and it provides
accurate information about the spatial arrangement of the molecule relative to
the neighboring molecules. The synthesis of materials having an extended
structure, such as polymers, inorganic solids, glasses, or gels, often yields a
polycrystalline or phase-impure powder. Powder XRD is the most powerful tool
available for the structural characterization of such products. Powder XRD
pattern can elucidate the structure and relative abundance of the crystalline
phases present in a sample, it can expose the existence of preferred crystalline
orientation (called texture) of a film of a material relative to a crystalline
substrate surface, and the XRD linewidth can provide an estimate of the mean
crystallite (or grain) diameter. In addition, the structure of extremely thin
films (&lt;100 nm) of materials can be investigated by powder-XRD whereas such
films cannot be probed by single-crystal XRD. These studies will have an impact
in a number of areas such as chemistry, materials and geology.