* 0821604
* MRI: Acquisition of an Analytical Transmission Electron Microscope System for Multidisciplinary Research and Education at UNC Charlotte
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Ahmed Faik, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 07/31/2011
* USD 556,532.00

The objective of this Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award is to acquire a
transmission electron microscope (TEM) System for multidisciplinary research and
education at the University of North Carolina at Charlotte (UNC Charlotte). The
TEM will be housed at the UNC Charlotte Center for Optoelectronics and Optical
Communication. This shared-user instrument will impact 23 researchers from eight
departments and four interdisciplinary research centers at UNC Charlotte. It
will also serve as a central facility to researchers and students in the greater
Charlotte region and neighboring institutions including Johnson C. Smith
University (JCSU), Benedict College (BC), Winston-Salem State University (WSSU)
and Davidson College, scholars affiliated with the Center for Biomedical
Engineering Systems including the Carolina Medical Center, and industrial
partners associated with the Charlotte Research Institute. The TEM will
accelerate and stimulate research efforts encompassing (1) creation of new
classes of nanostructured materials for thermoelectric and solar energy
conversion; (2) creation of new ultrafine grained and nanocrystalline metals for
structural applications; (3) understanding environmental change caused by
geological forces to create a better planet; (4) discovery of novel materials
for the detection and degradation of environmental pollutants; (5) assessment of
nanoparticle risks in aquatic organisms for environmental concerns; (6)
understanding the mechanism of aging to realize future life prolongation; (7)
creation of new tissue engineering approaches to enhance bone integration with
orthopedic implants; and (8) creation of novel nanocomposites for future
lithography applications. Research results obtained using the TEM will provide
significant contributions to the broader areas of national and regional
technological needs, specifically in the fields of energy conversion,
environmental sustainability, biotechnology, advanced materials, and
optoelectronics. In addition, the TEM will have a direct impact on the new Ph.D.
program in Nanoscale Science that was launched in Fall 2007 as both an
educational and a research tool.

Combined with various materials characterization resources on campus, the TEM
will provide invaluable training and education opportunities to K-12,
undergraduate and graduate students (with a focus on students from groups
traditionally underrepresented in the sciences) as well as local area teachers
through: (1) various collaborative research and educational projects between
JCSU, WSSU, Benedict College (all three institutions are Historically Black
College and University institutions) and UNC Charlotte; (2) a variety resources
of Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) programs; (3) the Society of
Women Engineers (SWE) chapter; and (4) the Aspire! Summer Nanocamp program.

