* 0821032
* Investigation into the Evolution of a Protein Enzyme from Random Sequence Origin
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* John Chaput, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2012
* USD 405,870.00

Intellectual Merit. How the first protein enzymes evolved from a primordial pool
of random sequences remains a fundamental unanswered question in biology. One
possibility is that enzymes, by chance, had some intrinsic catalytic function
that was optimized by natural selection. An alternative scenario is that enzymes
evolved from proteins that initially only bound their substrates and later
adapted to catalyze reactions with those substrates. To address this question,
this project combines the principles of Darwinian evolution with X-ray
crystallography to study the mechanism by which proteins evolve function.
Through this process, a protein from random sequence origin was discovered that
catalyzes a reaction with the substrate for which it was selected. Based on this
observation, it was speculated that many enzymes may have originated from
proteins that initially only bound their substrates and later acquired the
ability to catalyze reactions with those substrates. This may be the first
example of a functional enzyme from random sequence origin. The practical value
of studying how proteins evolve function is that this knowledge could one day be
used to create tailor-made enzymes in the laboratory. In this regard, the
approach of this research project is ideal for evaluating the amount of
information that is needed to specify a polypeptide with a desired functional
property and the requirements needed to change or improve an existing function.
The focus of this research is to investigate the evolutionary path by which a
synthetic, non-biological protein evolved catalytic function. &lt;br/&gt;
Broader Impact. This research has the potential to provide broad scientific
impact by developing new insight into the diversity of structures and functions
distributed across the protein universe. By removing many of the intrinsic
biases associated with biology, the PI was able to search sparse regions of
protein sequence space for unique independent solutions to a given functional
problem. This approach led to the discovery that synthetic proteins obtained
from non-biological origins have the ability to adopt novel folds possessing
discrete chemical functions, which includes enzyme catalysis. Continued research
in this area is expected to improve the fundamental understanding of the
chemical basis of biological evolution by developing new constraints on models
that describe the evolution of biological proteins. This area of research is
also expected to reveal new strategies for evolving tailor-made enzymes in the
laboratory, which remains a major problem in chemical and synthetic biology. In
addition, this project also contains a significant educational component
designed to implement a proactive university effort to attract and maintain
student interest in the physical sciences, and improve the participation of
underrepresented minorities in math and science. As part of this project, the PI
plans to continue synergistic activities that involve training high school and
undergraduate students in laboratory techniques that allow them to tackle
significant problems in health and science. Through this work, the PI has
developed a relationship with Dr. Sandra Simpkins in the Center for Social and
Family Dynamics at ASU to help understand the values that children place on
science.