* 0821600
* MRI: Acquiring a 500 MHz NMR Spectrometer to Establish the Joint Morehouse College - Clark Atlanta University  Magnetic Resonance Facility (MCMRF)
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Ishrat Khan, Clark Atlanta University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2011
* USD 549,800.00

Non-Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Clark Atlanta University and
Morehouse College, located on contiguous campuses in Atlanta Georgia, propose to
establish the joint Morehouse College - Clark Atlanta University Magnetic
Resonance Facility to serve the research and educational needs of students,
faculty and research staff. Pursuant to this goal these institutions have
jointly submitted to the National Science Foundation this NSF-MRI proposal to
acquire a 500 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance spectrometer. The two institutions
have a long history of providing the Country with a source of highly trained and
talented minority scientists. The utilization of this Facility will impact the
quality of courses provided to both undergraduate and graduate students. Its
utilization by undergraduates involved in research, graduate students developing
their theses and dissertations and research staff and faculty will impact the
quality and broaden the scope of their investigations. Nuclear magnetic
resonance has the ability to reveal the composition and structure of substances
at the molecular level and is thus an essential tool in tackling problems in
areas as diverse as how living system function and the adsorbants on catalysts.
Furthermore, the availability of this instrument will permit the researchers at
both Institutions to significantly contribute to the solutions of complex
scientific and technological problems by undertaking investigations that will
deliver on the promise of science in the service of humankind. The purchase of
the 500 MHz NMR spectrometer and the establishment of the Morehouse College -
Clark Atlanta University Magnetic Resonance Facility is an integral part of the
strategic plan to increase the research capacity and competitiveness of these
two Institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Clark Atlanta University and Morehouse College,
located on contiguous campuses in Atlanta Georgia, propose to establish the
joint Morehouse College - Clark Atlanta University Magnetic Resonance Facility
to serve the research and educational needs of students, faculty and research
staff. Pursuant to this goal these institutions have jointly submitted to the
National Science Foundation this NSF-MRI proposal to acquire a 500 MHz Nuclear
Magnetic Resonance spectrometer. The utilization of this Facility will impact
the quality of courses provided to both undergraduate and graduate students. Its
utilization by undergraduates involved in research, graduate students developing
their theses and dissertations and research staff and faculty will impact the
quality and broaden the scope of their investigations. The ongoing and
anticipated research programs that will be positively impacted by the
establishment of this Center include: work in material synthesis and
characterization, nanobiotechnology, organic and polymer synthesis, enzyme
structure-function studies and catalysis. Among the specific research projects
that will benefit from the acquisition of the 500 MHz spectrometer are
the:&lt;br/&gt;? Synthesis and modification of zeolites and related micro and
mesoporous aluminosilicate and organosilicates for applications as adsorbents,
catalysts, and components of nanocomposites&lt;br/&gt;? Towards a Better
Biodiesel: Scope and reactivity of low-valent transition metal complexes in the
hydrogenation, amination, and carbonylation of non-olefinic
substrates&lt;br/&gt;? Design and preparation of functional nanoscale materials
for controlling and understanding material-protein and material-cell interaction
&lt;br/&gt;The purchase of the 500 MHz NMR spectrometer and the establishment of
the MCMRF is an integral part of the strategic plan to increase the research
capacity and competitiveness of these Institutions.