* 0821801
* Characterization of XopN, a Heat-Repeat TTSS Effector Required for Xanthomonas Pathogenesis in Tomato
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Mary Beth Mudgett, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2013
* USD 506,015.00

This project seeks to identify critical plant processes affected during
bacterial pathogenesis, opening the door to the discovery of alternative methods
to control or eliminate plant disease. The investigators will use genetic,
biochemical, and cell biological approaches to determine how pathogenic bacteria
suppress plant defenses to promote colonization. The disease that will be
studied is bacterial spot disease of tomato caused by Xanthomonas campestris
pathovar vesicatoria (Xcv). Xcv has evolved a specialized secretion system
(referred to as the type III secretion system (TTSS)) to transport 30-35
proteins into the plant cell during infection. The intellectual goal of this
project is to determine the biochemical function of XopN, a unique Xcv protein
that is highly conserved amongst different Xanthomonas species. The central
hypothesis is that XopN interferes with protein-protein interactions in tomato
to suppress defense activation. The specific aims are to: (1) characterize XopN
protein domains required for Xcv pathogenesis in tomato; (2) characterize a
tomato protein that XopN binds to at the plant plasma membrane; and (3) identify
and characterize plant pathways specifically modulated by XopN during Xcv
infection. Knowledge gain herein will contribute to the mechanistic
understanding of microbial pathogenesis and the regulation of defense pathways
in plants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;In the long-term,
knowledge gained herein will be used by academia, industry, and the government
to address agricultural production, disease prevention, and eradication. In the
short-term, the investigators will work with K-12 teachers in Fremont CA and
their students to introduce this plant topic. Currently, a plant biology
curriculum is not being taught. Emphasis will be to train students and teachers
about plant biology, disease, and agriculture - highlighting the importance of
the plant sciences and its impact on society.