* 0821497
* MRI:   Development of a GPU-Enabled Integrated Storage Computation Architecture and System
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Anthony Skjellum, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 07/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

This project, developing an experimental high performance computing/storage
platform based on GPGPU technologies (CUDA, CTM), integrates storage more
closely with computation, while achieving higher performance and availability
than current commercial high-end controllers. Emphasizing design, performance-
analysis, integration, optimization, and construction, the work seeks to enable
the construction of massive storage with high reliability, while remaining cost
effective and high performing. A computation/storage hierarchy will be designed,
studied with diverse components at small scale, optimized further, and finally
constructed at full scale (reaching 250+ terabytes). GPU performance proves to
be a ?disruptive technology? enabling the architecture to deliver I/O at full
performance, something not possible with multicore x86 systems alone. High
performance, high reliability parallel I/O will coexist with computation and be
supported through pNSF, rather than being presented only as add-on SAN
architecture or as limited direct attached storage. Introducing simpler
controllers (JBOD plus failover) and using GPUs for offloading RAID computation
and reconstruction, systemic abstraction barriers of separate controller and CPU
subsystems should weaken. Since failures occur in practice at non-trivial rates
in large installations, the system will be configurable for high performance
with RAID configurations (e.g., three-disk-or-higher failure resiliency). The
constructed large-scale system will be used to test reliability and performance.
The ability to move computation closer to storage drives the experimental
architecture that will support scalable scientific algorithms as well as modern
Internet application back-ends. If successful, the architecture of the clusters
and grid nodes might shift from x86-64 servers plus local RAID or SAN storage to
this heterogeneous architecture while conserving programming paradigms (e.g.,
MPI-2 + Pthreads). Muticore x86-64 CPUs alone might be insufficient for
achieving high availability, high performance storage and computation based on
current and near-term COTS components. Furthermore, silicon optimizations that
may converge GPUs with CPUs might not significantly diminish the long-term value
of the proposed cluster architecture and associated systems integration work.