* 0821235
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Flow Cytometer 4 Color Dual Laser Basic for the Identification and Quantification of Cells
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Lakshmaiah Sreerama, St. Cloud State University
* Standard Grant
* Vicki Martin
* 08/31/2011
* USD 142,615.00

A grant has been awarded to St. Cloud State University (SCSU), St. Cloud,
Minnesota, to acquire a flow cytometer that is a versatile and easy-to-use
instrument that can perform quick, multicolor flow cytometric analysis in order
to detect and quantify different types of cells. Intellectual Merit: The flow
cytometer will bring to SCSU a highly sensitive tool crucial for sophisticated
cellular and molecular analysis in areas such as immunology, genetics,
biochemistry, microbiology, parasitology, physiology, phycology and aquatics.
Nine research laboratories in the Biology and Chemistry departments at SCSU all
require identification and quantification of different cell molecules. The
acquisition of the proposed instrument will allow the PI to elucidate important
biological mechanisms involved in signal transduction of immune responses. In
addition, the flow cytometer will be used to research eukaryotic transcriptional
regulation, cell cycle control, tumor cell sensitivity, hormonal responses,
bacterial toxin activity, and environmental aquatic contamination. Thus, the
utilization of the flow cytometer will promote diverse research projects by nine
laboratories, and undergraduate research training in common cell analysis
technique. Broader Impacts: Incorporation of proposed instrument into
undergraduate curricula will also greatly improve the laboratory practices of
several biology and chemistry classes, including Immunology, Hematology, and
Cell culture techniques. A robust, versatile, multicolor flow cytometer is a
fundamental piece of equipment for a research and teaching institution such as
SCSU. Its acquisition will not only enrich primary research, cross-departmental
collaboration and undergraduate teaching, but also promote attractiveness of
SCSU to new prospective students and faculty.