* 0821988
* R&amp;D: Building BLOCKS for Science--What young children should know and be able to do when they enter kindergarten
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* Mary Hobbs, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Julia Clark
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,860,616.00

The Texas Regional Collaboratives, headquartered in the Center for Science and
Mathematics Education at the University of Texas in Austin seeks to integrate
research and applied education to take important tools inside pre-kindergarten
classrooms to assess young students' knowledge and skills and test strategies
for teaching core science concepts to young learners. The project will involve
teachers from multiple backgrounds and will be conducted in a variety of
settings with an emphasis on including classrooms where students are culturally
and economically diverse. The mixed methods research will include data
collection via case studies and technology-based assessment
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Utilizing a robust research community of
science and early childhood educators, science content specialists, researchers,
and classroom teachers, the project will conduct four years of intense classroom
observation and data collection in 25 pre-kindergarten classrooms with the
intent of probing for answers to the following questions: (a) What should
children know and be able to do when they enter kindergarten? (b)What core STEM
ideas should be stressed in pre-kindergarten/kindergarten science learning
activities? (c)What professional development practices best support the teaching
of complex STEM concepts and processes to young learners?