* 0821556
* MRI: Acquisition of Terahertz Ray Research Facility
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Costas Soukoulis, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 07/31/2011
* USD 342,500.00

CBET-0821556&lt;br/&gt;Thompson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently, electromagnetic
radiation in the terahertz frequency range, best known as terahertz rays
(T-rays), has emerged as one of the most promising energy forms for measurement
in a variety of applications in science and engineering. T-rays, residing in a
relatively unexplored region between the microwave and infrared, are considered
by many to be the last frontier in the electromagnetic spectrum. This has
recently become accessible because of instrumentation advances and the
acquisition of a system for T-ray imaging and spectroscopy is proposed. Initial
interest in this system at Iowa State University was motivated by a number of
applications in physics, chemistry and engineering, and includes applications to
the characterization of photonic and metamaterials, solvation of ionic liquids,
fundamental studies of multiphase combustion and flow processes, nondestructive
evaluation of composite materials, and bioengineering. Given the newness and
limited availability of such equipment, there will doubtlessly be numerous
applications that are not initially expected. Accordingly, a portion of the user
time will be set aside for innovative exploratory projects. In addition time
will be made available to users from other institutions to allow others to
explore these special opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of the proposed equipment acquisition is extremely high, as would be
expected when a new measurement frontier is opened. Among the reasons for this
is the fact that the newly accessible terahertz frequency regime is one in which
molecular resonances dominate. Accordingly, the absorption spectra of T-rays
exhibit distinct signatures for substances such as water vapor, polar plastics,
certain gases, DNA, crystalline solids, biofuel feedstocks and explosives.
Examples of problems in which unique experimental information can be obtained by
this technique are identified in the project areas described above and developed
in greater detail in the proposal. The proposing team is in an excellent
position to investigate these because of its strong experimental and theoretical
programs in condensed matter physics, chemistry, combustion and environmental
engineering, nondestructive evaluation and other areas of science and
engineering. It is also anticipated that new interdisciplinary opportunities
will manifest themselves as this broad group works in a common facility. The
dedication of a portion of the user time to innovative exploratory projects and
collaborative users from other institutions is designed to maximize the
opportunity for exploratory research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significant Broader
benefits to society will be a natural outcome of this instrumentation
acquisition. In addition to fundamental scientific studies, applications of
T-rays are rapidly emerging in a number of areas including the automotive,
aviation, food, energy, materials, pharmaceuticals, medical diagnosis,
forensics, defense, and homeland security. It can be expected that broad
advances in such areas can be expected based on accessibility to the proposed
equipment. The intellectual excitement associated with a new scientific tool,
along with the existence of practical applications that have major benefit to
society, will make this an area of significant interest to students. In addition
to the obvious education of graduate and undergraduate students that will occur,
this forefront instrumentation will serve as a magnet that will be a centerpiece
in efforts to recruit and educate a more diverse student body. As an example,
the Principal Investigator is currently engaged in programs aimed at increasing
the involvement of Hispanic, African American and Native American students, and
the facility built around this instrumentation should increase the
attractiveness of those programs.