* 0821899
* Center for Magnetic Self-Organization in Laboratory and Astrophysical Plasmas
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2016
* Ellen Zweibel, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jean Allen
* 08/31/2016
* USD 15,538,000.00

The goal of the Center for Magnetic Self-Organization in Laboratory and
Astrophysical Plasmas (CMSO), initiated in September, 2003, is to unite
laboratory and astrophysical plasma scientists to advance critical plasma
physics topics common to both fields. The sense of the CMSO research mission is
captured by two large questions: Why is the universe magnetized? How do magnetic
fields affect the structure of plasmas? CMSO encompasses and is organized around
four, coupled processes: magnetic reconnection, dynamo effects, momentum
transport, and magnetic turbulence. The heart of the effort is focused on
answering fundamental questions in each area through experiment, computation,
and theory, and applying the understanding to important astrophysical problems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These physics problems are addressed by a team of
scientists from seven institutions that collectively provide unique tools (seven
experiments and an arsenal of computational resources) and great breadth of
expertise from the lab to astrophysics, and from experiment to theory to
computation. The member institutions are the University of Wisconsin, Princeton
University and the Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory, Los Alamos National
Laboratory, the University of Chicago, the University of New Hampshire,
Swarthmore College, and Science Applications International Corporation.
Participating experiments include three toroidal plasma experiments that exhibit
many features of self-organization: the MST reversed field pinch (Wisconsin) and
two merging plasma experiments, MRX (Princeton) and SSX (Swarthmore); two linear
experiments for line-tied reconnection: RSX (Los Alamos), RWX (Wisconsin); and
two liquid metal experiments: the MRI experiment (Princeton) for studying the
magnetorotational instability, and the Madison Dynamo Experiment. National
laboratory participation (Los Alamos, Princeton) will be supported by DOE, as is
the experimental infrastructure; thus, CMSO is very much a partnership between
NSF and DOE. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational outreach program is based on
The Wonders of Physics lecture-demonstration program through the University of
Wisconsin. Under the auspices of this program CMSO representatives make over 100
presentations per year reaching an audience of school children and the general
public of 10,000 persons per year. In the past year, presentations were made to
2000 African American children through specially targeted presentations and
extensively to Native Americans and rural communities.