* 0821771
* MRI: Acquisition of a Composite Femtosecond Lasing System for Broadband Non-linear Static and Dynamic Optical Analysis of Organic and Semiconducting Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* David Kelley, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2010
* USD 656,473.00

Technical abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposers is to
acquire a composite, ultrafast broadband laser and general purpose detection
system to serve the research and teaching goals of UC Merced, the 10th and
newest campus in the University of California system. The proposed instruments
include (a) a multi-stage cascaded lasing system comprising a solid-state pump
and seed laser, a regenerative amplifier and two synchronous optical parametric
amplifiers (OPA). Each OPA will provide ultrafast (150 femtosecond width) pulses
covering large portions of the ultraviolet, visible, near- and far-infrared
spectral regions, and a white light continuum, and (b) detection modules
consisting of ultrafast avalanche photodiodes coupled to software controlled
time-correlated photon counting electronics, and an imaging spectrograph. This
acquisition will be easily reconfigurable for multiple static and dynamic
applications such as transient absorption, four-wave mixing, photoluminescence,
and magneto-optical Faraday and Kerr measurements, among others. The broad
spectral tunability of the laser system coupled with its high temporal
resolution provides enormous flexibility to support a wide variety of
experimental research across several disciplines, including condensed matter,
optics, bioengineering and biophysics. Some topics to be covered are studies of
electron and atomic spin polarization and coherence times in semiconductors and
insulators; opto-electronic dynamics of individual high-purity carbon nanotubes
and intertube energy transfer mechanisms; radiative excitonic lifetimes using
four wave mixing in organic-semiconductor liquid crystal composites;
photoisomerization on surfaces to enable single molecules to perform
sophisticated tasks necessary for molecular scale devices; pulsed light
propagation through novel optical fibers; two-photon absorption analysis of
nonlinear optical responses of conjugated organic chromophores; and dynamics of
actin during phagocytosis using two-photon excitation fluorescence
microscopy.&lt;br/&gt;The proposers have well-defined plans for integrating this
proposed acquisition into education, synchronized with the growth of this new
campus. A Nanotechnology minor for undergraduates has been planned and is to be
offered starting in Fall 2009. The planned curriculum for this minor includes
optical characterization of synthesized nanomaterials as an important part of
its laboratory component. An upper division laboratory course is also being
designed for the Physics major to be offered for the first time in Spring 2009,
in which there is a extensive optics component. In addition, the location of UC
Merced, with its high underrepresented student population, offers a means to
attract and retain underrepresented students to science and technology and
several PIs and co-PIs are involved in outreach
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical abstract:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Optical techniques provide a means to both interrogate and
manipulate properties of organic and inorganic materials over a broad range of
energy and time scales. We propose the acquisition of a highly versatile laser
and detection system that will allow researchers across several disciplines to
perform a wide variety of optical and opto-electronic experiments and hence
serve the research and teaching goals of UC Merced, the 10th and newest campus
of University of California. Systems which will be investigated include
semiconductors, exotic magnets, nanotubes, quantum dots, liquid crystals and
biomolecules. These studies constitute highly interdisciplinary projects and
will benefit a large number of graduate students across chemistry, physics,
materials science and electrical engineering. Additionally, the PIs have well-
defined plans for integrating this proposed acquisition into education,
synchronized with the growth of this new campus. A Nanotechnology minor for
undergraduates has been planned and is to be offered starting in Fall 2009. The
planned curriculum for this minor includes optical characterization of
synthesized nanomaterials as an important part of its laboratory component. An
upper division laboratory course is also being designed for the Physics major to
be offered for the first time in Spring 2009, in which there is a extensive
optics component.