* 0821954
* Functional Genomics of Transfer Cells
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2008,01/31/2011
* Karen Koch, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 01/31/2011
* USD 1,986,692.00

PI: Christopher G. Taylor (Donald Danforth Plant Science Center) coPIs: Lauren
McIntyre, Karen E. Koch (University of Florida; subawardee)

Intellectual Merit: The aim of this project is to define and characterize genes
important in the development and function of transfer cells. Transfer cells
facilitate the mass movement of sugars and amino acids from extracellular spaces
to the inside of plant cells. For example, transfer cells are formed in
endosperm tissues where assimilates are transferred from maternal tissues to the
developing seed. Certain biotrophic interactions are also known to induce the
formation of cells with similar function. Root-knot nematodes induce the
formation of multinucleated cells, called giant cells, which serve as the
exclusive source of nematode nutrition. Due to their functional similarities,
transfer cells from seeds and nematode-induced giant cells share many of the
same morphological characteristics including thickened and highly invaginated
cell walls, dense cytoplasm, abundant ER, and numerous small vacuoles and
mitochondria. Cells with transfer cell-like function are eminent objects of
scientific interest since their activity involves a number of poorly understood
molecular and cytological transport processes and they are crucial for the
survival of both plants and specific biotrophic plant pathogens. Using laser
capture microdissection, the transcriptome of transfer cells from developing
seeds and from nematode-induced giant cells of Arabidopsis and maize will be
examined for genes involved in transfer cell development and function. Genes
unique and common to endosperm transfer cells and giant cells will be examined
for their patterns of expression during plant development and nematode
infestation. Sub-cellular localization of proteins will aid in assigning the
role of proteins to transfer cell functions. T-DNA insertion lines (Arabidopsis)
and transposon tagged lines (maize) will be used to examine the function of
genes (and the proteins they encode) during seed development or nematode
parasitism. Molecular and biochemical analysis of Arabidopsis and maize mutants
will provide additional information on the role of transfer cells in assimilate
movement. All research materials will be cataloged and described on a project
website (http://www.danforthcenter.org/taylor/) and made available to the
research community. These experiments will provide valuable insight into the
molecular basis of giant and transfer cell function and will be of high
practical relevance given the importance of root-knot nematodes as plant
pathogens and the importance of transfer cells in the formation of seed, fruit
and/or biomass.

Broader Impacts: Three approaches to broadening the impact of science will be
provided in this project. First, summer undergraduate interns will get involved
in the project through the summer REU internship program at the Danforth Center.
This program is dedicated to fostering an interest and understanding in basic
science among students with an emphasis on the recruitment of underrepresented
minorities. Secondly, we will provide summer teacher fellowships through a
Research Education for Teachers (RET) program. The participating science teacher
benefits from the knowledge and experience provided by working in an active
laboratory. Thirdly, this project will develop several DNA Microarray Traveling
Trunks that teach high school students about microarrays and their uses. High
school science teachers will be trained to use the trunk and develop and
administer lesson plans based on microarray technology. The Trunk program will
incorporate lesson plans, equipment, materials, online resources and hands-on
student activities to demonstrate the principals of microarrays. The Trunks will
be shared among the school districts, reaching a diverse array of students
across the St. Louis and surrounding areas.