* 0821501
* MRI: Acquisition of an LCMS for the Chemistry Department at the University of Vermont
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Giuseppe Petrucci, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2011
* USD 430,735.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation program (MRI), Dwight
Matthews and UVM colleagues Giuseppe Petrucci, Matthias Brewer, Martin Case,
William Geiger, Thomas Hughes as well as Kevin Kittredge (Siena College) and
Linda Luck (SUNY, Plattsburgh) will acquire a low-flow liquid-chromatograph
tandem mass spectrometer (LC-MS/MS) system that will increase collaboration
amongst UV, Siena College and the State University of New York at Plattsburgh.
These collaborative efforts will enhance the research and educational
infrastructure of the region. The instrumentation will be used in seven specific
research activities: (1) synthesis of complex N- or O-containing polycyclic
compounds for biomedical application, (2) self-association of peptides, (3) C-C
coupling reactions of unactivated olefins, employing an organorhenium electron-
transfer mediator, (4) use of macrocyclic precursors to synthesize short single-
wall nanotubes segments, (5) linking mechanisms of crown ether modified
monolayer-protected clusters, (6) development of biosensors for estrogen
disrupting chemicals, and (7) environmentally relevant heterogeneous reactions
of volatile and semi-volatile organic compounds on airborne
particles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mass spectrometry (MS) is a technique used to
probe intimate structural details and to obtain the molecular compositions of a
vast array of organic, bioorganic, and organometallic molecules. This research
is also expected to have a positive effect on the environment. MS is one of the
fastest growing and most widely used analytical instrumentation techniques.
Because of this, it is important for graduate and undergraduate students to be
exposed to the technique. To a first approximation a tandem mass spectrometer
can be thought of as two mass spectrometers in series connected by a chamber
that can break a chemical species into pieces to facilitate
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;