* 0821625
* MRI:    Acquisition of an Advanced Computational Infrastructure for Modeling Biological Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Sarah Kieweg, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 07/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

Proposal #: CNS 08-21625&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Clark, Terry W.&lt;br/&gt; Kieweg,
Sarah L.; Kuczera, Krzysztof; Lushington, Gerry H.; Peterson, A.
Townsend&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Kansas &lt;br/&gt; Lawrence, KS
66045-7563&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Acq.: Acq. of an Advanced Computational
Infrastructure for Modeling Biological Systems&lt;br/&gt;Project
Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project, acquiring a parallel cluster for scientist to
conduct modeling on biological systems, aims to&lt;br/&gt;- Deploy the cluster
and integrate it with an existing high-capacity storage facility for projects,
&lt;br/&gt;- Leverage the equipment through the group of investigators towards
interdisciplinary projects, and&lt;br/&gt;- Advance collective computing
expertise.&lt;br/&gt;The cluster will be managed to provide a minimal set of
resources on demand to investigators participating on the proposal with
additional resources allocated to the community for promoting computational
growth for new users and educational programs. The resource enables qualitative
advancements in critical areas in the computational biosciences. Species niche
modeling and context-dependent evolution of DNA is fundamental to downstream
management of environmental resources through broadening understanding of
organism response to environmental factors at macroscopic and microscopic
levels. Other work aims to engineer microbial delivery agents for use in
combating the AIDS epidemic. Molecular studies advance methodologies for
accurately modeling phenomenological and microscopic properties of molecular
interactions of protein and DNS, with other work including development of high
throughput predictive models for small molecule
reactivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;This project
increases opportunities for students to gain experience in parallel computing as
part of course work, enhances research opportunities for graduate students,
supports the career development of junior faculty, and establishes a potential
for a broader high performance parallel computing base within the university and
surrounding area. A faculty coordinator is specifically assigned to assist in
recruitment and retention of students from underrepresented groups.