* 0821153
* Invertibility of hybrid systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Daniel Liberzon, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2012
* USD 253,935.00

Objective:

The proposed research studies systems that can operate in several different
modes, with some discrete dynamics governing the mode changes. Each mode of
operation is described by a dynamical system having an internal state, an
external input (which can be thought of as a disturbance or a control signal),
and a measured output. Such systems are known as hybrid or switched systems. An
important structural property of these systems that has not been investigated is
invertibility, which is the ability to reconstruct an unknown input and an
unknown current mode of operation from the knowledge of the measured output.
Invertibility may represent a desired property in system design, because it
allows one to infer the system configuration (characterized by the operating
mode) and the external influences (characterized by inputs) from the observed
data. Or, to ensure system security, one may want to design the system not to be
invertible, in order to ensure that the intruder will not be able to gain access
to protected system information. The goal of the proposed research is to develop
a methodology for investigating this property for hybrid systems.

Intellectual Merit:

The main theoretical outcome of the proposed research will be a new set of
theoretical tools for studying the invertibility property for hybrid systems.
This new theory will rely on a fusion of techniques from the classical theory of
invertibility for single-mode systems and from the more modern theory of
switched and hybrid systems, thereby pushing both of these research directions
to new frontiers.

Broader Impacts:

Invertibility is an important property in system design and system security
analysis. The theoretical tools developed in the proposed project will provide
new guidelines for system design in applications. A particular application
discussed in detail in the proposal is topology recovery in multi-agent
networked systems. We envision applications in a variety of other areas,
including vehicle systems, biological systems, and power networks. The proposed
research will be naturally integrated with education through course development
and graduate student mentoring. The PI will ensure wide result dissemination and
outreach through publications, invited lectures, tutorial workshops, and web-
based materials.

