* 0821788
* MRI:  Acquisition of Fiber Optic &amp; Tiltmeter Systems for Measuring Deformations in Deep Underground Facilities
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2008,01/31/2011
* Mary MacLaughlin,  Montana Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 01/31/2011
* USD 488,776.00

&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide funding to acquire state-of-the-art fiber
optic and tiltmeter sensor systems for monitoring deformations in deep
underground facilities, such as tunnels, mines, and laboratories. The research
facilitated by this acquisition will entail utilization of existing fiber optic
technology, but in a relatively novel application and at a site (the proposed
DUSEL site located at the former Homestake Mine in Lead, SD) that would provide
exciting potential for building long-term research synergy. Fiber optic
instruments have previously been used in other engineering applications, but
this will be the first comprehensive study of their performance in the
challenging underground environment of large excavations in rock. Measurements
of rock deformation will be made and compared in different spatial and temporal
scales, at sites with drastically different expected behavior.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The distributed and localized strain measurements at the
DUSEL site will provide a crucial infrastructure database for several
geomechanics, hydrology, and geoengineering experiments. The large volume of
coverage makes it ideal for calibrating a mine-scale finite element model of
deformation; as such, the fiber-optic strain experiment will contribute to
design and construction of large rooms and to mine safety. Specifically, the
fiber optic network will contribute to: (1) understanding how rock masses deform
as a function of spatial scale over long times, (2) interpreting mine seismicity
experiments, (3) testing of the coupling between fracture flow and deformation,
and (4) safety as it provides a large-volume indication of the mine ?breathing?
and can be deployed with a common measurement protocol for cavern monitoring.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While there is a focus on deploying the fiber optic
instrumentation in the Homestake site as part of the DUSEL initiative, other
sites will serve to develop deployment and interpretation techniques and as
locations for comparative studies. These include a) Fermilab in Illinois, where
a tiltmeter-based monitoring system is already in place and has produced a
2-year database of observations, and b) actively-deforming mines, both coal and
hardrock, to allow evaluation of the performance of the monitoring systems in
less than ideal working conditions, in which the rock is expected to undergo
substantial movement. A comprehensive comparative study such as this will lead
to much wider use of this technology in the mining and tunneling industries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research focused on providing a safe working environment
in the subsurface has been central to Montana Tech for its entire century of
existence. The new equipment will allow Montana Tech to make substantial new
contributions in this area, benefiting operation of subsurface facilities and
those who work there. Acquisition of these monitoring systems will also provide
an unprecedented and very exciting opportunity for Montana Tech faculty to
collaborate with high level researchers from the premiere doctoral institutions
in the U.S.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;DUSEL is an exceptional opportunity for
university, industry, and national laboratory researchers to work in partnership
on problems from construction to basic geoscience and geo-engineering by
occupying a single in situ, large-volume, underground laboratory with three-
dimensional access. K-12 through graduate students and the public will gain an
appreciation of how knowledge about underground rock mass response is gained by
observing researchers pose questions, conduct experiments, make observations,
and analyze and interpret the results. Montana Tech has very strong
Undergraduate Research Program, and the opportunity to conduct research at the
DUSEL is expected to be particularly attractive to student researchers. The PI
has demonstrated great success involving female students and undergraduates in
her research.&lt;br/&gt;