* 0821168
* MRI: Acquisition of an Atom Probe for Materials Research
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* G. Robert Odette, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2010
* USD 750,000.00

The proposed atom probe instrument will address and solve a wide range of
fundamental and applied problems in ongoing and future research at the
University of California, Santa Barbara. The atom probe instrument is capable of
revealing the location and identifying most of the atoms in a material. The atom
probe will be used to solve key problems in atomic scale structure and chemistry
for ~15-25 research groups in Materials, Electrical Engineering, Chemical
Engineering, Physics, Chemistry, and Geology. It will be used to analyze the
three-dimensional structure and composition of materials for light emission and
electronic devices, materials systems for advanced propulsion, energy
generation, including gas turbines and nuclear reactors, and hypersonic flight.
Dedicated space will be provided for the atom probe in UCSB?s Microscopy and
Microanalysis Facility. The atom probe is an ideal tool for introducing future
scientists to the wonders of the atomic scale structure of nature. We will offer
a new course in our characterization course sequence. We will host a teachers
and undergraduate students to work with atom probe techniques. We will take
advantage of the new visualization capabilities of the UCSB Allosphere, which is
a sphere, spanning three stories, which provides a fully immersive visual and
audio environment. and is an integral component of UCSB?s California Nano
Systems Institute.

The proposed atom probe instrument will address and solve a wide range of
fundamental and applied materials problems in ongoing and future research at the
University of California, Santa Barbara (UCSB). It will allow researchers at
UCSB to perform three-dimensional, atomic resolution, compositional imaging and
analysis with a local electron atom probe (LEAP). The LEAP will have laser
pulsing capabilities for the analysis of low electrical conductivity materials
including semiconductors, ceramics and geological materials. The atom probe will
be used to solve key problems in atomic scale structure and chemistry for ~15-25
research groups in Materials, ECE, Chemical Engineering, Physics, Chemistry, and
Geology and other departments at UCSB. In the area of electronic materials, the
atom probe instrument will be used to solve key problems in interfacial
chemistry and abruptness, alloy composition and homogeneity, and dopant and
impurity distributions in wide bandgap semiconductors for light emission and
electron devices, epitaxial materials for spintronics and materials for novel
CMOS devices. In the area of nuclear materials, atom probe tomography will be
used extensively to the study of nanoscale precipitates in nuclear steels. The
structural materials group will benefit from a LEAP system for their work on
high temperature materials systems for advanced propulsion, energy generation,
including gas turbines and nuclear reactors, and hypersonic flight. Dedicated
space will be provided for the atom probe in UCSB?s Microscopy and Microanalysis
Facility. The atom probe is an ideal tool for introducing future scientists to
the wonders of the atomic scale structure of nature. We will offer a new course
in our characterization course sequence. We will host a secondary school teacher
and an undergraduate student to work on atom probe techniques. We will take
advantage of the new visualization capabilities of the UCSB Allosphere, which is
an integral component of UCSB?s California Nano Systems Institute.