* 0821192
* MRI: Aquisition of a Laser Scanning Microscope for Imaging of Eukaryotic Organisms for Research and Teaching
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Wendy Boss, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven E. Ellis
* 08/31/2009
* USD 394,482.00

A grant has been awarded to North Carolina State University (NCSU) to acquire a
confocal laser scanning microscope (CLSM) for research and training. The new
CLSM is essential to reveal the biological relevance of ongoing cellular,
biochemical and genetic studies at NCSU. None of the CLSMs on campus were
capable of the high resolution, high sensitivity, dynamic and fixed-specimen
imaging required to monitor and analyze the distribution of low levels of
multiple fluorescent compounds in organisms. The new CLSM will be housed in the
Cellular Molecular Imaging Facility (CMIF), a University-wide facility that is a
focal point for imaging training and research.

On-campus training and outreach was constrained by the lack of a state-of-the-
art CLSM. The CLSM will have immediate and broad impacts on the training of
undergraduates, graduates and post graduates at NCSU as well as undergraduates
at near-by colleges who take the NCSU biotechnology imaging course. Furthermore,
the CLSM will be used by a diverse group of PIs who provide role models as they
mentor undergraduates in independent research and participate in summer REU
programs involving students from non-research I and minority universities. The
CLSM also will be highlighted during the tours and hands on activities for
prospective students and local school children. For example, CMIF is a focal
point of the ?Expanding your Horizon? program aimed at attracting 7th grade
girls from around the State of North Carolina to a career in science,
mathematics and engineering. Therefore, the new CLSM will greatly expand
teaching, outreach and research activities at NCSU.