* 0821955
* Molecular Mechanisms of Actin-Dependent Regulation of Synaptic Maturation and Plasticity
* BIO,IOS
* 11/15/2008,10/31/2009
* Gong Chen, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* James Deshler
* 10/31/2009
* USD 106,000.00

The long term goal of this research is to understand molecular mechanisms of
learning and memory. Synaptic maturation and plasticity are two major functional
elements involved in learning and memory. Actin is enriched in synaptic
structures and regulates synaptic function. Actin dynamics is known to be
associated with synaptic maturation and plasticity, but the precise molecular
machinery regulating actin dynamics in synapses is not well understood. Previous
studies often focus on the function of individual actin-regulatory proteins.
This project takes a novel approach to investigate an interactive protein
complex LIM kinase/slingshot/cofilin (LSC complex) in controlling synapse
maturation and synaptic plasticity. LSC proteins play a key role in regulating
actin turnover. The proposed experiments are based on a recent discovery that
immature synapses are presynaptically silent, but can be activated by repetitive
stimulation in an actin-dependent manner. Three key hypotheses will be tested.
(1) That LSC proteins act as a complex, rather than individually, in controlling
spine morphology. (2) That a balanced action of LSC complex is critically
required for synaptic maturation. (3) That alteration of LSC complex will
significantly modulate synaptic plasticity. The proposed studies will gain
comprehensive understanding of the molecular interaction among LSC proteins and
their regulation of synaptic maturation and plasticity. This research will
provide important training for graduate and undergraduate students. The research
findings will be integrated in teaching students and disseminated to the public
through presentations at scientific meetings and publications in high impact
journals.