* 0821420
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Volumetric, 3-Component Particle Displacement and Velocity Measurement System for Mechanical and Environmental Engineering Measurements
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2010
* Wei Tong, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 07/31/2010
* USD 196,490.00

CBET-0821420&lt;br/&gt;Krueger&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances in technology and
engineering require innovative approaches that often involve systems more
complex than their predecessors. Increased complexity necessitates more
sophisticated measurement techniques in order to understand, quantify, and
refine innovative approaches. This is abundantly apparent in fluid flows and
mechanical deformations, which are typically 3-dimensional (3D) and may involve
highly unsteady or transient behavior. Recent advances in particle imaging and
tracking now, for the first time, allow measurement of time-varying 3D particle
displacement and velocity within a volumetric region. The objective of this MRI
project is purchase of a TSI V3V system capable of 3D (volumetric), 3-component
displacement and velocity measurements for use in a range of projects including
porous media flows, sea turtle locomotion, investigation of diesel particle
collection efficiency in electrostatic precipitators (ESP), optimization of
plant-based contaminant remediation, and measurement of plastic deformation
fields in 3D sheet metal for assessing mechanical properties and spot weld
failure mechanisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The TSI V3V system has refined and
commercialized the technology used in defocusing digital particle image
velocimetry (DDPIV). Specifically, the system extracts the 3D location of imaged
particles in a flow or dots on a surface based on their location in the image
plane and a quantified measure of how "out-of-focus" they are. Then comparing
particle positions obtained from successive images using particle tracking
techniques, particle displacements and, when divided by inter-frame delay,
velocities may be obtained. Particle positions anywhere within a designed
volumetric field of view (FOV) may be triangulated, so the results are truly
volumetric and 3D. Currently available fast data transfer systems allow for
capture of image sequences so that time-varying data may be obtained as well.
Finally, the self-contained, single imaging plane configuration makes
measurements relatively easy, even in settings where much/most of the experiment
is optically inaccessible. As such, the V3V system is ideal for providing
essential 3D velocity and displacement information in a wide range of existing
and future projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. Purchase of the
V3V system will provide an unprecedented capability in volumetric, 3-component
measurement of complex flow and mechanical deformation phenomena. This
capability will provide essential information for understanding the ecology of
an endangered species (sea turtles), refining and optimizing methods for
maintaining air and water quality, and understanding the properties and failure
mechanisms of alloys used in automobile manufacturing. Application of the V3V
system to these areas will also involve efforts to improve the system capability
including increasing the accuracy of displacement measurements by borrowing from
image correlation analysis tools developed for 2D mechanical deformation
measurements and adjusting the FOV of the system for increased resolution using
a specialized optical setup. Both approaches promise to improve the results of
the current projects and promote application of the purchased V3V system to a
wider range of research areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The V3V
system will be utilized by two departments (Mechanical Engineering and
Environmental and Civil Engineering) on research spanning several disciplines
(engineering, biology, and chemistry). The broad utilization of the V3V system
will bring together PIs, graduate students, and undergraduates from these
diverse disciplines. Moreover, the combination of a state-of-the-art measurement
system with novel and highly relevant research topics such as endangered
species, air quality, and plant-based contaminant remediation promises to
attract new students and underrepresented groups to research. Outreach will be
further enhanced by showcasing the research projects and results in public
settings such as "Science Day at the Zoo," an event organized by the Dallas Zoo
and Aquarium to promote science education in the local community and continuing
education for K-8 teachers in the Dallas-Ft. Worth Metroplex.