* 0821796
* MRI: Acquisition of an Aberration Corrected High Resolution Analytical Transmission Electron Micro. for Advanced Materials Research
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2008,08/31/2014
* Michael Treacy, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2014
* USD 3,277,750.00

Technical Abstract.&lt;br/&gt;This microscope is designed to determine the
spatial arrangements of atoms in solids and their chemistry/bonding with atomic
resolution, to further understanding of the structure/properties relations of
unique new materials. The microscope operates at up to 300 keV with a
monochromated field emission electron source, a C3/C5 spherical aberration
corrector for the probe forming lens, a high resolution electron energy loss
spectrometer, a high count rate energy dispersive x-ray spectrometer, and a very
stable high-tilt-range stage designed for tomography as well as conventional
imaging. Current versions of this microscope have demonstrated 0.5 Å image
spatial resolution in both annular dark field and bright field STEM and 110 meV
energy resolution in electron energy loss spectroscopy. All detectors used for
these modes are digital, which facilitates quantitative measurements of
nanostructures and teaching. This remarkable spatial/energy resolution is
sufficient for quantitative investigations of atom/chemical distributions at
most important properties-determining structural features of solids such as
heterophase interfaces and grain boundaries, and catalyst surfaces. Further, the
aberration corrector enables use of large electron collection angles from the
gun, to form very small and also very high current electron
probes.&lt;br/&gt;The high current probes enable collection of many images and
electron energy loss and x-ray spectra in relatively short times, to derive
2-dimensional chemical maps of solids with very high resolution. The stable
high-tilt stage enables us to extend the mapping to 3-dimensions using
tomography, a relatively new imaging method for materials science research that
we will explore thoroughly, to determine its limits.&lt;br/&gt;This microscope
will be installed and operated in the LeRoy Eyring Center for Solid State
Science, a multiuser facility, in the School of Materials. It will be accessible
for cutting edge materials research by external university and industrial
laboratory researchers. &lt;br/&gt;Popular Publication Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The
engineering properties of all materials, such as structural aerospace alloys and
electronic material microchips for computers and cell phones, depend on the
geometric arrangements and chemical identities of the atoms that comprise the
materials. These relationships are called ?structure-properties relations? and
they are the major part of the field of materials science and engineering for
all types of materials. The role of microscopies in materials science and
engineering is to determine the structure of the materials in this relationship.
Electron microscopy, in particular high resolution analytical transmission
electron microscopy, is the highest resolution method that we have to determine
the structures part of this relationship. The microscope to be acquired during
this project is just at the cutting edge of electron microscope capability, and
will produce many new and exciting results from new advanced materials to
enhance our nations competitive position in nanotechnology, and it will provide
essential education in nanomaterials characterization for our university
students. This microscope will achieve 0.5 Ångstrom ( 0.00000001 centimeter, or
less than 1 atom diameter) spatial resolution in images, and about 0.001
electron volt (1 meV) energy resolution in nanospectra, to determine chemical
bonding in materials at essentially the atomic scale. The special features of
this microscope that enable this spectacular performance are: (1) its electron
source which is field emission type with a monochromator; (2) an aberration
corrector for the most important lens in the microscope, which eliminates image
blurring caused by spherical aberration; and (3) high resolution electron energy
loss and energy dispersive x-ray spectrometers which can determine chemical
composition and bonding type at the nanoscale with unparalleled accuracy. In
addition, this microscope will be fitted with a special stage that can change
the spatial orientation of the specimen under observation to create
3-dimensional maps of its chemistry and structure using tomography. These will
be similar to the x-ray CAT scan 3-D images familiar to many people, but at much
higher magnification and resolution for materials research. There are a host of
important materials problems that will be investigated using this microscope,
such as how impurity atoms on the surface of catalysts affect their ability to
efficiently produce petroleum-based fuel, and the how electrically active dopant
atoms in semiconductors may segregate to various locations in microchips instead
of maintaining a spatially uniform distribution. This microscope will be
installed and operated in the LeRoy Eyring Center for Solid State Science, a
multiuser facility, in the School of Materials. It will be accessible for
cutting edge materials research by external university and industrial laboratory
researchers.