* 0821855
* MRI: Acquisition of a Siemens MAGNETOM Trio A Tim System
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Mark D'Esposito, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1,431,462.00

The Harry H. Wheeler Brain Imaging Center (BIC) at the University of California,
Berkeley consists of a large multidisciplinary group of scientists dedicated to
basic and clinical neuroscience using MRI methods. The group has made numerous
contributions to the field of systems and cognitive neuroscience through the
study of normal and disordered neural processes. Since its inception in 2000,
when there was no MRI facility at UC Berkeley, the human functional neuroimaging
group has grown to comprise twenty-eight different labs across campus. In
addition to the wide range of basic and clinical neuroscience questions being
investigated at the Berkeley BIC, physicists, bioengineers and neuroscientists
at UC Berkeley have made significant contributions to the development of new MRI
hardware and analytical tools to analyze fMRI data. This award provides funds to
purchase a Siemens 3T MRI system at the BIC to replace the current Varian 4T MRI
scanner which is insufficient for current research purposes. Twenty seven senior
researchers will utilize the instrumentation to address a wide range of
scientific questions. For example, substantive projects include investigating
the neural bases of high-level cognitive processes such as working memory and
executive control; understanding the processes that enable goal-directed
behavior; examining the neural mechanisms of motivation, both positive reward
directed) and negative (punishment avoidance; study of the neural mechanisms
underlying vision and visual perception, object recognition and selective
attention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the primary purpose of this
instrumentation is to understand basic brain functioning the work will have
strong carryover into clinical research areas. The knowledge gained will be
relevant for gaining additional insight, for example, into areas of clinical
child and development psychology. The Brain Imaging Center provides important
training experience for undergraduates, graduate students and post-doctoral
fellows to learn MRI methods and the new imager will further this goal. It will
also strengthen the development of a strong coherent university research
group.&lt;br/&gt;