* 0821875
* BRIGE: Building the Foundation for Nanoscale Interface Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Ashlie Martini, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 07/31/2011
* USD 174,937.00

The research objective of this award is to develop and validate a physically
representative molecular model of thin film lubrication. Key to the success of
the project is direct, quantitative comparison of model predictions to
experimental data obtained through collaboration with experts in the field. The
simulation will take advantage of advanced, accelerated molecular dynamics
techniques to match the operating conditions and materials properties of the
corresponding experiments. The validation will be performed by comparing the
predicted and observed relationships between speed, film thickness, and
friction. The experimentally validated model will be used to gain new insight
into the behavior of thin film lubrication and how this behavior is influenced
by molecular-scale events.

If successful, this project will provide a knowledge base for rational design of
thin film lubricated interfaces. Such interfaces are becoming extremely common
as applications continue to get smaller and faster. Small-scale components have
correspondingly smaller lubricated interfaces where the lubrication phenomena
are still not well understood. The current project will directly address this
need thereby building the foundation for development of numerical design tools
for thin film lubricated interfaces. The technical objective of the project is
integrally related to its outreach goal, increasing participation of women in
mechanical engineering by redefining the external perception of field. The
cutting-edge, molecular-scale simulation technology that will be employed to
develop a practical design tool is representative of a new concept of mechanical
engineering, and supports improved participation of women by increasing their
awareness of the exciting role this field is playing in design and development
of emerging nanoscale technologies.