* 0821571
* MRI: Acquisition of a Photobioreactor for Pilot-Scale Studies of Biofuel Generation from Microalgae
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Jefferson Lebkuecher, Austin Peay State University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2011
* USD 107,000.00

CBET-0821571 Markov

The use of fossil fuels is widely recognized as unsustainable due to their
depleting supplies and growing demand, and contribution of these fuels to global
climate change due to CO2 release. To maintain sustainability, we need renewable
and CO2-emission neutral fuels. One of the solutions is the use of microalgae
that can provide both renewable energy and removal of CO2 from the atmosphere.
Such microorganisms could be used to generate a number of environmentally
friendly fuels, including oil (biodiesel), hydrogen (H2) and ethanol. Microalgae
generate biofuels in photosynthetic reactions using water (even wastewater) and
sunlight as an energy source. To generate biofuels from these microorganisms we
need simple, high-cell density, fully automated, cost-effective
photobioreactors.

This proposal requests an acquisition of a photobioreactor for pilot-scale
studies of biofuel generation and related capabilities of microalgae. A number
of studies on biofuel generation by microalgae and other photosynthetic
microorganisms using lab-scale photobioreactors were done in the past decade.
The general aim of the proposed research activities is to examine the response
of microalgal cells to scale-up in requested photobioreactor. Some examples of
the research projects are: (1) Optimization of oil (biodiesel) generation by
microalgae in a photobioreactor, (2) H2 production by microalgae mutants in a
photobioreactor, (3) CO2 mitigation by microalgae, and (4) Wastewater treatment
using microalgae in a photobioreactor: ammonium ion removal from water by
microalgae.

The acquisition of a photobioreactor for microalgal studies will offer a number
of considerable benefits for research program at Austin Peay State University
(APSU). These research activities will demonstrate the effectiveness of
microalgae and other photosynthetic microorganisms in photobioreactors for the
conversion of solar energy and waste CO2 into biofuels such as biodiesel and H2
which are renewable, biodegradable alternatives to gasoline and diesel. In
addition, use of microorganisms for production of biofuels does not rely on food
sources. At the same time, such microbial technology will provide the means for
utilization of CO2 which is generated by industrial plants.

The broader impact of this project also includes integration of this research
into education of the students. APSU students (most of them from
underrepresented groups) will be involved in the research activities based on
the requested photobioreactor, both during an academic year and summer period.
In addition to publishing research findings in professional scientific journals,
we will disseminate the results through popular journals, newspapers, and
websites.