* 0821536
* MRI: Acquisition of a Multipurpose X-Ray Diffractometer for  Advanced Materials Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Toh-Ming Lu, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2012
* USD 319,982.00

Non-technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;The new multipurpose X-ray diffractometer
system (MXDS) will support advanced materials research in a variety of
multidisciplinary programs at Rensselaer, and serve as an educational tool for
hands-on training to undergraduate and graduate students through newly designed
laboratory modules. &lt;br/&gt;This instrument will directly impact more than 35
projects in 12 major research programs in 8 academic departments and 4 research
centers at Rensselaer in the areas of nano- and bio-sciences and device
technologies. In particular, the MXDS will serve as a key central facility for
studies involving the synthesis, fabrication, assembly, stability and properties
of a wide range of novel materials for energy generation, nanoelectronics,
solid-state lighting, infrared detection, light-weight composites, biological-
assembly, detection and sensing, tissue engineering, and early earth studies for
understanding climatic changes. More than 18 faculty, 21 post-doctoral fellows,
69 graduate students (16 women/minorities), and 29 undergraduate researchers
from 8 departments across the schools of engineering and sciences and 4 research
centers funded through federal, state and industrial grants, will use this
instrument on a regular basis. &lt;br/&gt;The MXDS will be used for in 4
undergraduate and 3 graduate courses through laboratory modules and live
experimental demonstrations, to enrich the educational experience of more than
700 students per year. Additionally, the new instrument will be available for
training and access to more than 70 student participants each year in
Rensselaer?s K-12 and summer outreach programs --including those from
Historically Black Colleges and Universities and Primarily Undergraduate
Institutions. Finally, the MXDS will also be used by other local educational
institutions and the industry, including Union College and General Electric, for
research and training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The new
multipurpose X-ray diffractometer system (MXDS) will serve as an essential
cornerstone tool for characterizing the structure of advanced materials in a
variety of multidisciplinary programs at Rensselaer, and for enriching the
educational experience of students through demonstrations and hands-on research.
The MXDS will be used to characterize a wide range of novel materials and
composites in bulk, micro- and nano-structured forms, impacting 35 projects in
12 major research programs in 8 academic departments and 4 research centers in
the areas of nano-, bio- and geo-sciences and device technologies. The state-of-
the-art MXDS will be a versatile medium-resolution X-ray diffraction system used
for characterizing crystal structure, phase formation, transformations and
stability, preferred orientation, residual stresses and reflectivity in a
variety of materials. The MXDS includes a multiple strip detector for rapid
high-signal-to-noise ratio data collection, a capillary pipe collimator for
spatially resolved microdiffraction, and a hot-stage for phase transition
kinetics studies. &lt;br/&gt;The MXDS will be used in laboratory modules and
live demonstrations in 4 undergraduate (including the Materials Science for
Engineers course wit 500+ students) and 3 graduate courses to provide enriched
education in the rudiments of diffraction and materials structure
characterization. Additionally, the new instrument will be available for
training and access to more than 70 student participants each year in
Rensselaer?s K-12 and summer outreach programs --including those from
Historically Black Colleges and Universities and Primarily Undergraduate
Institutions. Finally, this instrument will also be used by other local
educational institutions and the industry, including Union College and General
Electric, for research and training. The software supports advanced analyses and
user-friendly interfacing for remote operation, real-time classroom
demonstrations, and outreach through laboratory modules.