* 0821608
* MRI: Acquisition of an Integrated High Frame-Rate Particle Image Velocimetry (HFR-PIV) System
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2013
* Martin Wosnik, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 07/31/2013
* USD 234,126.00

CBET-0821608&lt;br/&gt;Wosnik&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This MRI project funds for
the acquisition of an integrated High Frame-Rate Particle Image Velocimetry
(HFR-PIV) system, to obtain highresolution, time-resolved, whole-field,
quantitative experimental data in a variety of turbulent flows. Time-resolved
whole-field flow measurements - inaccessible prior to the development of HFR-PIV
systems - have the potential to greatly advance our understanding of flow
physics, and will play an important role in the creation of advanced simulation
tools, for example the parametrization of subgrid-scale processes for large eddy
simulations. HFR-PIV will also be a key measurement technique to be used in the
NSF EPSCoR-funded large scale facility for the development and testing of
sensing, prediction, actuation and control technologies in high Reynolds number
turbulent boundary layer flows (Klewicki et al. 2006). The instrumentation will
be used by the principle investigators and their research groups, other UNH
researchers working in experimental fluid dynamics, as well as students in new
graduate experimental courses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
instrument allows spatial structure to be understood in the context of its
temporal evolution. This capability is a primary obstacle preventing our
understanding of complex fluid phenomena. For example, high frame-rate PIV of
both the liquid and gas phases in cavitating flows will, for the first time,
provide a bridge between the large body of qualitative work (high speed
photography, videos) and quantitative flow measurement. In turbulent boundary
layers, advancing the current state of knowledge of the transport mechanisms
requires flow field information that captures the interactions across spatial
scales of the dynamical motions as these motions evolve in time. More broadly, a
description of these scale interactions is precisely the information required in
the development of viable subgrid models in LES computations. The HFR-PIV system
uniquely provides this capability. Current research activities that will benefit
directly from the HFR-PIV system are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Investigation of
cavitation dynamics on hydrofoils and turbine blades, a first step towards
control&lt;br/&gt; of partially cavitating flows&lt;br/&gt;- Scale separation
effects on the dynamical mechanisms of turbulent boundary layers&lt;br/&gt;-
Experimental Studies of Separated Flows with Polymer Ejection for Control of
Turbulence&lt;br/&gt; Generated Noise&lt;br/&gt;- Development and Testing of
Viable Ocean Turbine Designs for In-Stream Tidal
Energy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The thesis research and research
education of approximately 8 Ph.D, 12 M.S. and a number of undergraduate
students will be directly affected by the availability of this instrument
through the three years of this grant. The instrument will be used in newly
created experimental graduate courses. Additionally, the time-resolved
quantitative flow visualization movies that come naturally from research
activities will be used in undergraduate fluid mechanics education. Having an
experimental tool that can inspire students to explore the complexity of fluid
phenomena will make it easier to attract students of all backgrounds to this
subject. Many broader societal impacts may also result from the integration of
the HFR-PIV system into the described activities. For example, the outcomes from
the research on high Reynolds number boundary layers, which are omnipresent in
many natural processes and technologically important flows. Similarly, this
instrument will substantively increase our capacity to explore fluid dynamical
phenomena important to the development of alternative energy related
technologies. This capability directly supports broader, College-wide,
initiatives.