* 0821584
* MRI: Acquisition of Portable Extreme Temperature-Pressure System
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Guoyin Shen, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2011
* USD 397,393.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Imagine we could explore an enormous
pressure (P) and temperature (T) field equivalent to the conditions spreading
the entire Earth from the surface to its very center. In this field, countless
new materials, properties, and phenomena would be discovered, our accessible
materials base would be doubled or tripled, and many of the novel discoveries
could be recovered to ambient conditions for practical use and the benefit of
mankind. This vision could be realized if we had the proper exploration tool;
the proposed portable system for creating the extreme P-T conditions and
conducting in-situ investigation would make a key advancement toward this
goal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose to acquire a portable system that combines
both a heating laser and versatile probes. The design of the system takes
advantage of recent breakthroughs in fiber laser and detector technology. Its
highly portable head is no bigger than a handheld flashlight, yet so powerful
that it can heat samples in a high-pressure vessel beyond the temperatures on
the surface of the Sun, and detect a complete set of optical spectra.
Portability is essential for bringing the extreme P-T samples for in-depth
investigations at the nation?s most powerful synchrotron, neutron, spectroscopic
and electromagnetic facilities. Development of the proposed system will impact
our fundamental knowledge of physics and chemistry of matter, will unravel the
deep secrets in Earth and planetary interiors, and will contribute to our quest
for novel technological materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks funds to acquire and develop a
portable extreme temperature (T)-pressure (P) system for a broad range of
materials studies to 10,000 K and several hundreds of GPa. The essential
features are portability, a broad temperature range, and a modular design
consisting of two fiber lasers and various probes and detectors. This instrument
will be used for in-situ high T-P Raman spectroscopy, conventional and
synchrotron IR spectroscopy, Brillouin spectroscopy, neutron diffraction, axial
and radial x-ray diffraction, x-ray absorption spectroscopy, x-ray Raman
spectroscopy, and inelastic x-ray scattering spectroscopy. The system will
provide stable laser heating on a sample area greater than 30 Âµm in diameter,
and will have reliable temperature measurement from 500-10,000 K, along with the
advantages of portability, flexibility, self-sufficient control, and built-in
safety features. The integrated instrument contains a microscope head, fiber
lasers, IR and UV spectral radiograph modules, IR and visible CCD cameras, and a
control system. The coupling of high T-P capabilities with numerous analytical
probes will allow a wide variety of chemical and physical phenomena to be
discovered and explored with greatly improved resolution. As a consequence, this
new instrument will illuminate new and existing areas of research in physics,
chemistry, materials science, geoscience, planetary science, and biology. The
proposed system will also contribute significantly to infrastructure development
by enhancing capabilities at synchrotron radiation and other major national
facilities with new experimental techniques for the broader community and the
training of new scientists at these facilities.