* 0821640
* MRI:    Acquisition of Instruments for Interaction, Learning, and Perception in Virtual Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* John Rieser, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 07/31/2011
* USD 179,651.00

Proposal #: CNS 08-21640&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Bodenheimer, Robert E.&lt;br/&gt;
Adams, Julie A.; McNamara, Timothy P.; Rieser, John J.; Sarkar,
Nilanjan&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Vanderbilt University &lt;br/&gt; Nashville, TN
37235-7749&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Acq.: Instruments for Interaction, Learning, and
Perception in Virtual Environments&lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This
project, acquiring a high-fidelity instrument designed to facilitate and assess
perception, interaction, and learning in immersive environments, pursues an
ambitious research agenda dealing with people, their interactions with virtual
environments, and the design factors underlying successful environments. The
work aims to build a program to develop a better understanding of the cognitive
capabilities of humans in immersive virtual environments, to inform the design
process of such environments and to understand how humans reason about space.
The instrument will be shared among diverse and interdisciplinary groups
collaborating in the area of virtual environments, including Computer Science
and Engineering (graphics, animation, artificial intelligence, human factors,
robotic, etc.) and the Psychological Science (cognitive psychology, child
development, rehabilitation engineering, brain sciences, etc.) The component
parts of the instrument (comprising optical motion capture equipment, a head-
mounted display with binocular eye-tracking, and high-performance wireless data
gloves) allow the measurement, tracking, rendering, and animation of subjects in
virtual environments (from their overall position, to their posture, to the
actions of their hands and fingers) coupled with the measurement of their gaze.
The project ranges from low-level research in how people experience virtual
environments to user evaluations involving high-level interface and simulation
design. Children with autism will also be studied.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
This project improves the quality of learning in virtual environments, reducing
the time and cost of authoring and overcoming likely impediments to their
widespread use. The instrument enables courses in robotics currently infeasible
with real robots and provides experience for students. The work builds a
scientific program to develop a better understanding of the cognitive
capabilities of humans in immersive virtual environments and may be applied to
understanding the development of children?s abilities to reason about space and
to coordinate perceptual-motor skills as they develop. Moreover, it may help to
treat autism spectral disorder.&lt;br/&gt;