* 0821455
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Resolution Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer for Earth and Environmental Science Research at Texas A&amp;M University
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Deborah Thomas, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2011
* USD 450,000.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award will provide funding for a high
resolution inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer (HR-ICPMS) to further
the goals of interdisciplinary Earth and Environmental Science research at Texas
A&amp;M University (TAMU). The research applications afforded by the acquisition
of this equipment will play a critical role in the PIs? research and teaching
programs. The analytical applications offered by the HR-ICPMS are required for
and will enhance and diversify future research capabilities. In addition, the
instrumentation will benefit at least ten faculty members in five departments
and the Integrated Ocean Drilling Program. Acquiring a HR-ICPMS will more fully
engage TAMU researchers in cross-disciplinary research, and enhance the
teaching, training, and learning of undergraduate and graduate students. The HR-
ICPMS instrument will play a prominent role in the $2.6M geochemistry facility
that is currently under construction and scheduled for completion in April 2008.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new HR-ICPMS instrument will make possible several
lines of research: studies of the relationship between changes in past patterns
of atmospheric and ocean circulation and past climate change, studies of past
ocean chemistry and temperatures, tracer studies (isotopic and elemental) in the
hydrosphere, and studies of the petrogenesis of igneous and metamorphic rocks.
The instrumentation will benefit higher education through laboratory training
for undergraduate and graduate students. Construction of a clean lab and
acquisition of the HR-ICPMS will establish a wide range of opportunities for
thesis and work experience as well as coursework and associated research
projects. In addition, scientific results derived from the Texas A&amp;M HR-
ICPMS-related research will be incorporated into all levels of classroom
instruction of geology and oceanography. This direct linkage between cutting-
edge research and curriculum revision/innovation is one of the primary ways in
which the geosciences can reach the broader
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;