* 0821264
* MRI: Acquisition of a Gas Chromatograph/Mass Spectrometer (GC/MS) for Research and Teaching in Science and Engineering
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,10/31/2013
* Nedim Vardar, Inter American University of Puerto Rico San Juan
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 10/31/2013
* USD 142,030.00

CBET-0821264&lt;br/&gt;Vardar&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This MRI (Major Research
Instrumentation) project involves the acquisition of for an Agilent 5975C inert
MSD/DS Gas Chromatograph/Mass Spectrometer (GC/MS). The major components of the
instrument are a mass selective detector (Agilent 5975C MSD/DS Standard Turbo EI
Bundle), Agilent 7890A Gas Chromatography, 7683 Autosampler tray and 7683B
Autoinjector. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific Merit: The equipment would
provide the PI the opportunity for conducting three research projects described
in this proposal. The GC/MS will enable the PI to study:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Atmospheric concentrations of polychlorinated biphenyls
(PCBs) and organochlorine pesticides (OCP) with passive samplers spatially
distributed throughout Puerto Rico. Samples will be taken both indoors and
outdoors at selected locations (primarily high schools) in nine municipalities.
The expected benefits of the proposed research will be the development of new
scientific information related to PCBs and pesticide concentrations in the
ambient air of Puerto Rico. This project will improve our understanding of the
relationship between indoor and outdoor concentrations of PCBs and pesticides.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) Effect of atmospheric deposition (dry and wet) of
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and
chlorinated pesticides on Jobos Bay. Such research is significant since no
detailed deposition studies have been published on toxic organics in Puerto
Rico. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) Influence of port-related emissions on
atmospheric PAH concentrations and deposition in the San Juan Bay area. A total
of six sampling sites at upwind and downwind of the port area will be operated
in order collect PAH samples and measure air quality. The study results will be
a source of valuable information that can be used to create proper air quality
control measures and policies for the control of air pollution in busy harbors
such as the Port of San Juan. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Acquisition
of this instrument will aid Inter American University of Puerto Rico (IAUPR),
the largest private university in Puerto Rico and a minority serving
institution, and specifically the Bayamon Campus, in its mission to increase
minority participation in science and engineering by providing students with
research and training opportunities. The instruments will benefit a cross-
disciplinary community of faculty and students at IAUPR and other Puerto Rican
institutions, including the University of Puerto Rico (UPR) and the Metropolitan
University. With the availability of the instrument, the PI will be able to
initiate and conduct environmental research on semi-volatile organic compounds
(SOCs) with the participation of undergraduate students. In addition it is
anticipated that new research collaborations will be develop making use of the
new instrument. It is anticipated that the three projects described in this
proposal will involve the research efforts of at least thirteen to fifteen
undergraduate students over the course of an expected three-year study. Research
and teaching activities employing the instruments will also include high school
students from locations throughout the island. Special attention will be paid to
diversity, and at least one-third of the site operators will be chosen from
female students. The students will also be presenting results at on-campus
journal and at relevant regional and national meetings, and we expect to obtain
several peer-reviewed publications from the results of these studies. The
instrument will also be integrated into the curricula of industrial chemistry
and forensic science programs, specifically in the courses of forensic
investigation II, industrial chemical analysis and analytical separations.