* 0821353
* Dynamics of Citizens and Organizations in Knowledge Making, Building Practices, and Repatriation of New Orleans' Historic Neighborhoods
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Barbara Allen, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2012
* USD 123,476.00

Through a case study of post-Katrina New Orleans, this project funded by the
Science, Technology &amp; Society (STS) Program, addresses the broader research
question of how communities successfully or unsuccessfully rebuild after human
and natural disasters. The project focuses on the epistemic dimension of various
interacting groups -- homeowners, neighborhood groups, non-governmental
organizations, local governments, and federal agencies to identify some of the
factors that influence successful repatriation and restoration. Public
understanding of science theory and analytical tools in STS are used to
understand the participation of citizens and lay-people in the formation,
hybridization, and use of expert knowledge. New political sociology of science
theory is used to provide insight into institutional knowledge production such
as how the convergence of rules, routines, cultures, meanings, and resource
distributions influences knowledge making. This research project contributes to
these STS specialties as well as providing information about rebuilding after
disaster.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project uses mixed methods to study three
neighborhoods undergoing rebuilding efforts. The broader impacts lie in the
development of causal explanations potentially relevant to other communities
dealing with rebuilding after a disaster. The knowledge of effective and least
effective organizational, agency, and citizens dynamics is useful for
policymakers, organizational leaders, and community activists alike. The project
is meaningful for future STS research on lay and expert knowledge and practices
in the aftermath of disasters and other human settlement disruptions. Because
rebuilding after disasters, both in the U.S. and abroad, includes funding,
expertise, and/or labor from a combination of NGOs, government agencies, and the
citizens themselves, it is important to understand how effective relationships
are constituted.