* 0821387
* MRI: Acquisition of Instrumentation for Digital Imaging and Fluorescent Detection
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Brian Ashburner, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Steven E. Ellis
* 08/31/2009
* USD 207,274.00

A grant has been awarded to the Department of Biological Sciences at The
University of Toledo to support the acquisition of: 1) the Storm 860 Gel and
Blot Imaging system; 2) the ImageQuant RT ECL Imaging system; and 3) a
SpectraMax M5 Multi-detection plate reader. This instrumentation will support
the research programs of the PI and Co-PIs and other members of the Department
of Biological Sciences focused on cell signaling and regulation of gene
expression in human cells and in model systems (nematodes and plants). In
addition, these instruments will also be available to the broader research
community in other departments at The University of Toledo. These instruments
will provide investigators with more advanced and sensitive tools for conducting
assays that they currently do not have the capabilities of performing.

The acquisition of these instruments will have a significant broader impact on
the educational mission of the Department of Biological Sciences and The
University of Toledo. The PI/Co-PIs as well as the department as a whole are
strongly committed to the integration of research and education. The use of
these instruments will be available to undergraduate students working on
research projects under the direction of a faculty mentor. In addition, the use
of these instruments will be incorporated into several upper division
undergraduate laboratory courses, in particular the core Molecular Genetics and
Cell Biology (taught by the PI) labs. Underrepresented groups, through the
department?s commitment to the STARS and Glenn-Stokes programs will also benefit
from the acquisition of these instruments.