* 0821215
* MRI: Acquisition of Equipment to Quantify Environmental Conditions in Estuarine Systems
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Delbert Smee, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2011
* USD 389,542.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The proposal requests funds to acquire
instrumentation to outfit 15 stations that will measure environmental parameters
including pH, salinity, turbidity, dissolved oxygen, temperature, chlorophyll a,
velocity, and turbulence. The use of the 15 instrumented stations will enable
the PIs to more rigorously capture large-scale patterns of temporal and spatial
variability than currently feasible. These stations will provide data necessary
to address research questions involving (1) causes of hypoxia and its long-term
effects; (2) effect of freshwater inflow on hydrography and biology in a Texas
estuary; (3) oyster reef community dynamics; and (4) influences of environmental
context on top-down and bottom-up effects in community dynamics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;As a minority-serving
institution, TAMU-CC is well positioned to significantly expand the
representation of minority students in ocean and coastal sciences. The proposed
instrumentation, combined with the active research and enthusiasm of the PIs,
will provide additional research and educational opportunities to both
undergraduate and graduate students. The proposed instrumentation will support
an existing Master?s program and a newly initiated PhD program at the
institution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;