* 0821312
* MRI: Acquisition of a Scanning Electron Microscope/Scanning Transmission Electron Microscope
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Keith Stevenson, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2011
* USD 526,097.00

The Department of Chemistry at the University of Texas at Austin will acquire a
field emission scanning electron microscope/scanning transmission electron
microscope (FE-SEM/STEM) for the central Texas academic science and engineering
community. This instrument will significantly impact several areas of research
ranging from soft tissue applications in drug delivery systems, on through
catalysis, to probing the cell walls of diatoms and cement-based materials and
analyzing the nanostructure of fuel cell materials. Furthermore it will fill a
crucial gap in characterizing materials with nanoscopic dimensions using a work-
horse, user friendly instrument that draws strong demand across engineering,
materials science and natural science disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
scanning electron microscope/scanning transmission electron microscope is a
powerful tool for imaging a wide range of materials ranging from nanoparticles
to polymers and films. The instrument provides topological and compositional
information of these materials. It is an essential analytical tool in research
on the properties and behavior of such materials. This is a consortium award
that involves 11 research groups as major users and 46 research groups as minor
users at UT-Austin from 14 different departments affiliated with the Texas
Materials Institute (TMI) and the Center for Nano and Molecular Science and
Technology (CNM), as well as, outside users at the Texas Memorial Museum, and
the UT Health Science Center at Houston. UT-Austin will also enable access to
smaller Texas universities in the nearby area. The instrument will be used by
BS, MS, PhD and post doctoral students in their research training, thus
preparing them for careers in science and engineering with state of the art
technology.