* 0821873
* Board on Research Data and Information
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2010
* Paul Uhlir, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2010
* USD 312,000.00

National Academies Establish Board on Research Data and Information through
National Research Council's Policy and Global Affairs
Division&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Federal government agencies make public
investments of many billions of dollars each year in producing or externally
funding the generation of huge and diverse data streams as inputs into the
research enterprise. They also produce or fund the creation of ever-increasing
volumes of scientific information?both peer-reviewed and "gray" literature?that
embodies the results of much of the research output. As the nation's stewards or
funders of these digital research assets, they have a major stake in continually
improving their management, policies, and utilization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the large expenditures on producing research data
and information, the investments and policies for managing, preserving,
disseminating, and reusing the data and information resources are lagging and
are generally perceived to be inadequate. Many unresolved issues arise at
different levels of the research system in this regard, affecting established
research strategies and priorities. They involve not just scientific and
technical elements, but institutional, economic, legal, and socio-cultural
aspects. The most pervasive dysfunctions occur at the interdisciplinary, inter-
sectoral, and international boundaries, and in public-private partnerships. The
problems in successfully managing and using digital knowledge resources can have
significant negative effects, such as structural inefficiencies and lost
opportunity costs for our national research and innovation systems, our economic
competitiveness, and the greater social welfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because
research data and information are of great importance to the progress of science
and the nation's competitiveness in the knowledge-based economy, these issues
need to be well understood by the various stakeholders in our nation's research
enterprise. Those who have a stake in this include not only the research
communities in government, academia and industry, but also research policymakers
and managers in the Administration and Congress, and ultimately the public that
both support these activities and the benefit from their improved effectiveness.
Acting through the National Research Council (NRC), the new Board on Research
Data and Information will establish an interdisciplinary advisory mechanism and
focal point for bringing greater understanding and visibility to these issues,
for adding value to the National Science Foundation's and other sponsors'
objectives and priorities in these areas, and for helping to improve returns on
the federal agencies' investments in a time of increasingly constrained budgets.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Board on Research Data and Information will maintain
surveillance of the field and propose initiatives that might be undertaken at
the NRC, targeted at challenges of national and international significance of
particular interest to the board's sponsors. The Board will engage in planning,
program development, and administrative oversight of projects launched under its
auspices, dealing with the management, policy, and use of digital data and
information for science and the broader society. As part of its activities in
the first year, it will organize and hold a national symposium and workshop on
The Future of Open Knowledge Environments in the Digital Age and an
international symposium on Designing Microbial Research Commons. &lt;br/&gt;