* 0821268
* MRI: Acquisition of Magneto-Optical Microscopy Instrumentation for Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Randall Headrick, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2010
* USD 242,539.00

Technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the acquisition of a warm bore
superconducting magnet and spectroscopy instrumentation for a state-of-the-art
magneto-optical microscopy facility at the University of Vermont. This facility
will offer the unique capability of simultaneously acquiring spectrally,
temporally and spatially-resolved spin-dependent information from many different
types of materials, such as semiconductor or ferromagnetic nanostructures,
biomolecules or polymer structures. It will enable a wide range of experiments
from condensed matter to nanotechnology and bio-imaging. Projects benefiting
from this facility include: magneto-optical studies of spin-dependent phenomena
in wide bandgap semiconductors, spatially-resolved spectroscopy of spin
injection and transport in single-crystal organic semiconductors, magnetic
circular dichroism of proteins and time ?resolved magneto-optical spectroscopy
of semiconductor nanocrystals. Use of the equipment will be incorporated into
newly developed courses such as "Physical Optics", that have a very strong
demo/hands-on component which takes place in the research
laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non ?technical abstract: &lt;br/&gt;This award
supports the acquisition of a 5 Tesla superconducting magnet and research
instrumentation for a state-of-the-art magneto-optical microscopy facility at
the University of Vermont. This facility integrates polarization-resolved
optical microscopy techniques traditionally used to characterize electronic and
structural properties of materials, into the high magnetic field environment. It
enables researchers to investigate fundamental quantum mechanical behavior of
electrons in a variety of semiconductor nanostructures, proteins and polymers,
of interest for many applications ranging from quantum computing to
nanotechnologies and imaging-based diagnostics. The users will take advantage of
the magnetic field-mediated coupling between polarized light and a quantum
property of electrons called ?spin? to simultaneously obtain spatially and
temporally?resolved information on the electrons response to external stimuli
such as electric and magnetic fields or strain. Use of the equipment will be
incorporated into newly developed courses such as "Physical Optics", that have a
very strong demo/hands-on component which takes place in the research
laboratory.