* 0821918
* Electromagnetic Scattering from 3-D Objects Buried in Layered Lossy Earth with Multiple Rough Interfaces
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Xiao-Bang Xu, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 08/31/2013
* USD 283,814.00

Abstract

Proposal Number: ECCS-0821918

Proposal Title: Electromagnetic Scattering from 3-D Objects Buried in Layered
Lossy Earth with Multiple Rough Interfaces

PI Name: Xu, Xiao-Bang

PI Institution: Clemson University

The objective is to investigate scattering of 3-D objects buried in stratified
earth with multiple random rough interfaces. The approach is to develop and then
employ an efficient hybrid numerical technique based on pseudospectral time-
domain method with Monte-Carlo simulation. Intellectual Merit: The proposed
research is more advanced than the previously published work by considering
stratified media with multiple random rough interfaces, which can more
faithfully model the earth and other realistic layered structures that may be
encountered in practical subsurface investigations. The proposed numerical
technique is based on the pseudospectral time-domain method, which is more
efficient than the conventional finite-difference time-domain method, due to its
significantly less computer time and memory requirement for the same or even
higher accuracy, as illustrated by many published numerical experiment results.
The pseudospectral time-domain technique can also deal with complex geometry
with a great flexibility, and has potential for parallel computations. Broader
Impacts: The proposed research may benefit the society through a number of
important potential applications in various areas including: detection of
subsurface targets such as landmines for protection of our troops; geophysical
exploration of mineral deposit, petroleum, and alternative energy resources such
as geothermal spots; locating buried hazardous waste for environment protection;
nondestructive testing of underground pipes and other underground facilities;
microwave imaging of abnormal area embedded in multi-layer biological structures
for detection of cancers; and modeling of indoor wave propagation through multi-
layer walls for wireless internet planning. The research will also enhance three
graduate courses and train five students.