* 0821210
* MRI: Acquisition of nanomanipulator system for collaborative undergraduate research at Santa Clara University
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Cary Yang, Santa Clara University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2009
* USD 229,999.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this research is to study the electrical properties of nanoscale material
systems, including resistance-change materials, carbon nanofibers, nanotubes,
and polymer nanocapsules. The properties of the systems are measured directly by
contacting the systems with the nanometer-sized tips of a Zyvex Instruments
nanomanipulator, which is connected to external test equipment. Measurements and
SEM imaging can thus be done simultaneously.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Issues to be addressed include the scalability of
resistance-change materials for advanced nonvolatile memory; the relationship
between microstructure, electrical resistance and reliability in interconnects
based on carbon nanofiber/s and nanotubes; and the size dependence of the
chemical environment for solubilized molecules inside polymer nanocapsules.
These topics are of high importance for the continued advancement of digital
electronics and the potential development of chemical
sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact of this research will be enhanced undergraduate education at Santa Clara
University, and improved nanotechnology research capability in the Bay Area. Use
of the nanomanipulator in undergraduate research projects at Santa Clara
University will provide science and engineering students with advanced training
at an early stage in their careers. The unique capabilities of the
nanomanipulator will also serve as a focal point for collaborations between
Santa Clara Universit and research institutions in the Bay Area, providing two
complementary benefits; Santa Clara University undergraduates will gain exposure
to nanoscale research that cannot be supported solely by Santa Clara University,
and collaborating institutions will gain access to the state-of-the-art
capabilities of the nanomanipulator system. &lt;br/&gt;