* 0821029
* RUI: Cytoplasmic Dyneins and Intraflagellar Transport in Tetrahymena Thermophila
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2008,05/31/2010
* David Asai, Harvey Mudd College
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 05/31/2010
* USD 242,096.00

Intellectual Merit. &lt;br/&gt; A fundamentally important challenge is to
understand the extent to which the products of multi-gene families are
functionally specialized, and the many dynein isoforms co-existing in the same
cell present an important opportunity to understand dynein specialization. The
present project focuses on the interplay of the two non-axonemal or cytoplasmic
dyneins-1 and -2 in cilia formation. Because of the essential roles of
cilia/flagella, intraflagellar transport (IFT) has evolved to ensure the proper
assembly of these organelles. The ciliated protozoan Tetrahymena thermophila is
an excellent system in which to study IFT, and promises to yield new insights
into IFT and cytoplasmic dyneins. In contrast to what has been observed in other
systems, the knockout of dynein-2 components in Tetrahymena results in only a
mild reduction in the number and length of cilia. In these knockout cells, the
dynein-2 is catalytically inert, but there is evidence that the Dyh2 tail domain
continues to be expressed. Thus, either Tetrahymena does not require IFT to form
functioning cilia, or Tetrahymena IFT can be powered by alternative motors other
than dynein-2. An intriguing possibility is that the remaining Dyh2 tail domain
can recruit other motors to substitute for the missing Dyh2 catalytic domain.
Further, here is the opportunity to visualize both cytoplasmic dyneins in the
same cell undergoing different processes, thus providing insights about the
spatial coordination of the two dyneins. Combinations of genetics,
immunochemistry, and fluorescence microscopy will be used to determine how the
intracellular location and the level of expression of one cytoplasmic dynein is
affected by the depletion of the other cytoplasmic dynein.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. &lt;br/&gt; The project focuses on the
function of a protein motor in the regulation of cilia formation in a model
organism. In a wide spectrum of organisms, cilia/flagella play essential roles,
including the coordinated movements of fluids across a tissue surface, the
movement of gametes, and the establishment of the left-right axis in embryos. In
Tetrahymena, active cilia are required for cell motility, feeding, and cell
division. A central objective of this RUI project is to integrate research into
education while enabling undergraduate students to engage in complex, open-ended
experiments that provide each student the opportunity to employ strategies in
molecular biology, genetics, cell biology, and serology. Since 2003 at Harvey
Mudd College, the laboratory has mentored 32 students who were from 7 different
academic majors. Of the 21 who have now graduated, ten are in graduate school.
To date, undergraduates have co-authored two peer-reviewed papers and three
abstracts presented at national meetings.