* 0821159
* MRI-RUI: Acquisition of a Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope to Advance Research and Education at Missouri State University
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Pawan Kahol, Missouri State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2010
* USD 321,986.00

Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
acquire a field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM) to support
materials related research and training activities at Missouri State University
(MSU) and surrounding southwest Missouri institutions. Currently, there is only
one 19-year-old SEM and no functioning transmission electron microscope (TEM) on
campus, which imposes significant impedance to the success of funded research.
The intellectual merit of this project is that the unique capabilities provided
by an FEI Quanta 200 FEG FESEM, equipped with an X-ray energy dispersive
spectrometer (EDS) and a scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM)
detector, will enable researchers, educators, and students to obtain high
resolution secondary electron and backscattered electron images of surface
topography, spatial elemental distribution (EDS mapping and line-scans), and
internal structures (STEM) for conductive or nonconductive samples. In
particular, the instrument will be used to explore correlations between
morphology, structures, and compositions of various materials and their
electrical, optical, magnetic, and biological properties for funded projects. In
addition, it will improve the educational curriculum in material
characterizations for both graduate and undergraduate students and stimulate
collaborations among researchers across different departments and different
university campuses. The broader impact reflects the fact that training and
skills acquired by undergraduate and graduate students through research projects
using the FESEM instrument will serve them well for graduate study and
employment in places such as in universities, high-tech industry, and government
research laboratories. The new instrument will also contribute greatly toward
existing MSU outreach programs to motivate K-12 students, especially female and
minority students, to pursue careers in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years, Missouri State University has
been acquiring a core of faculty members and an impressive array of physical
facilities and equipment to support basic research concerning the physical
characterization of electronic, optical, and magnetic materials. However, this
group lacks an important analytical instrument in their research arsenal, a
field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM), and must depend on an aged
conventional scanning electron microscope (SEM) to support their fundamental
research efforts. A FESEM is a high-resolution microscope designed to reveal
surface details of minute objects beyond the reach of a typical light
microscope, present the acquired images in three dimensions, and analyze sample
surfaces for their elemental composition by obtaining X-rays from those
surfaces. Therefore, the acquisition of an FEI Quanta 200 FESEM, equipped with
appropriate detectors, will enhance the capabilities for scientific research and
education at Missouri State University. In particular, the instrument will be
used to examine the morphology and composition of various materials for eight
specific research projects concerned with their magnetic, optical, electronic,
and biological properties. Selected courses will be revised to incorporate the
FESEM as part of the curriculum, and both undergraduate and graduate students
will be trained in materials characterization using this instrument. In addition
to strengthening the materials science program at MSU, the proposed instrument
will engender interdisciplinary cooperation among several science departments on
campus and encourage future collaborations with other universities and research
centers. Importantly, this instrument will contribute to existing university
efforts to recruit a diverse student population and expose students to discovery
science and a variety of learning perspectives.