* 0821704
* MRI: Acquisition of A Hybrid Deposition System for Materials Science Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Arunava Gupta, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2012
* USD 413,000.00

This project will provide a tool capable of controlled synthesis of
nanostructured elements of a wide combination of nanostructured materials. The
system will combine high-pressure Chemical Vapor Deposition (CVD) and Pulsed
Laser Deposition (PLD) in the same ultra-high vacuum processing tool, along with
a nanocluster source. Samples will be transferred between integrated process
chambers under a controlled vacuum environment. The combination of CVD and PVD
within the same tool is a powerful one, which will allow an unprecedented
breadth of high-quality materials to be synthesized. Novel heterostructures of
materials with nominally incompatible process requirements can be readily
fabricated in a directed manner. The instrumentation enables the invention of
new processing techniques to create novel nanostructured materials using the
best-suited deposition tools for the formation of functional nanostructured
materials with maximum flexibility and breadth of application. Projects that
will benefit from the use of this versatile deposition tool include two that are
funded by NSF and a third that is being initiated by two new faculty members.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves the acquisition of
equipment needed to develop better nanostructured materials. The equipment will
be shared by a multidisciplinary group that includes physicists, chemists,
electrical engineers and chemical engineers, working together to provide
improved methods of making, measuring and controlling these tiny substances
whose size is less than one-thousandth the thickness of a human hair. Although
many aspects of nanotechnology have only been discovered and understood within
the last decade, this group asserts that evidence of this recent research
indicates there are two necessary stages for controlling the surfaces of these
materials: using chemical vapor deposition (CVD) to create nanostructures by
assembling them from gases and then following with pulse laser deposition (PLD)
to coat the structures with functional material useful for scientific studies.
The challenge of these partnered processes up to this point has been that the
gases used in the CVD process are not compatible with most vacuum processes. PLD
is a high-vacuum technique, and is therefore incompatible with the gas process.
The new equipment circumvents this difficulty through use of a system that
provides an avenue for shuttling nano samples from one closed chamber to another
without removing them. This dual-process machine is especially important for
this class of research because some nanostructures would be ruined if exposed to
the air. Nanotechnology has become vitally important in the fields of science
and engineering for designing improvements in product design and manufacturing,
enhancing clinical processes in medicine, and producing faster and more powerful
computer components. This equipment acquisition is on the forefront of filling
this need by solving some of the mysteries of the nano world by creating new
materials within a dual, controlled environment.