* 0821658
* MRI: Acquisition of Research and Education Equipment for Ultra-Wideband Wireless Sensor Network and Radar Sensing Integration
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2010
* Periasamy Rajan, Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 09/30/2010
* USD 196,000.00

Objective:&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal, the acquisition of ultra-wideband (UWB)
wireless sensor network and radar (Environmental) sensing integration equipment
is proposed. The new lab equipment will form a UWB radar sensing system
including an arbitrary waveform generator, real-time spectrum analyzer, and a
digital phosphor oscilloscope. The new equipment will be integrated with the
existing UWB sensor network at Tennessee Technological University (TTU). The
equipment would provide a core facility for all academic departments and
research centers at TTU. Primary users of the instruments, across different
colleges, would be Center for Manufacturing Research, Department of Electrical
and Computer Engineering, Department of Manufacturing and Industrial Technology,
and Department of Earth Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
&lt;br/&gt;Some projects are funded by NSF, ONR, or DoE. At this time, the PIs
and the participating faculties are either waiting for the acquisition of the
proposed facility or using off-campus equipment. The purchase of the dedicated
state-of-the-art facilities at TTU would greatly enhance the participating
faculties, productivity and ability in conducting the ongoing research and
broaden their capacity to attract new projects or make new
discoveries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;TTU is a
comprehensive university with a vibrant undergraduate research emphasis while
offering a PhD degree program in engineering. It is a regional university
serving Tennessee and the Upper Cumberland region. The proposed state-of-the-art
equipment will enhance the undergraduate program through new course contents,
curriculum, and design projects. It will promote faculty research, strengthen
the PhD program, and offer necessary training in modern technology to graduate
students.