* 0821113
* MRI: Acquisition of NIR Chemical Imaging Spectrometer to Study Novel Organic Composites
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Zafar Iqbal, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2011
* USD 290,795.00

The Department of Chemistry at the University of Puerto Rico Mayagüez will
acquire a Near Infrared Chemical Imaging (NIR-CI) spectrometer with this award
from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program. The instrument will
support research and education efforts in materials science, analytical
chemistry, and pharmaceutical engineering at the University of Puerto Rico at
Mayagüez, and through the NSF Engineering Research Center on Structured Organic
Particulate Systems (ERC-SOPS), research efforts at Rutgers University, the New
Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT), and Purdue University in novel organic
composites will benefit. Various research projects will be undertaken including
the development of real time methods, based on material properties, to monitor
and control pharmaceutical and polymer manufacturing processes; characterization
of electrospun polymeric fibers; the processing and structure of liquid-
crystalline polymer based composites.

An infrared spectrometer provides information of the structure of materials by
identifying vibrational motions characteristic of the chemical bonds that make
up the material. An imaging infrared spectrometer allows the study of spatial
information as one scans over the materials, acting essentially as a microscope
probing across a sample. It is a necessary tool for understanding the
composition of complex materials. This instrument will be used by research
students at all the collaborating institutions and by students in laboratory
courses at UPR-Mayaguez where it will be housed.