* 0821036
* Binding in Adult and Child Thai
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Kamil Ud Deen, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 08/31/2011
* USD 138,841.00

The Binding Principles, perhaps the most well studied principles in human
language, state where in a sentence nominals (e.g., pronouns, common and proper
nouns, etc.) may occur, and what they may/may not refer to. Many prominent
researchers argue that these principles are part of our innate linguistic
endowment because (i) they occur in the vast majority of languages for which we
have data, and (ii) children in every language studied to date exhibit them at
the very earliest testable ages. This argument for innateness is threatened
somewhat by the existence of a handful of languages, e.g., Thai, in which the
Binding Principles appear not to hold. If these principles are innate,
exceptional languages like Thai should not exist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;So why
don't Thai speakers obey the Binding Principles? Thai children hold the answer
to this puzzle: if Thai children, unlike Thai adults, exhibit knowledge of the
Binding Principles at young ages, this will show that the principles are indeed
part of our innate linguistic endowment, and that as children mature, they
'unlearn' these principles on the basis of adult input. However, if Thai
children show no evidence of the Binding Principles at any stage in development,
this will suggest that the principles are not innate. If this is the case,
children acquiring other languages (e.g., English) do not have access to these
innate principles, and must simply learn them on the basis of experience and
other (non-linguistic) mechanisms. This project will test 80 Thai children aged
3yrs-7yrs and 20 adult Thai speakers on six experiments, each targeting a
different aspect of the Binding Principles. The project will not only address
one of the biggest debates in cognitive science (nature versus nurture), but it
will also gather data from an understudied language, as well as establish and
foster relations between academic institutions in Thailand and the United
States. Moreover, this work will lay the foundation for the development of
standards for the acquisition of Thai that may be used for Speech Pathology or
educational assessment purposes.