* 0821233
* MRI: Acquisition of a FACS (Fluorescent Activated Cell Sorter) to Support Collaborative Research and Education in Biomolecular sciences and nanomaterials applications
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2011
* Alex Punnoose, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Vicki Martin
* 07/31/2011
* USD 503,775.00

A grant has been awarded to Boise State University under the supervision of Dr.
Denise Wingett to support biology and nanotechnology research at the biological
interface. This grant from the National Science Foundation will enable the
purchase of a state-of-the art scientific instrument with advanced capabilities
that are currently unmatched elsewhere in the state of Idaho. The fluorescent
activated cell sorter (FACS) is useful for a wide array of biological and
nanomaterials science applications. This instrumentation allows researchers to
identify, analyze, and collect rare subpopulations of cells from many different
origins and species or engineered materials in the nanometer to micron size
range. Research projects that will benefit from this instrumentation include
studies of fundamental mechanisms of cellular response, growth, death, and
differentiation to natural and chemical stimuli or materials from the fast
developing nanotechnology sector. This instrument also allows for the collection
of chromosomes, subcellular components including mitochondria from individual
cells, or bacteria starting from complex mixtures of cell populations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of this instrument will support more than
nineteen collaborative and interdisciplinary research projects at institutes of
higher education in the Treasure Valley region including Boise State University,
College of Idaho, and Northwest Nazarene University, as well as numerous
research programs at surrounding government and hospital research institutes and
private industry partners. Availability of this cutting-edge instrumentation
will be used to advance educational opportunities for hundreds of undergraduate
and graduate students by efficient integration of research and education through
hands-on training as well as the development of a new PhD program in
biomolecular sciences at Boise State University.&lt;br/&gt;