* 0821369
* MRI: Acquisition of a Distributed Environmental Sensor Network by the Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Brian Enquist, Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Vicki Martin
* 08/31/2011
* USD 473,800.00

This proposal will fund installation of a Distributed Environmental Sensor
Network (DESN) consisting of permanent and portable weather stations deployed
along an elevational gradient. The DESN will enable measurement of important
environmental parameters such as rainfall, soil moisture, temperature,
radiation, and soil CO2 that will fundamentally improve the ability of
scientists to study how organisms interact with the environment. Installation of
a sensor network will allow RMBL scientists to pursue a number of specific
questions, including how climate variability affects water budgets, ecosystem
carbon fluxes, and species distributions; to test hypotheses concerning the
physiological underpinnings of species hybrid zones; to identify how
environmental parameters interact with social dynamics to influence marmot
population demography, influence butterfly species invasions, and plant,
amphibian, and stream/pond insect population dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The RMBL has been an important center for training in field research
and access to a DESN will be an important component of both undergraduate and
graduate training. Additionally, the DESN will provide data to the Natural
Resource Conservation Service that will allow them to improve the models they
use to manage water resources. Decisions about how much water and when to
release it from dams is critical to maintaining agriculture as well as ensuring
availability of water for domestic consumption. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;