* 0821675
* Acquisition of a plasma-enhanced-chemical-vapor-deposition cluster tool for photovoltaics and large area electronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* David Galipeau, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2011
* USD 250,000.00

Research Objectives and Approaches&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proposal is
to acquire an advanced plasma-enhanced chemical-vapor-deposition system for
supporting research projects in the fields of photovoltaics at the South Dakota
State University and State of South Dakota. The approach is to design the system
based on the requirements of the proposed research projects and have it built
and installed by the manufacturer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;Due to the high cost of photovoltaic electricity and the
importance of a clean and sustainable energy for the future of mankind, research
on developing photovoltaic technologies with cost-reduction potential is of
great importance. The PI is involved in initiating and conducting several
research tracks in the field of cost-effective photovoltaics. These include 1)
new generation of wafer based silicon solar cells, 2) high efficiency flexible
thin film solar cells, 3) structural optimization of group-VI thin film alloys,
and 4) organic/inorganic hybrid solar cells. The new instrument will support
over 12 ongoing and proposed interdisciplinary research projects in the
previously mentioned research fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This instrument will support the research and teaching
activities at the three major research institutes in the State of South Dakota,
the NSF-EPSCoR supported Photoactive Nanoscale Systems cluster, the new Ph.D.
program in Photovoltaics at South Dakota State University, and projects from
local industries. The PI will integrate and teach the synthesis and
characterization of hydrogenated Si thin films in his graduate level courses.
The system will be used to demonstrate thin film deposition for high school
students during cleanroom tours.&lt;br/&gt;