* 0821303
* MRI:  Acquisition of a High Resolution Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer and Laser Ablation System
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Arthur Flegal, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2010
* USD 566,787.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The PIs are requesting funds to acquire an excimer
laser ablation inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer. The Element XR HR
ICP-MS will replace the current system, which has become unsupportable as key
replacement parts are no longer manufactured. The laser ablation (LA) system
(New Wave UP193FX) will be a new acquisition for the institution (i.e., not a
replacement). The LA ablates solid sample volumes in situ with high spatial and
depth resolution, and introduces the sample into a variety of analytical
instruments, including the HR ICP-MS. The research efforts that would be
supported by the proposed instrumentation include: mechanisms and rate of growth
and decay of collisional orogens and convergent margins
(geochronology/thermochronology); past ocean temperature change (Cenozoic
paleoceanography); crust and mantle evolution (petrology/geochemistry);
geographic variation and population dynamics of fish (otolith microchemistry);
and exposure pathways and neurotoxic actions of lead and manganese in
vertebrates (environmental toxicology). The proposed instrumentation will be
incorporated into the existing Plasma Analytical Facility, which provides
training and rapid transition to unassisted user
rates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The proposal outlines a
strong commitment to outreach through a variety of efforts, including the
development of a LA-ICP-MS short course, inclusion of the proposed
instrumentation in existing courses involving instrument analyses, and the
maintenance of user group e-mail list serves for instrumentation needs. The
proposal also outlines the efforts of UCSC to promote participation of under-
represented groups and anticipates the presence and use of the proposed
instrumentation to enhance these efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;