* 0821005
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Field, Multi-Probe Cryogenic System for Quantum and Nano-Structured Materials Research
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2009
* Chia-Ling Chien, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 09/30/2009
* USD 501,374.00

Technical abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will establish a high-
magnetic-field, multi-probe cryogenic facility for condensed matter physics and
nanostructured materials research at Johns Hopkins University (JHU). The
Physical Properties Measurement System (PPMS) will provide access to four orders
of magnitude in temperature (0.1 K to 1000 K) and magnetic field from 0-14
Tesla. Measurement capabilities include specific heat, electrical and thermal
transport, magnetization, and magnetic susceptibility. To ensure reliable long
term operations, a small helium liquefier will be an integral part of the
system. The PPMS will enable a broad range of condensed matter physics and
materials science: Specific heat and magnetic susceptibility measurements will
be used to explore the low temperature high field phase diagram of frustrated
quantum magnets and the critical properties of the corresponding phase
transitions. The instrument will be used to compare static thermodynamic
quantities to the complementary dynamic properties of strongly correlated metals
measured through time-domain THz spectroscopy and neutron scattering. Magneto-
resistance will be used to access spin transport in lateral structures and
organic semiconductor nano-structures and anomalous transport in metallic thin
films with arrays of micron sized holes. Magnetization measurements will be used
to probe nano-magnets and superconducting nano-structures. Thermal transport
measurements will probe quantum phase transitions at the
insulator/superconductor boundary. Such measurements will also benchmark novel
organic seminconducting materials for thermoelectric applications. Researchers
throughout JHU and from our NSF-PREM partner Howard University will be able to
access the instrument as will JHU seniors and graduate students through advanced
laboratory courses. The instrument will also provide new opportunities for MRSEC
related outreach programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Abstract:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To understand atomic scale properties of new materials and
access their utility for technical applications it is necessary to measure their
physical properties under accurately controlled conditions of temperature and
applied magnetic field. This project will establish a facility for such
measurements to complement a wide range of materials related scientific programs
at the Johns Hopkins University. The Physical Properties Measurement System
(PPMS) will subject materials to temperature from 0.1 Kelvin (-459.5 F) to 1000
K (1340 F) and magnetic fields up to 14 Tesla (400,000 times the earth?s field).
Under these conditions the instrument will be able to probe the specific heat,
the electrical resistivity, the thermal conductivity, and the induced
magnetization of materials that challenge our basic understanding of solids or
present new possibilities for technical applications. The electrical resistivity
of materials in high magnetic fields for example reveals intricate details of
electron charge and electron spin transport through the material. Such
measurements will be used to advance our understanding of organic semiconductors
with potential for applications in plastic electronics. Likewise the field
induced magnetization of samples reveals details about their magnetic
configuration. Such measurements will be used to evaluate nano-engineered
structures with potential for applications in ultra high density information
storage systems. New states of matter induced by competing interactions in so-
called ?frustrated magnets? and by electron interactions in so-called ?strongly
correlated metals? will be explored through specific heat and magnetization
measurements. Finally, thermal transport measurements will be used to probe
novel thermoelectric materials that can help to address the energy challenge.
The PPMS will also become an integral part of and strengthen a wide range of
undergraduate, graduate, and education outreach programs at Johns Hopkins
University.