* 0821231
* MRI:  Development of a Mobile, Rapid-scan, X-band, Polarimetric Doppler Radar
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Howard Bluestein, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 07/31/2012
* USD 875,000.00

The goal of this Major Research Instrumentation award is to develop a novel,
rapidly scanning, high-resolution, mobile, volume imaging, X-band,
meteorological Doppler radar having polarimetric capability. The radar will be
used in the field by the Principal Investigator (PI) and his graduate students.
The PI has over thirty years of field experience and two decades of experience
in using mobile Doppler radars. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: High-
resolution, rapidly scanning radars are necessary to study tornadoes and other
meteorological phenomena having very short time scales. In part because it is so
difficult to study such features, they are not well understood. Although there
is widespread interest in developing electronically scanned radars for
meteorological applications, such radars have several drawbacks, the most
significant being the high cost for a narrow-beam system. Furthermore, current
electronically scanned radars are limited to single polarization operation that
cannot take advantage of rain rate extraction algorithms based on polarimetric
quantities. By combining a pulse compression, frequency hopping radar with a
large, dual- polarized antenna mounted on a high speed pedestal, the system will
be able to achieve the first ever fully polarimetric volume images of severe
storms in less than a minute, at a reasonable cost. The radar will be used to
map the reflectivity and wind fields in phenomena characterized by very short
time scales and relatively short space scales, such as tornadoes, severe
convective storms, the eyewall and precipitation bands in tropical cyclones, and
some boundary-layer features. The radar will permit the documentation and study
of rapidly evolving structures that would otherwise not be possible. Having
polarimetric capability will make possible the identification of hydrometeor
type, which is important for the thermodynamic and dynamic processes in
convective storms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The radar will be used
to further knowledge of potentially damaging and injury-causing storms.
Knowledge gained can be put to use for improving warnings to the public.
Graduate students in meteorology and electrical engineering will gain valuable
experience in using in the radar and analyzing and interpreting the data, and in
suggesting and implementing modifications to the radar. The radar will become
part of the Radar Innovations Laboratory at the Atmospheric Radar Research
Center at the University of Oklahoma and will be made available to the local and
national community. Underrepresented groups will be encouraged to participate in
projects making use of the radar. Currently, two female, Ph. D. students are
being supervised by the PI and it is expected that both will still be in
residence when the radar is available for the field. &lt;br/&gt;