* 0821070
* MRI: Acquisition of an Immersive Virtual Reality System for the South Jersey Technology Park at Rowan University
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Beena Sukumaran, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2011
* USD 392,000.00

This project seeks support to purchase a fully-immersive, navigable and
interactive virtual reality (VR) system, commonly known as a CAVE®, for
providing advanced scientific visualization support to research projects in the
Imaging and Nondestructive Evaluation (NDE) Laboratory at Rowan University.

Intellectual Merit: We describe two specific application areas of ongoing
project activity for the proposed acquisition; the intellectual merit associated
with each is provided below: (a) Development of VR platforms for the integrated
systems health management of NASA's rocket-engine test stands: We will expand
our collaborative work with NASA-Stennis Space Center and develop 3-D VR
environments in order to support the testing of the new Constellation rocket
systems. We will develop novel data fusion capabilities such as those requiring
the integration of heterogeneous sensor data and the real-time generation of an
immersive, interactive and navigable display of an evolutionary scenario inside
the VR environment. The results of this effort will provide a more useful
framework for both ground operations and in-flight space systems to better meet
NASA's Human & Robotic Technology missions to the Moon (and subsequently, Mars).
(b) Synthesis of particle aggregate mixtures from numerical 3-D shape
descriptors: We will use the immersive and interactive virtual environment to
enable the development of computationally efficient 3-D numerical shape
descriptors of granular soil mixtures. These descriptors will be employed in
developing realistic discrete element models that capture the actual soil
morphology. This is important from a practical viewpoint because a fundamental
understanding of soil behavior governs the design of foundation elements for any
type of infrastructure project.

Broader Impact: The proposed immersive VR system is planned to be installed in
the newly constructed South Jersey Technology Park into which the Imaging & NDE
lab facility will move. The South Jersey Technology Park is a collaborative
effort between the State of New Jersey and Rowan University to revitalize the
economic development of the Southern New Jersey region through an integrated
strategy of science and technology initiatives. The acquisition of an advanced
VR facility such as the CAVE® has the potential to attract anchor tenants to
this facility and will have a significant economic impact in the region in terms
of the development of a high-technology enabled workforce. Furthermore, this
project will benefit students enrolled in the Engineering Clinic program (Junior
and Senior engineering design projects) and the MS in Engineering program, who
will be co-located at the South Jersey Technology Park.