* 0821832
* Acquisition of Automated Genetic Analyzer for Interdisciplinary Research, Teaching and Training in Molecular Phylogenetics,  Biology, and Bioinformatics in an Undergraduate College
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Timothy Evans, Hope College
* Standard Grant
* Steven E. Ellis
* 08/31/2009
* USD 117,080.00

A grant has been awarded to Hope College to purchase an automated genetic
analyzer for research and training in evolutionary biology, microbiology,
molecular biology, and bioinformatics. The instrument, which will be used by
both faculty and students, will significantly impact multiple areas of research
and teaching. First, it will be used to collect DNA sequence data for
evolutionary studies of the pineapple family, whose species have been under
increasing risk of extinction due to extensive habitat loss. Second, it will be
used to examine genome evolution in the primitive eukaryote Giardia lamblia, the
parasite that causes Giardiasis. Third, the instrument will be used to learn
more about how genes are regulated by fatty acids through a study in yeast.
Lastly, it will be used in a comparative analysis of virus genomes as part of
the HHMI-funded Phage Genomics Research Initiative&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
automated genetic analyzer will have broad impacts by helping to train Hope
College undergraduate students and NSF-REU students in modern scientific
techniques, thereby encouraging them to pursue careers in science. It will
strengthen Hope?s HHMI-funded program in phage genomics, which is an initiative
targeted at retaining outstanding freshmen in science, and it will be used to
foster faculty-student collaborative research in plant evolution, microbial
genomics, cell biology, and biochemistry. With its service in research
laboratories as well as in several different classes, the instrument will
provide at least 100 undergraduate students per year with hands-on experience in
sample preparation, state-of-the-art DNA sequencing, and data analysis and
interpretation.&lt;br/&gt;