* 0821313
* MRI:  Acquisition of Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption Ionization and Electrospray Ionization Mass Spectrometers for the Analysis of New Synthetic Polymers and Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* George Newkome, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Rieker
* 08/31/2011
* USD 788,600.00

Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Matrix-assisted laser desorption
ionization (MALDI) and electrospray ionization (ESI) mass spectrometers will be
acquired for the analysis of synthetic, macromolecular materials. The
instruments will support a variety of interdisciplinary research programs in
polymer science and engineering at the University of Akron, which focus on the
creation of new polymers and materials and the examination of these substances
for specific applications. The studies performed within this research regularly
raise questions about the mass, composition, functional groups, purity,
connectivity, and architecture of functionalized oligomers and macromonomers,
hyperbranched and dendritic systems, organic and inorganic polymers, copolymers,
polymer interfaces, and polymer-biomolecule conjugates. These questions can be
answered with exceptional sensitivity and specificity by combined MALDI time-of-
flight and ESI ion trap / time-of-flight mass spectrometry analyses. The high
resolution, high mass accuracy, and tandem mass spectrometry capabilities of the
instruments to be obtained will significantly facilitate the desired structural
characterizations, fostering the development of new methods of polymerization
and the discovery of new materials with properties fine-tuned for particular
technological uses, inter alia, in photovoltaic devices, sensors, or drug
delivery systems. The instruments will be accessible to industrial researchers
and college faculty from Northeast Ohio, who need ESI or MALDI mass spectrometry
to solve their analytical problems. They will also be available for a variety of
educational activities, including instrumental analysis courses and research
courses for graduate, undergraduate, REU, and McNair
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
University of Akron (UA) will purchase instruments to study structure and
enhance research and education in many interconnected research projects in
polymer science and engineering. Currently, researchers at UA focus on the
preparation of new materials; on the mechanical, physical, and chemical
properties of these materials; and on the optimization of their properties for
specific applications in nanotechnology and biomedical fields. For example,
materials for light harvesting devices, biosensors, stents, implants, and drug
delivery systems are being studied. The research naturally leads to questions
about the chemical make-up, size, and purity of the materials. The mass
spectrometry equipment requested will enable rapid and accurate measurement of
these properties and lead to the making of new materials. The problem solving
capability of the instruments will make the discovery of new materials easier
and allow the properties of the materials to be fine-tuned for the desired use.
The instruments will be used by academic and industrial researchers within the
Ohio Mass Spectrometry Consortium (universities, other research institutions,
and affiliated industrial corporations) as well as by college faculty from
universities in Northeast Ohio. The instruments will also be available for a
variety of educational activities, including undergraduate courses in
instrumental analysis and research courses for graduate and undergraduate
students.