* 0821241
* MRI: Acquisition of Motion Capture and Eye Tracking Equipment to Enable Innovative Research on Joint Action
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Kevin Shockley, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2009
* USD 317,510.00

Joint actions involve two or more people coordinated in a common endeavor
"bodies and minds moving together." A conversation is a joint action, as is the
shared hefting and moving of a piano, or a blistering rally in professional
tennis. Real-time joint action has been notoriously difficult to study because
of the complexity of measuring coordinated cognitive and bodily activity across
two or more people. Nevertheless, people participate in joint activities on a
daily basis, and they often have enormous practical significance, as when a team
of air-traffic controllers shepherds passenger planes through air space.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent research suggests a point of entry into this
difficult topic: body and eye movements become closely synchronized between
participants in joint actions. Thus measurements of synchronization may reveal
the nature of the coordination and the subtle changes that sustain coordination
in joint action. Success also depends on the new mathematics of synchronization
developed across the last half of the 20th century and on very recent
developments in wireless sensor technology. Wireless sensor technology allows
researchers to take precise measurements of movement without the elaborate
tethers created by dozens of connecting wires. The new technology allows
subjects to move freely in joint activities while a dense array of real-time
measurements are taken.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the National
Science Foundation, Drs. Michael Riley, Kevin Shockley and Guy Van Orden will
purchase state-of-the-art wireless motion-capture and eye-tracking technology to
objectively measure coordination of moving bodies and of eye movements during
joint activities. Body, limb, and eye movements of up to four people can be
tracked simultaneously and recorded for later analysis to quantify coordination.
These powerful sensor technologies, combined with new mathematical analysis
techniques, define the next generation of scientific instrumentation to
investigate joint action. This instrumentation provides unparalleled detail to
address basic questions about joint action and provides practical knowledge of
joint actions in applied settings requiring teams of operators to collaborate on
joint tasks. If cognitive and perceptual-motor coordination that arises during
joint action is related to enhanced team performance, then performance can be
improved by stimulating coordination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The equipment
purchased with National Science Foundation support will also enhance
undergraduate and graduate training at the University of Cincinnati, where an
interdisciplinary network of researchers from psychology, biology, biomedical
engineering, electrical engineering, and medicine study basic and applied
aspects of coordination in human activity. Topics include joint cognitive
activities, learning and development, ergonomics, and other specific topics in
motor coordination (balance, gait, movement disorders, and rehabilitation). The
newly equipped laboratory will also enhance ongoing efforts to attract students
to STEM disciplines, especially from groups who are underrepresented in science
but well represented in undergraduate studies at the University of Cincinnati.
Many students are attracted to motion-capture technology it is used to create
animated films and video games but are unaware of its scientific applications.