* 0821594
* Solid State Chemisty of Inorganic Materials VII to be held at the MRS Fall Meeting; Hynes Convention Center; Boston, MA; December 1-5, 2008
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2009
* Patrick Woodward, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 05/31/2009
* USD 19,000.00

Interest in solid-state chemistry as a discipline has undergone explosive growth
in recent years due to the broadly based recognition of the technological
importance and scientific challenges involved in the discovery and study of new
materials, and due to the influx of scientists from other disciplines who see
the opportunities for performing exciting research in this area. The 2008 MRS
Symposium PP on Solid State Chemistry of Inorganic Materials is a major
international meeting. The goal of the conference is to facilitate
collaborations and information exchange across a broad spectrum of researchers
with interests in solid-state chemistry areas that address issues such as novel
synthesis methods, crystal chemistry, electronic , magnetic and optical
properties of new classes of materials, computational solid state chemistry,
chemistry of nano-scale materials, surfaces and interfaces/catalysis, solid
state ionics, microporous materials and framework structures, dielectric
materials inorganic/organic hybrid materials, and composite materials. These
topics play key roles in the preparation and characterization of novel materials
for important applications. The NSF support will go to students, post-doctoral
scholars, and early career faculty, as well as senior U.S. session chairs and
invited speakers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this
conference is to bring together researchers from diverse backgrounds to discuss
the latest advances and challenges in the area of solid-state chemistry with the
intent to promote an exchange of ideas and to build strong relationships among
academic, industrial, and government researchers. Internationally known speakers
and poster presentations from students, post-doctoral scholars, and early career
faculty will emphasize technical advances, the presentation of unpublished work,
and the discussion of new ideas and future directions emerging within the solid-
state chemistry community. The speakers represent academic, industrial, and
government laboratories, and there will be strong international participation.
Leading scientists working in various areas of solid-state chemistry are
expected to draw the interest of many researchers in the field. Current
frontiers to be highlighted include synthesizing, characterizing, and
investigating the properties of novel classes of inorganic solid compounds. The
area impacts the entire field of solid-state chemistry and much of materials
chemistry research since it spans all materials types and a wide variety of
exploitable properties. As a result, this MRS symposium on solid-state chemistry
will draw the interest of those working on diverse classes of compounds
important to advancing new technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;