* 0821979
* A Novel Structure for 3-Dimensional Quantization in Semiconductor Diode Lasers
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2013
* James Coleman, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2013
* USD 270,000.00

The objective of this research is the understanding and development of a novel
three-dimensional (3D) quantized semiconductor laser active layer design called
the nanopore. The approach is to create the inverse of a quantum dot structure
using a layer of lower energy material "a quantum well" that is perforated and
has imbedded in it bits of higher bandgap material that are small enough and
close enough together to introduce 3D quantization.

Intellectual Merit: While conventional quantum dots can show very strong
quantization effects, the dots are often sparse, weakly coupled, irregularly
distributed, and variable in size. The nanopore structure addresses all of these
issues and introduces additional intermediate design freedom "pore pattern and
geometry" unavailable in other approaches. There is also evidence of some
unexpected behavior in these structures, including a forbidden energy gap within
the conduction and valence bands, which will be explored. The presence of an
energy gap offers intriguing potential for terahertz frequency generation and
emission.

Broader Impacts: Carefully controlled 3D quantized behavior in semiconductor
structures is critical to future nanoscale electronic and photonic devices.
Therefore the success of this program can have transformative impact on the
critical fields of electronic and photonic integrated circuits and systems.
There is substantial involvement of undergraduates in this work, targeted toward
the participation of underrepresented groups and a plan to "teach the teacher"
involving at least one middle school teacher in this program each year to learn
about research and develop lesson plans for their students.