* 0821785
* Test of 3C recording with 1C instruments in association with High Lava Plains field program, for crustal shear-wave velocity, anisotropy, and lithology.
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Simon Klemperer, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard E. Johnson
* 07/31/2011
* USD 49,976.00

This is an SGER award which will take advantage of dynamite explosions during a
previously funded CD project (the High Lava Plains Experiment). The PIs will
collect high-resolution (100 m spacing, 1 ms temporal sampling) P ? and S ? wave
profiles at multiple azimuths in south-eastern Oregon. The data will be analyzed
for anisotropy and S ? wave velocity, utilizing the high spatial resolution.
Although some preliminary observations of crustal anisotropy have been made in
the USA, it has not normally been possible to localize their depth extent,
because passive observations are typically made at far lower frequencies
(coarser resolution) than active-source measurements. Hence the need to make 3
component (3C) active-source measurements to complement the now standard 3C
passive-source receiver-function methods. If the PIs are successful, their
results, in conjunction with the existing CD funded explosive-source refraction
velocity model and receiver function images, will help estimate the relative
roles of magmatic intrusions and crustal flow in maintaining crustal thickness
in SE Oregon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to collecting data of scientific
interest to the CD-funded High Lava Plains Experiment, the PIs will demonstrate
the technical feasibility of using three one-component (1C) recorders in
parallel at a single site to record 3C data. Success in the latter aim will open
a path to fuller utilization of the PASSCAL and EarthScope Texan recording
facility, more complete recording of the waveforms generated by NSF-funded
controlled-source experiments, and extraction of additional scientific results
from future experiments. IRIS is arranging fabrication of 300 ?harnesses? to
connect 900 existing 1C recorders (Texans) in groups of 3 to 300 existing 3C 4.5
Hz geophones, at no charge to this project.&lt;br/&gt;