* 0821203
* MRI:  Acquisition of an Updated Digital Microscopy Station for Multidisciplinary Museum Research and Student Training
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Thomas Pucci, Cleveland Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Vicki Martin
* 08/31/2011
* USD 100,000.00

A grant has been awarded to The Cleveland Museum of Natural History to update an
aging microscope facility that supports research and training across multiple
scientific disciplines. Currently, the Museum openly offers all Museum
departments and colleagues (and their students) from other institutions
microscopes with digital cameras and computer software for scientific analysis
of images of Museum specimens. This grant will fund the purchase of two new
microscopes with digital cameras and the computers and software needed for image
analysis. A third camera will be purchased to update the existing equipment. The
Museum intends to continue allowing access to visiting researchers. The original
research will allow for continued work in diverse areas of invertebrate zoology,
including 1) descriptions of new species of wasps; 2) elucidation of the biology
of the immature stages of various insect groups; 3) the application of
entomological data to crime scene investigation; and 4) the use of aquatic
insects as indicators of ecosystem health in wetlands.

The Museum is committed to obtaining a better understanding of the natural world
and our place in it. Research in the broader areas of biodiversity and ecosystem
health will provide descriptive data that will generate hypotheses to be tested.
Data obtained using modern microscopy equipment and image analysis will generate
data for application to practical questions, such as forensic entomology and
conservation biology. One of the new systems will be mobile, allowing it to be
used in Museum galleries for public interaction and incorporation into the
Museum's Distance Learning Studios for remote classroom experiences. All
equipment will be stored and used in a room visible to the visiting public to
ensure they understand the behind-the-scenes world of Museum research and public
service.