* 0821745
* MRI: Acquisition of a High-Resolution Transmission Electron Microscope to Enhance Interdisciplinary Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Wiley Kirk, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2009
* USD 320,000.00

Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests funds for the
acquisition of a High-resolution Transmission Electron Microscope (HRTEM)
equipped with an energy-dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) system to support funded
research and education at the University of Texas at Arlington (UTA).
Advancements in the field of nanoscience and nanotechnologies require structural
and chemical characterization capability with atomic resolution. The imaging of
lattice structures using a HRTEM is the only known method of yielding such
details. Based on the strengths of materials research that is currently
undertaken on the UTA campus, we have judiciously chosen a select, and
requisite, set of HRTEM-EDS instrumentation that will allow a large number of
both group and individual researchers to greatly enhance their experimental
programs. The three major research clusters that will enjoy the benefits of
HRTEM-EDS are: (i) nanomaterial synthesis; (ii) electronic materials; and (iii)
biomaterials. Knowledge gained from the proposed facility will deepen
understanding of the fundamental mechanisms in the formation and evolution of
nanostructures and materials in these three thrust areas. The proposed
instrumentation will be part of the newly established and University supported
Characterization Center for Materials and Biology (CCMB). CCMB is a multi-user
facility consisting of several state-of-the-art pieces of equipment, serving UTA
researchers and students, other universities and industry fostering
interdisciplinary research. The proposed facility will provide a cornerstone
laboratory for undergraduate and graduate education and training. The facility
will be an integral part of attracting underrepresented minorities to UTA in the
area of science and engineering by partnering with the Society for Hispanic
Professional Engineers (housed on UTA campus). The use of the new facility will
be extended to local industry in Dallas/Fort Worth metropolitan region, which
hosts more than 400 telecommunication, aerospace, defense, and health science
industries and institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-
technical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent materials research by looking at very
small scale (nanoscale) has produced an unprecedented number of exciting
discoveries, new materials and devices, and new industries. The proposed high-
resolution transmission electron microscope utilizes a high energy beam of
electrons to penetrate thin foils of materials providing imaging at the atomic
scale and unique information about the local structure and chemistry of
materials. Such a characterization tool is indispensable in studying and
synthesizing novel, very small scale materials. This new capability will expand
and excite ongoing research at UTA in fields of critical technological
importance to the U.S. and Texas including microelectronics, nanotechnology, and
bioengineering. The proposed instrumentation will be part of the newly
established and University supported Characterization Center for Materials and
Biology. This new facility provides a cornerstone laboratory for undergraduate
and graduate education and training of future materials scientists and
engineers. The proposed instrumentation will be an integral part of attracting
underrepresented minorities to UTA in the area of science and engineering by
partnering with the Society for Hispanic Professional Engineers (housed on UTA
campus). This research and education is important to the Dallas/Fort Worth
metropolitan region, which is home to more than 400 telecommunication,
aerospace, defense and health science industries and institutions.