* 0821956
* Mobile Genetic Elements in Sexual and Ancient Asexual Taxa
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2013
* Irina Arkhipova, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 08/31/2013
* USD 788,557.00

Transposable genetic elements (TEs) are of virtually universal occurrence in
eukaryotes and prokaryotes, and in multicellular eukaryotes have been found to
constitute a substantial portion of the genome: nearly one-half in humans, and
even more in many plants. Their existence raises fundamental questions related
to eukaryotic genome structure, function, and evolution. This project is based
on the view that much can be learned about TEs and their effects on genome
structure by comparing their characteristics and evolution in sexual taxa with
those in asexual taxa. Because of the important role of sexual reproduction in
both the maintenance and limitation of deleterious TEs in eukaryotic
populations, the putative asexuality and other highly unusual characteristics of
bdelloid rotifers, such as the repeated DNA breakage and repair thought to occur
during the cycles of desiccation and rehydration characteristic of bdelloid
habitats, make them a promising model system for investigating fundamental
problems associated with TEs. These problems include their proliferation,
compartmentalization and distribution within genomes, the mechanisms of their
copy number control, the dependence of their maintenance, dynamics and evolution
on biparental reproduction, their domestication and possible role in the
maintenance of chromosome ends, and their participation in horizontal gene flow,
whereby TEs and other DNA may enter bdelloid genomes by means other than
vertical descent. Indeed, the investigators' studies of bdelloid TEs have
already revealed notable differences from sexual taxa in the types and genomic
distribution of TEs and foreign DNA in bdelloid genomes, and have suggested
novel ideas for the operation and evolution of systems that protect chromosomes
and their ends from degradation. The principal objectives of the research are
(i) to investigate subtelomeric TE-rich clusters in bdelloids in order to
determine whether telomeric TE copies may constitute part of a genome defense
system against invading TEs, and to uncover the role of telomere-associated
retroelements in formation and function of these clusters; (ii) to investigate
the origin and function of novel reverse transcriptases found in bdelloids and
its possible relation to genome defense mechanisms; (iii) to further examine
bdelloid and monogonont genomes for the presence of diverse intact or relict
retroelements and telomeric TE-rich clusters, and to identify candidate
monogonont TEs for introduction into bdelloid genomes; and (iv) to continue
efforts to achieve stable transformation in order to test for proliferation of
TEs introduced into internal and telomeric regions. These specific objectives
are aimed at characterizing fundamental mechanisms of genome defense in
bdelloids and their implications for eukaryotes generally.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be of interest to biologists interested
in problems of genome structure and evolution, as well as to the general public.
The investigators will continue to discuss their research in the media, as they
have done in previous years on programs such as NPR's "The Connection" and "Talk
of the Nation: Science Friday." They will contribute to the activities of Mobile
Genetic Element Cluster at the Marine Biological Laboratory (MBL) at Woods Hole,
and will participate in convening the annual Northeast Mobile DNA meeting. The
project will continue to rely on student involvement, providing undergraduates
with hands-on training and with access to the unique summer environment at the
MBL, which includes Friday lectures by eminent scientists and the possibility to
interact with visiting scientists and summer course students from around the
world.