* 0821391
* MRI: Acquisition of computing equipment for research and education in computational biology
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Bruce Tidor, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Vicki Martin
* 08/31/2011
* USD 256,086.00

Through a grant from the National Science Foundation to the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, six faculty members will collaborate in the purchase
and use of high-performance computing equipment for research and education in
computational and systems biology. The advent of high-throughput technologies in
the life sciences has provided many genome sequences, protein structures and
biological interaction networks. The amount of such data will continue to grow,
compelling the development of rigorous and quantitative approaches to decipher
and understand it. Simultaneously, advances in computing technology are enabling
new ways of attacking complex biological problems using modeling and simulation.
The projects to be supported cover a wide range of exciting areas, including the
study of gene and organism evolution, transcriptional and post-transcriptional
gene regulation, molecular signaling, protein conformational modeling, protein
design, and the analysis of complex networks. The work will lead to advances in
computational methods and provide basic biological insights.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support MIT?s active role in developing
computational and systems biology in the United States. The university is
establishing novel programs and curricula to train students at the interface of
the life sciences, engineering and the physical sciences. The investigators on
this award are deeply involved in these activities. Shared computing resources
will help attract talented students and provide them with modern, cross-
disciplinary training. These students, who come from diverse backgrounds, will
assume leadership positions in American universities and
companies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;