* 0821126
* MRI: Development of a Reconfigurable Microgrid Test Bed for Resilient and Sustainable Energy Systems Research and Education
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2013
* Hongtan Liu, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2013
* USD 250,000.00

Objective: The objective of this project is to develop a novel, reconfigurable
microgrid test bed that will promote research and education in the area of
resilient and sustainable energy infrastructure systems. The microgrid is a
promising paradigm to integrate a heterogeneous set of distributed energy
resources and may eventually become the building blocks of future utility power
grids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The unique instrument developed
in this project does not currently exist. The developed microgrid test bed
provides a critical research infrastructure to verify, validate and demonstrate
innovative power system concepts and control technologies for microgrids, which
otherwise could not be readily done in a real utility power grid. The efforts
based on this instrument will greatly advance our knowledge and understanding in
large-scale, safe deployment of alternative and renewable energy resources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The success of this project will provide a
significant platform for research in the effective integration of distributed
energy resources that includes physical and control interface requirements, and
in bounding the performance of those standards and interfaces through
demonstration. Several current research projects and a number of potential
projects will directly benefit from this research instrument. Three PhD students
and several undergraduate students are directly involved in this project and a
large number of other undergraduate and graduate students will benefit from this
instrument. In addition to scientific research, this instrument will be used for
the educational programs of undergraduate and graduate students, especially the
large population of minority students, at the University of Miami.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;