* 0821393
* MRI: Acquisition of a Scanning Laser Doppler Vibrometer System
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Ahmed Shabana, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2009
* USD 214,581.00

Technical Description. This grant will enable the University of Illinois at
Chicago (UIC) to acquire a Scanning Laser Doppler Vibrometer (SLDV) for research
and educational use. The SLDV enables noncontact (remote) measurement and
mapping of the dynamic deflections of a wide-range of structures and systems. By
employing laser technology and a computer software driven data acquisition
system, the instrument can measure velocities at very low levels (&lt;
microns/second) over a wide frequency range (from a fraction of Hz up to 24 MHz)
on structures ranging in size from millimeters to tens of meters at remote
measurement distances of 8 centimeters to 100 meters. It will be used by
researchers and students to catalyze a wide range of cutting edge research
projects spanning biomedical, mechanical and civil engineering. These include:
improved techniques for monitoring and damage detection in civil infrastructure,
including bridges and offshore drilling and production platforms; validating
large-scale computational simulations of vehicular system dynamics; developing a
better fundamental understanding of and improved medical diagnostic techniques
for vascular, pulmonary and musculoskeletal diseases; aiding in the development
of improved engineered tissues and improved early detection of cancer; and
developing and characterizing novel miniaturized actuators and biomedical
implants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significance &amp; Impact. Acquiring the SLDV
will advance research at UIC on numerous multidisciplinary fronts important to
society, spanning from civil infrastructure and transportation system safety to
medical diagnoses, tissue engineering and biomedical implants. The proposed
research using the SLDV will leverage its unique combination of qualities:
precision, portability, noninvasiveness, and capability for making noncontact
measurements. These features enable its use in many critical applications and
make it an ideal gold standard for calibration and validation of other less
expensive and alternative sensor array techniques being pioneered by the
assembled multidisciplinary research team. Wide use of the SLDV, including
hands-on training, in undergraduate and graduate instructional courses, will
help make these students better engineers, preparing them for challenges they
will face with real world problems and enabling them to compete globally in
their respective technical fields. UIC is one of the ten most diverse
institutions in the nation, and the senior personnel on this project have some
of the strongest records of engaging underrepresented groups in their laboratory
research that include K-12, undergraduate, graduate and post-graduate
levels.&lt;br/&gt;