* 0821978
* Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience of Moral Judgment
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Joshua Greene, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Rigdon
* 07/31/2012
* USD 749,049.00

Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience of Moral Judgment&lt;br/&gt;Consider the
following moral dilemma: It's wartime. You and your fellow villagers are hiding
from nearby enemy soldiers in a basement. Your baby starts to cry, and you cover
your baby's mouth to block the sound. If you remove your hand, your baby will
cry loudly, and the soldiers will hear. They will find you, your baby, and the
others, and they will kill all of you. If you do not remove your hand, your baby
will smother to death. Is it morally acceptable to smother your baby to death in
order to save yourself and the other villagers?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dilemmas
such as this one, in addition to being troubling and puzzling, are a window into
the psychology and neuroscience of moral decision-making. People often speak of
a "moral faculty" or a "moral sense," suggesting that moral judgment is a
unified phenomenon, but recent research strongly suggests that this is not so.
Rather, it seems that moral judgment depends on a complex interplay between
intuitive emotional responses and more deliberative controlled responses that
depend on different parts of the brain. When we confront dilemmas like the one
above, these neural systems compete for control of
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to use behavioral
testing and cutting-edge neuroscientific techniques to help us understand how
different kinds of moral decisions are influenced by emotional responses and
controlled cognitive processes. Some experiments aim to illuminate how the brain
represents moral costs and benefits. Other experiments are focused on the role
of social obligations in moral judgment. Some experiments use hypothetical moral
dilemmas such as the one above, while others involve real decisions with real
consequences for real people.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how the human
brain makes moral judgments is important from a basic science perspective, but
it is also a matter of broader social concern. Our capacity for moral judgment
is central to our identities as humans, and understanding this capacity in
biological terms may change the way we approach controversial moral issues and
may also, in the long run, dramatically change the way we see ourselves and each
other.