* 0821884
* Arabidopsis WWD2 and WDL Proteins Modulate Cell Expansion and Growth Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Patrick Masson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Sarah Wyatt
* 07/31/2012
* USD 450,000.00

Principle Investigator: Patrick H. Masson &lt;br/&gt;NSF Proposal Number
IOS-0821884&lt;br/&gt;Title: Arabidopsis WVD2 and WDL Proteins Modulate Cell
Expansion and Growth Behavior.&lt;br/&gt;Abstract. Plant organs grow using a
combination of localized cell divisions at apical structures called the
meristems, and cell expansion in sub-apical regions. The patterns of cell
division and cell expansion condition the morphology of these organs.
Furthermore, regulated cell expansion in the elongation zones allows plant
organs to develop directional growth responses to environmental stimuli and
developmental cues, further contributing to plant morphogenesis and
environmental adaptation. Regulated directionality (anisotropy) of cell
expansion is critical, and intracellular microtubular polymers of a protein,
called tubulin, which form a dense network underneath the plasma membrane,
control this process by guiding the deposition of inextensible cellulose fibrils
within the surrounding wall. The investigators have identified a group of 8
conserved plant-specific proteins that modulate the alignment of microtubules in
expanding cells, thereby regulating the patterns of cell expansion and the
growth behavior of the corresponding organs. They will use a combination of
approaches derived from Genetics, Genomics, Cell Biology, Biochemistry and
Physiology to establish the mode of action of these proteins, and investigate
the regulation of their activity by plant hormones. This project is expected to
have a profound impact on our understanding of the molecular mechanisms that
govern anisotropic cell expansion and organs? growth behavior in plants, with
potential impact on agriculture and biomass production for bioenergy conversion.
A postdoctoral fellow will carry out the project, helped by undergraduate
students who will be exposed to scientific experimentation and will be
introduced to state-of-the-art technologies in the fields of Genetics, Genomics,
Cell Biology and biomass production. Furthermore, an outreach program will be
implemented whereby K-12 teachers will join the lab each summer of the project
to work in partnership with the PI, the students and other lab members to design
instructional materials for testing and implementation in K-12 classrooms and
undergraduate lab courses. &lt;br/&gt;