* 0821338
* MRI: Acquisition of Instrumentation to Support Integrated Research and Teaching in Interdisciplinary Environmental Plant Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Stephen Cessna, Eastern Mennonite University
* Standard Grant
* Vicki Martin
* 08/31/2011
* USD 103,130.00

The research projects that will utilize the funded instrumentation address
questions related to plant fitness and environmental/ecosystem stress. The first
project studies the biochemistry and physiology of plants responding to adverse
environments. Plants undergoing environmental stress (high light, drought,
salinity, heat, cold, disease, insect herbivory, etc?) almost invariably show
changes in cellular biochemistry. The instrumentation will allow detailed,
quantitative measurements of these changes, both in the field and laboratory.
The second area of research is in collaboration with the US Park Service on
invasive plants in Shenandoah National Park. The requested instruments will
facilitate the expansion of a long term ecological study of invasive plant
impacts on native wetland species from mapping and quantifying plant population
dynamics and spread to also include detailed study of the physiology of both
native and invasive plants.

These varied research projects are related in their shared need for the
equipment requested, and in the overarching goals of gaining deeper
understanding into how environmental change alters plant adaptive fitness to a
particular geographical area. The instruments will also significantly and
positively impact our evolving research atmosphere at Eastern Mennonite
University, in which we are striving to integrate research and education across
the biological and chemical sciences, in collaboration with research partners at
other universities and with scientists working in the public sector (e.g. in
Shenandoah National Park).

