* 0821527
* MRI:    Acquistion of A Scalable Instrument for Discovery through Computing
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Brian Smith, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Amy Walton
* 06/30/2012
* USD 1,255,501.00

Proposal #: CNS 08-21527&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Raghavan, Padma&lt;br/&gt; Chen, Long-
Quing; Hudson, Peter J.; Kandemir, Mahmut T.; Smith, Brian
K.&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Pennsylvania State University &lt;br/&gt; University
Park, PA 16802-700&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Acq.: Acq.of A Scalable Instrument for
Discovery through Computing&lt;br/&gt;MRI Acquisition of a Scalable Instrument
for Discovery through Computing&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Major
Research Instrumentation Program (MRI)&lt;br/&gt;provides funds for the
acquisition of a terascale advanced computing&lt;br/&gt;instrument at the
Pennsylvania State University. The instrument&lt;br/&gt;will enable researchers
from seven disciplines (biological, materials&lt;br/&gt;and social sciences,
computer and information science, engineering,&lt;br/&gt;education, and
geosciences), to perform virtual experiments toward&lt;br/&gt;discovery and
design through computing. Research projects concern:&lt;br/&gt;predictive
network modeling of infectious disease dynamics, designing&lt;br/&gt;new
piezoelectric materials, designing next-generation
chip&lt;br/&gt;multiprocessors, modeling human interactions to promote
learning&lt;br/&gt;in virtual communities, and the development of a critical
zone&lt;br/&gt;environmental observatory. Despite their diversity, these
projects&lt;br/&gt;share computational scalability challenges to be addressed
for&lt;br/&gt;enabling scientific advances that often depend on solving
large&lt;br/&gt;problems representing a sufficient level of detail and
complexity.&lt;br/&gt;The instrument will form the core of a multidisciplinary
collaborative&lt;br/&gt;environment to enable transformative approaches to
address the&lt;br/&gt;challenges of scaling at multiple levels. It will support
a set of&lt;br/&gt;integrated research, education, training, and outreach
activities&lt;br/&gt;to: (i) enable collaborative scaling across projects
through the&lt;br/&gt;transfer of scaling approaches from one domain into
another, while&lt;br/&gt;addressing algorithmic, system, or instrument scaling
challenges&lt;br/&gt;within individual projects, (ii) promote technology-
transfer through&lt;br/&gt;industrial partnerships, and (iii) grow and enhance
the diversity&lt;br/&gt;of the limited computational science talent
pool.&lt;br/&gt;