* 0821702
* MRI:   Acquisition of A Wireless Nanonetworks Integration and Emulation System for Multi-Processor SoC Research and Education
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2013
* Magdy Bayoumi, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 07/31/2013
* USD 500,000.00

Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, acquiring a wireless
nanonetworks integration and emulation system, aims at establishing an ultra
wideband Radio Frequency Integrated Circuits (RFIC) design flow for the
development and testing of RF nodes. To bridge the gap between computation
requirements of ubiquitous applications and communication efficiency faced by
gigascale MultiProcessor Systems on Chips (MPSoC), a new on-chip communication
system, Wireless Network-on-Chip (WNoC) is proposed using CMOS Ultra WideBand
(UWB) intrachip wireless technology. The system will support research on
developing and prototyping self-configurable, on-chip wireless interconnects for
the next generation high-performance and low-power MPSoC. An integrated UWB RFIC
design flow will be set for the development of RF nodes, laying the basis for
WNoC. The corresponding RF node test and measurement environment will be linked
to the implementation process for performance characterization and evaluation.
The overall WNoC will be demonstrated on a Xilinx FPGS emulation system that
enables accurate evaluation of performance, power and area cost, and various
design tradeoffs. The application-specific WNoC prototypes will be developed to
address the challenges associated with this new design paradigm and assess the
potential of the WNoC technology. Some breakthroughs could be forthcoming in the
area of intra-chip interconnect network for high performance computing in the
upcoming nanoscale MPSoC paradigm, hopefully demonstrating the feasibility and
applicability of RF/wireless interconnects, and providing cost effective
extendable solutions to interconnect and IC
designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This work contributes to enhance
curriculum development of ubiquitous computing, providing effective training.
The lab already offers hands-on opportunities for students. Partnering with
McNair Scholars and Stokes Alliance (LS-LAMP), teachers and students will be
recruited. Augmenting lab capabilities should contribute in solidifying research
via analysis, simulation, and testbed experiments, enabling collaboration and
interaction that might activate partnerships with industry, government labs, and
other users.&lt;br/&gt;