* 0821589
* MRI: Development of a 240 GHz Pulsed Electron Paramagnetic Resonance Spectrometer with Nanosecond Time Resolution
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Frederick Dahlquist, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2012
* USD 1,254,623.00

The Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University of California-
Santa Barbara will develop a 240 GHz pulsed electron paramagnetic resonance
spectrometer (EPR) with this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI)
program. This high frequency EPR spectrometer will capitalize on the tunable
terahertz excitation pulses generated at UC Santa Barbara's Free Electron Laser
(FEL) facility. The instrument will push the frontier of EPR spectroscopy to
more than twice the current frequency/field limitation. It will open up new
areas of investigation of the structure and dynamics in biological, chemical and
electronic systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EPR spectroscopy detects changes in
electron spin in materials that contain an unpaired electron. This provides
information on the structure and motions of the material at an atomic level. The
resultant data provides insight on the properties of materials such as proteins,
enzymes and defects in solid materials. This new instrument will allow the study
of proteins in biologically relevant environments that were heretofore
impossible in many cases. After development, the new spectrometer is intended to
become a multi-user facility because of its unique capabilities. Graduate and
undergraduate students will be involved in this project learning skills in the
design and construction of state-of-the-art instrumentation.