* 0821132
* MRI:   Acquisition of a High Performance Computational Cluster for Yale University
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2012
* Mitchell Smooke, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 06/30/2012
* USD 500,000.00

Proposal #: CNS 08-21132&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Girvin, Steve M.&lt;br/&gt; Basu,
Sarbani; Batista, Victor S.; Ismail-Beigi, Sohrab; Smooke, Mitchell
D.&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Yale University &lt;br/&gt; New Haven, CT
06520-8337&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Acq.: Acq. of a High Performance Computational
Cluster for Yale University&lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project,
acquiring instrumentation for a large-scale computing system, enables research
in the physical, biological, and social sciences, as well as engineering,
linguistics, statistics, and many other fields, under the umbrella of a High
Performance Computing (HPC) Center. The instrumentation complements the
Biomedical HPC center. Supported by the Information Technology Services (ITS),
these centers are considered a single virtual unit. This work services 52
research projects from faculty in 22 departments including physical sciences,
engineering, linguistics, mathematics, ecology, economics, psychology,
statistics, and the biological sciences. The very diverse research covers a wide
range of topics from cosmological simulations to climate modeling, to neural
circuit networks and simulation of internal dynamics, to economic modeling, to
name a few. The research is supported by more than 35 current and more than 20
pending projects. Research computational scientists assist with the
instrumentation, teach parallel programming techniques, optimize current code,
and write new codes to support individual projects. The diverse needs capable of
handling both CPU and memory bound tasks along with substantial mass storage and
communication infrastructure will most likely be covered by a large CPU cluster
consisting of 350 nodes with 16GB of memory shared by 8 cores per node and a
large memory cluster consisting of 28 nodes sharing 7,168 GB memory. This
10-fold more CPUs, increased memory, and mass storage are expected to be heavily
utilized and have immediate impact in research and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The instrumentation
leverages individual research of more than 350 faculty, research and
postdoctoral staff, and graduate and undergraduate students. The latter will be
able to train and learn how to optimally use such a facility. New courses will
be developed for undergraduates focusing on HPC for nanoscale and biological
systems. The institutional outreach program involves Howard and Xavier
universities. Faculty from these universities will be trained via summer
internships and allocated time in the HPC facilities.&lt;br/&gt;