* 0821959
* Improving Reconstructions of Open Vegetation in North America: Pollen-Productivity Estimates for Grassland Plants
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,02/29/2012
* Kendra McLauchlan, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/29/2012
* USD 90,005.00

The Great Plains of the U.S. experience remarkable climate variability that is
projected to increase in the next two decades. Knowledge of grassland response
to past and future climate changes is relatively primitive, however. The purpose
of this research project is to develop a method to reconstruct quantitative
grassland cover from pollen records preserved in sediment. The project will
employ a coupled empirical and theoretical approach to lay the foundation for
quantitative reconstructions of grassland vegetation in North America. It will
be conducted in the Flint Hills of Kansas, the largest contiguous expanse of
native tallgrass prairie in the U.S. The project has three main goals. The first
goal is to determine pollen productivity for 13 common plant types in the
grassland. This will be accomplished by obtaining pollen preserved in sediment
from many small ponds in the Flint Hills and conducting detailed vegetation
surveys around each pond where pollen is collected. A computer model will
calibrate the relationships between pollen and vegetation, which will produce an
estimate of pollen productivity for each type of grassland plant. The second
goal is to establish both the regional and local spatial scales of grassland
vegetation represented by pollen in sedimentary basins. This is a key step to
providing spatially explicit estimates of the cover of grassland plants over
time as climate changes. The final goal of the project is to reconstruct
regional grassland vegetation for the past several decades by using the newly-
derived pollen productivity estimates. The investigators will obtain a sediment
core from a large lake in the Flint Hills. Pollen assemblages from the past 50
years will be quantified from the sediments, as will land cover surrounding the
basin from aerial photos and remote sensing data. Overall, this research will
improve interpretations of how grassland vegetation and climate have interacted
in the past and how they are likely to interact in the future. This knowledge is
becoming more important as human pressure on the grassland biome
increases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much of the economy of the Great Plains of the
U.S. depends on grassland resilience to climate variability. The results of this
project will help discern how grassland composition and productivity have
responded to past climate changes. It also will produce information about two
trends perceived as undesirable by residents of the region, the causes of woody
plant expansion and the factors correlated with allergenic pollen in the
atmosphere. A significant portion of the research project will train
undergraduate and graduate students to conduct field and laboratory activities.
Using infrastructure developed by Kansas State University's Women in Engineering
and Science Program, researchers will take part in outreach to K-12 girls
interested in science. Data generated by the project will be shared with the
North American Pollen Database for use by other
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;