* 0821748
* MRI: Acquisition of an XRF Core Scanner - A Revolutionary Tool for Studying the Long-Term Behavior of Ocean Ecosystems and Climate
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2011
* Richard Norris, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 02/28/2011
* USD 481,600.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The PI is requesting funds to acquire a COX
Analytical XRF Core Scanner which is capable of ultra-fine, non-destructive
measurements of elemental composition, line scan color images, and x-radiography
in core materials. The instrument would be dedicated to the analysis of sediment
cores and potentially hard rock samples. The proposed instrument would be
operated at the SIO Geological Collections facility which houses a major, NSF-
funded sediment core archive. The proposed instrument will be used to support
research efforts into marine ecosystem history, marine sedimentation processes,
gas hydrate geochemistry, and climate archives in laminated sediments in lakes
and marine anoxic basins. The proposed instrument will be one of three in the
United States (as of this writing); the other two are located at Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution and the University of Minnesota-
Duluth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The proposed instrument
will be one of three in the United States (as of this writing); the other two
are located at Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution and the University of
Minnesota-Duluth. The proposed instrument will be used as a community asset,
operating as a cost center for special projects, with on-line open scheduling
(first come, first serve) and open posting of acquired data. The use of the
proposed instrument will be incorporated into an existing undergraduate/graduate
course on Paleoecology and be demonstrated/displayed as part of tours currently
being conducted of the core repository for area high schools, junior colleges,
and the public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;