* 0821763
* MRI: Development of a robust, high-repetition rate, ultrafast mid-IR laser source for spectroscopy and sensing
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2008,05/31/2011
* Nancy Levinger, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 05/31/2011
* USD 250,000.00

Objective: Spectroscopy harnessing the mid-infrared region of the
electromagnetic spectrum is critical for scientific analysis for a vast array of
fields. MIR vibrational transitions are dipole allowed, and can present a large
interaction cross-section allowing for sensitive and specific detection of
molecular species.

Intellectual Merit: To address the need for robust, compact, energy efficient
and relatively inexpensive ultrashort pulse MIR radiation, we will develop a
novel ultrafast MIR spectral source. The source will be fiber-based and thus,
tts low cost and portability will lead to an effective source for a wide range
of chemical and biological applications. This source will extend applications of
MIR spectroscopy to a large community, facilitating new experiments through the
short pulses and high repetition rate available. The combination of short pulses
and broad spectral bandwidths promise to reveal new insights using time-resolved
spectroscopy, as well as the fingerprinting of chemical species in atmospheric
samples.

Broader Impacts: Because this equipment will be substantially less expensive and
relatively easy to use, we expect it to have a substantial broad impact on
student education. We plan to involve undergraduate researchers in both laser
construction and spectroscopy applications. Involvement by students at our
partner institutions and through summer undergraduate programs (REU, McNair,
LSAMP) will as well as from CSU will allow us to encourage students from diverse
backgrounds. We will also incorporate this laser source into three courses in
our graduate curricula, both in ECE and Chemistry.