* 0821544
* MRI:  Acquisition of Upper-Air and Surface Observing Systems for Weather Research and Instruction at SUNY Oswego
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2010
* Alfred Stamm, SUNY College at Oswego
* Standard Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 07/31/2010
* USD 156,072.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award will be used to acquire surface
and upper air meteorological equipment with a focus on lake-effect weather
research. The State University of New York (SUNY) Oswego campus, with its
proximity to Lake Ontario, is an ideal location to carry out research on the
effects of lake-land-air interactions. The mobile upper-air facilities will
allow the study of the structure and evolution of mesoscale meteorological
systems. Since there is a lack of surface weather stations in the immediate
vicinity of the Great Lakes, the SUNY Oswego site will provide a robust database
for sampling lake-modified air. These facilities will allow SUNY Oswego faculty
and students to engage in a nearly continuous, low-cost field project around
Lake Ontario and enable researchers at Oswego and other institutions to compare
model output with observations near Oswego. Students participating in research
projects as well as meteorology majors enrolled in the required experimentation
laboratory will benefit by learning how to operate modern meteorological
observing systems and perform quality control of the data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: Lake-effect snow bands form as the
result of complex interactions between processes ranging from the cloud scale to
the synoptic scale. Numerical models have provided some insight into the
structure and evolution of these snow bands, but direct observations have been
limited. With the acquired observing systems, the Principal Investigator will be
able to identify where mesoscale models succeed or fail to represent important
details of the thermodynamic structure and circulation patterns in and around
these bands. This will help modelers evaluate the many boundary layer and
microphysics schemes available, and identify those which best reproduce the
observed structure and evolution of lake-effect snow bands. Improvement in model
physics should result in more accurate simulations of snow band location, inland
extent and precipitation rate. It is hypothesized that the upper-air soundings
at Oswego during lake-effect conditions will result in more accurate snow band
simulations. To test this hypothesis, sensitivity experiments using mesoscale
models will be conducted to determine the impact of assimilating the Oswego
data. With the new facilities at SUNY Oswego, the Principal Investigator expects
to sample close to the core of at least 50 snow bands over the next decade. In
late spring or summer, the radiosonde equipment will be used to obtain proximity
soundings near Great Plains thunderstorms. At other times during the year, the
lakeside location will allow sampling of the atmospheric environment around
other interesting phenomena such as waterspouts, thunderstorms, frontal
passages, lake and land breezes, and nocturnal low-level jets. Findings for Lake
Ontario will likely extend to other large bodies of water.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: Acquisition of the equipment will
strengthen the ability to conduct research on weather phenomena around Lake
Ontario and improve educational activities centered on these phenomena. The
increased understanding of important mesoscale weather could result in improved
forecasting of hazardous weather conditions. Data and results will be shared
with interested scientists. The PI will collaborate with researchers from other
institutions who wish to use the Oswego facilities for short-term, low-cost
field studies near Lake Ontario. The SUNY Oswego meteorology program has
involved undergraduates in research since its inception. Interesting phenomena,
especially lake-effect snowstorms and Great Plains thunderstorms, excite and
attract students including those from diverse backgrounds. Many students engage
in independent study projects and are eager to participate in internally and
externally-funded grants. The equipment acquired under this MRI will provide
more research opportunities for these students.