* 0821607
* MRI:    Development of Next Generation Collaborative Underwater Robotic Instrument
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2013
* Scott Glenn, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 06/30/2013
* USD 1,997,164.00

Proposal #: CNS 08-21607&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Metaxas, Dimitris N.&lt;br/&gt; Glenn,
Scott M.; Kremer, Ulrich; Parashar, Manish; Schofield,
Oscar&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Rutgers University &lt;br/&gt; New Brunswick, NJ
08901-8559&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Dev.: Dev. of Next Generation Collaborative
Underwater Robotic Instrument&lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This
project, developing the next generation of Collaborative Underwater Robotic
Instrument (CURI), targets empirically-anchored investigations based on the
deployment of a semi-Langragian network of biologically inspired autonomous
robots. This new instrument consists of a collection of new underwater glider
robots, a computer cluster, and monitors for Human-CURI interaction (along with
novel hardware and software), capable of exhibiting biologically inspired
autonomous cooperative behaviors such as swarming, maneuvering efficiently,
sensing, and making decisions. Among others goals, the work aims to be able to
track and map a water mass over time and to assess how a water column mixing in
ocean water drives local primary productivity over time. CURI, developed as a
collaborative effort between the institution and Webb Research (manufacturers of
current robotics gliders), will exhibit and allow&lt;br/&gt;- Biologically
inspired behaviors such as swarming,&lt;br/&gt;- Decision making (in uncertain
conditions) based on the integration of multi-dimensional, multi-scale, and
multi-sensory data,&lt;br/&gt;- Human-CURI interaction to help guide the mission
goals of the large number of underwater robotic vehicles, and&lt;br/&gt;-
Underwater communication among the robots of the CURI based on the
implementation of ideas from distributed and adaptive non-fixed topology
networks which include middleware, metadata, and low power protocols for
underwater communications.&lt;br/&gt;Leveraging significant NSF, ONR, NOAA,
USGS, DHS, and other agency investments, CURI will be tested in the linked
ecosystems of the densely populated NY-NJ metropolitan area, the Hudson River
watershed and estuary, and the adjacent coastal ocean of the Mid-Atlantic, as
well as Polar and Tropical environments. The diverse data gathered will provide
foundation for computational analysis and modeling. &lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;This development has strong multidisciplinary components that
involve control, algorithms, marine science, statistical learning, dynamic
systems, human-computer interaction (HCI), and distributed systems. The work is
applicable in many areas that involve large-scale, distributed modeling of
coordinated behaviors of individual units and their interaction with the
environment. Thus, current and future oceanographic applications are expected,
including improved modeling of the Coastal Hydrologic Cycle and understanding
how a human initiated act such as pollution, global warming, and over-fishing
affects the coast, the atmosphere, and ultimately, the quality and security of
human life in urbanized environment. CURI will influence the educational
program. Courses will be developed and collaboration across disciplines will
ensue.&lt;br/&gt;