* 0821615
* MRI: Acquisition of a Laser Ablation ICP-MS Facility for Geoscience and Environmental Engineering and Sciences Research and Teaching in Iowa
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Ingrid Ukstins Peate, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2012
* USD 303,123.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award will enhance the inorganic
analytical capabilities available to researchers and students at the University
of Iowa through the acquisition of a quadrupole inductively-coupled plasma mass
spectrometer (ICP-MS) plus a laser ablation unit. This versatile instrument
combination will be used for elemental analysis at trace and ultratrace levels
of natural and engineered materials (rocks, minerals, waters, soils). It will
play a key role in the research and teaching programs of faculty in the
Geoscience Department that focus on magma genesis and tectonics, and faculty in
the Environmental Engineering &amp; Science (EES) Program that focus on
biogeochemical cycling of heavy metals. Selected research activities in
Geoscience and EES that will benefit from on-campus access to ICP-MS facilities
include: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- trace element abundances in volcanic rocks from
various tectonic settings (subduction zones, ocean islands, flood basalts) to
constrain models of magma genesis and mantle sources. &lt;br/&gt;- in-situ laser
ablation analysis of melt inclusions and crustal xenoliths to determine
mechanisms of crustal assimilation in basalts. &lt;br/&gt;- compositions of
impact materials and implications for impact cratering processes. &lt;br/&gt;-
in-situ laser ablation U/Pb geochronology of zircon to understand the tectonic
evolution of orogens. &lt;br/&gt;- methods for the environmental clean-up of
uranium. &lt;br/&gt;- role of nanoparticle Fe on the fate and transport of heavy
metals (U, Cr, As) in the environment. &lt;br/&gt;- water quality monitoring and
assessment of inorganic contaminants in drinking water systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Establishment of an ICP-MS facility at Iowa will lead to
creative and potentially transformative research driven by closer collaborations
between geologists, environmental scientists and engineers, and biologists.
Innovative research will potentially include development of novel methods for
remediation of heavy metals, insights into the behavior of nanoparticles in the
enviroment, and an improved understanding of how volcanoes work and what happens
during meteorite impacts. The presence of a quadrupole ICP-MS and laser ablation
facility will greatly enhance the educational opportunities for undergraduate
and graduate students at the University of Iowa, by providing them with more
comprehensive research training. Use of the facility will be incorporated into
the curriculum at all levels, and it will expand opportunities for student
research projects. Benefits to society include better understanding of the
behavior of toxic heavy metals in the environment and methods for their
remediation, and a better understanding of volcanic processes with implications
for hazard management.