* 0821384
* MRI:   Acquisition of Range Scanning and Rapid Prototyping Equipment for 3D urban modeling
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Mary Flanagan, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2011
* USD 115,550.00

Proposal #: CNS 08-21384&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Stamos, Ioannis; Flanagan, Mary
D.&lt;br/&gt;Institution: CUNY - Hunter College&lt;br/&gt; New York, NY
10065-0000&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Acq.: Acq. of Range Scanning and Rapid
Prototyping Equipment for 3D Urban Modeling&lt;br/&gt;Project
Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project, acquiring instrumentation (laser range scanner
and high quality digital cameras) for laser range scanning and rapid
prototyping, supports 3D modeling of structures in urban settings. With an
efficient combination of all possible sources of information, the work focuses
on the acquisition of high-level geometry information and intelligent
integration of laser-based models to reconstruct detailed models of urban sites,
i.e., digital cities. Laser scanner can produce highly-detailed geometry,
whereas color digital cameras can produce photorealistic representations of
urban scenes. The work allows&lt;br/&gt;- Acquiring large amounts of data with
the latest generation of laser range scanning and 2D image capturing
technology,&lt;br/&gt;- Generating CAD-quality models by the integration of
laser-based with image-based 3D acquisition technology, &lt;br/&gt;- Building
models using the rapid prototyping system, and&lt;br/&gt;- Attracting students
into visual and applied research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This
project enables the completion of a comprehensive software system for automated
photorealistic acquisition of urban environments that will benefit applications
such as urban planning, archeology, Google Earth/Microscope Visual Earth
visualizations, disaster recovery, architecture, film industry, and construction
industry. The large female and undergraduate minority population at this
minority-serving institution is likely to benefit from this work.