* 0821066
* ThinkTank (Doctoral Consortium) at International Conference on Auditory Display (ICAD) 2008
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2009
* Bruce Walker, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 05/31/2009
* USD 31,975.00

This is funding to support a doctoral consortium (workshop) of approximately 12
promising graduate students from the United States and abroad, along with
distinguished research faculty. The event will take place in conjunction with
the 14th International Conference on Auditory Display (ICAD 2008), to be held
June 24-27 at IRCAM in Paris, France. ICAD is the premier international forum
for presenting research on the use of sound to display data, monitor systems,
and provide enhanced user interfaces for computers and virtual reality systems.
It is unique in its singular focus on auditory displays and the array of
perception, technology, and application areas that this encompasses; this
includes, for example, data sonification, auditory wayfinding, auditory graphs,
speech interfaces, virtual environments, and associated perceptual, cognitive,
technical, and technological research and development. Many of the
interdisciplinary research and development efforts are of direct relevance to
persons with perceptual disabilities, especially visual impairments; for
example, developing wayfinding systems for the blind requires research into
effective distance cues and object identifiers used in auditory displays. The
goal of the doctoral consortium is to bring together graduate students from
diverse backgrounds (e.g., engineering, computing, music, and psychology), so
that they can experience the broad spectrum of approaches to auditory displays,
assistive technologies and universal design, while exploring their research
interests through interaction with peers and under the guidance of a panel of
distinguished experts in the field. To these ends, the ThinkTank will develop a
supportive community of scholars and a spirit of collaborative research, by
providing participants with a friendly and open, yet rigorous, scientific forum
to present their research ideas, listen to ongoing work from peer students, and
receive constructive feedback. Student participants will make formal
presentations of their work during the ThinkTank and will receive feedback from
the faculty panel. The feedback is designed to help students understand and
articulate how their work is positioned relative to related research, whether
their topics are adequately focused for thesis research projects, whether their
methods are correctly chosen and applied, and whether their results are
appropriately analyzed and presented. The ThinkTank will also provide students
with relevant information about important issues for doctoral candidates,
whether they are considering academic or industrial career paths. The event will
further offer invited speakers and discussion groups, and will involve many
students as part of the audience and discussion groups, in addition to those
presenting their work. An evaluation of the ThinkTank will be conducted, the
results to be made available to the organizers of future conferences and
consortia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This event will promote
scholarship and networking among new researchers in an important emerging
interdisciplinary area, and will help shape ongoing and future research projects
that have clear and important implications for development of assistive
technologies and universal access. The doctoral consortium will afford
participants exposure to a larger community, allowing them to bond among
themselves and with senior researchers at a critical stage in their professional
development. Because the students and faculty constitute a diverse group across
a variety of dimensions, including nationality and culture as well as scientific
discipline, the students? horizons are broadened to the future benefit of the
field.