* 0821035
* Dissertation Improvement Grant: Defensive Strategies and Resources in the Prehistory of the Society Islands: A Case Study from Moorea
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2008,11/30/2009
* Hinanui Cauchois, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/2009
* USD 15,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. Michael Graves, Ms Hinanui Cauchois will conduct
research for her doctoral dissertation. Her project draws upon information in
archaeology, ethnohistory and oral traditions that describe traditional warfare
and political competition in the Society Islands of French Polynesia. Though
located centrally within East Polynesia, these islands are not well studied by
archaeologists. For instance, there is only limited information on the time span
of human settlement and agricultural practices in the islands. Relatively little
work has been done on warfare and defense, or changes in the location of
villages in relation local ecology or the impact of other polities in the
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ms. Cauchois will study how the use of resources and
the construction of defenses have affected the locations of villages on the
Island of Mo'orea. She has hypothesized that villages were relocated inland in
several valleys before European contact in order to protect individuals from
aggression by others. This pattern extended into the period following European
contact when warfare became even more pronounced. Cauchois will compare her
findings in the valley of Papeotai with other valleys on Mo'orea and throughout
the Societies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work combines survey and mapping of
sites, with limited excavations, archival research, interviewing local
inhabitants, and the creation of a Geographic Information Systems database. This
latter piece will allow Cauchois to analyze the location and timing of different
activities and events associated him human development of the valley. Through
excavation Cauchois will acquire of samples for absolute dating and for
reconstructing the environment in different sections of the valley. Information
from these sources will be synthesized with historical sources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research provides evidence documenting one aspect of
interaction between humans and their environment in the tropics. It will
contribute to answering the general question: Did traditional Polynesian
societies develop through the same pathway of cultural processes toward a
similar endpoint, that of greater social complexity prior to the arrival of the
first Europeans? &lt;br/&gt;There will be two main products resulting from this
project: 1. creation of a GIS database that will provide a predictive model of
site locations and distributions for use by cultural resource managers in the
region; and 2. publication of the research results in French and English
language journals. Outcomes will also be directed toward the public. This
research is associated with 'Te 'ihipapa no ta'ato'a? (Archaeology for
Everyone), an organization Cauchois created in 2007 to make the results of
archaeology accessible to the public. This research is part of a community-
oriented project, including the training of young Tahitians to conduct survey
and excavation, as learning how to preserve sites for the future. There will be
presentations in different contexts: local schools and high schools around the
island, public meetings for the community, as well as publication of non-
technical booklets. Currently, there are few local people involved in managing
cultural heritage or the interpretation of Society Islands' history. This
project promises to share the significance of the Islands' archaeological
heritage and to empower communities, which tend to devalue their contributions
to history.