* 0821374
* MRI: Acquisition of equipment for microbial single cell genomics research
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* William Wilson, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2011
* USD 574,045.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The PIs propose to acquire instrumentation that
will form the basis for a new microbial single cell genomics facility at the
institution. Single cell genomics represents a novel approach to study
uncultured microorganisms and serves as a complement to metagenomics. The
proposed instrumentation will enable research efforts investigating
biogeochemistry and microbial interactions, microbial evolution and diversity,
and biotechnology. The proposed instrumentation includes: nanoliter reagent
dispenser, a thermal plate sealer, a PCR hood, an anaerobic chamber, a liquid
handling workstation, a real-time PCR thermocycler, an ultracold freezer, and a
bioinformatics computer cluster. The requested instrumentation would enable high
throughput wetlab and computational DNA analyses and help reduce DNA
contamination and overall per-sample costs, two of the most significant
limitations for single cell genomics to date. The new facility will be operated
in close collaboration with an existing aquatic cytometry facility using
established user fees, scheduling and protocols. The lead PI will be responsible
for the overall management of the purchase, installation, and operation of the
instrumentation. A part-time technician will be employed for the wet lab
instrumentation. The instrumentation will initially be located in different
laboratories, but will be relocated to a dedicated workspace upon construction
of new laboratory facilities at the institution projected for 2010.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;In addition to establishing a
shared-use facility to enable access to single cell genomics techniques, the PIs
propose developing an annual course in single cell DNA analysis, as well as
incorporating classes on single cell genomics into existing courses. The PIs
will also encourage on-site visits by college and university faculty and
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;