* 0821820
* MRI: Acquisition of a High-speed Camera System to Record Animal Movements in Three Dimensions
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Ulrike Muller, California State University-Fresno Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2012
* USD 311,414.00

California State University at Fresno is recieving funding from the National
Science Foundation for a 3D-motion studio to study bio-locomotion. The research
will be directed by University Professor Ulrike Müller. The proposed facility
will comprise five digital high-speed cameras to record animal and plant motion
in unprecedented detail. Mapping motion is vital to discovering propulsion
systems, muscle performance, and control features along with understanding
integrative behaviors such as predator-prey interactions. The facility will be
employed to study flying insects, swimming fish and suction-trapping carnivorous
water plants. The facility will record, track and model the position and shape
of an organism in three-dimensional space, e.g. how fish bend while turning. The
main research questions are: (1) How do organisms power and control their motion
during turns, leaps, fights, take-offs, or feeding strikes? (2) How do changes
in the organism?s structural properties and sensory feedback affect control and
performance?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 3D-motion studio will be the first such
facility in the Central California region and at a Hispanic-serving institution.
The facility is at the heart of a wide range of cross-disciplinary teaching and
research activities: it will serve 11 student research projects and at least two
courses each semester in the Departments of Biology, Chemistry and Computer
Science at CSU Fresno; it will also serve 11 scientists in national and
international collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;