* 0821751
* Exploring the Consent Process: Perspectives of IRB Members and Rural Research Participants
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Ann Cook, University of Montana
* Continuing Grant
* Kelly A. Joyce
* 08/31/2010
* USD 350,634.00

This research, co-funded by the Science, Technology &amp; Society program and
the EPSCoR program at NSF, examines the impacts of Institutional Review Board
rulings on human subjects research. Research that advances scientific,
engineering, biomedical, and technological knowledge often requires the
participation of human subjects. In order to be enrolled in such research,
subjects must give their voluntary and informed consent. Institutional Review
Boards (IRBs) serve as the oversight bodies charged with ensuring that: risks to
human subjects are minimized and reasonable, subject selection is equitable, and
the informed consent documents are adequate. Yet little is known about how IRBs
actually deliberate and perform these oversight functions, or about the extent
to which the experiences, preferences and values of potential research subjects
are incorporated into the IRB-approved informed consent process. Thus, it is not
clear if the IRB oversight process for monitoring informed consent achieves its
stated goal of ensuring protection and voluntarism of human subjects. This
research examines the relationship between science and society as evidenced in
the process of monitoring and obtaining informed consent from human subjects.
The examination will focus on two distinct populations: IRB members and research
participants. Using qualitative and exploratory methods, the first study
examines the norms and processes that IRBs use when assessing and monitoring the
adequacy of the informed consent process. The study will include representatives
from a variety of current types of IRBs: academic, for-profit, hospital, and
community boards. The second study examines the experiences, preferences and
levels of understanding that research subjects bring to the informed consent
process, focusing on human subjects from rural locations. The findings from
these two efforts will bring together and compare the perspectives and levels of
understanding of two key stakeholder groups. These findings will be widely
disseminated in order to inform the development of a consent process that takes
into account not only regulatory requirements, but also the information that
prospective research participants need and want to know in order to offer true
and voluntary consent.