* 0821450
* MRI: Development of an Ultra-Fast Optical Spectroscopy System for Multi-Disciplinary Studies
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Richard Averitt, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 09/30/2011
* USD 565,926.00

Technical Summary: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultrafast laser spectroscopy is
increasingly becoming an indispensable tool for studying the properties of
materials. However, currently available instruments are still limited in their
ability to routinely probe the diversity of materials used in multidisciplinary
studies over a broad spectral range with sufficient signal-to-noise and temporal
resolution to detect small changes which underlie fundamental processes. This
project aims to develop a broad spectral range, ultra-low noise, ultrafast
optical spectroscopy instrument suitable for multidisciplinary research. The
instrument will incorporate many innovations including significant improvements
in signal-to-noise (over 10-fold), wavelength range (far-IR to UV), and temporal
resolution (less than 35 femtoseconds). The new laser spectroscopy instrument
will be applicable to a broad range of multidisciplinary problems including
quasiparticle dynamics in multifunctional materials, band gaps in carbon
nanotubes, molecular events in biological energy conversion, ultrafast response
of heme proteins to light, and the structure of biological polymers such as
mucin. The proposed instrument will be developed and operated out of the Boston
University Photonics Center, a national resource for development of advanced
photonic prototype devices for commercial applications as well as providing a
center for excellence in teaching and training in advanced photonics technology.
The core faculty involved in this project will use the instrument to enhance
outreach programs to assure the maximum opportunity for training and research by
a diverse population of students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Layman Summary:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultrafast lasers produce pulses which are short enough to
monitor the motion of electrons and atoms in materials. Such fundamental
motions, occurring on a timescale approximately one million times faster than
the operating speed of modern desktop computers, determine the functional
properties of materials. Hence, ultrafast laser spectroscopy is increasingly
becoming an indispensable tool for studying the properties of materials.
However, currently available instruments are still limited in their ability to
probe the diversity of materials used in multidisciplinary studies. This project
aims to develop a next generation ultrafast optical spectroscopy instrument.
Several innovations enabling significant improvements in speed and sensitivity
will make it possible to explore a range of important multidisciplinary problems
including the behavior of advanced multifunctional materials, the properties of
carbon nanotubes, molecular events in biological energy conversion and the
structure of biological polymers such as mucin. The proposed instrument will be
developed and operated out of the Boston University Photonics Center, a national
resource for development of advanced photonic prototype devices for commercial
applications as well as providing a center for excellence in teaching and
training in advanced photonics technology. The core faculty involved in this
project will use the instrument to enhance outreach programs to assure the
maximum opportunity for training and research by a diverse population of
students.