* 0821121
* MRI:   Development of OmegaTable and OmegaDesk - Instruments for Interactive Visual Data Exploration and Collaboration
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Jason Leigh, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2013
* USD 490,000.00

Proposal #: CNS 08-21121&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Leigh, Jason&lt;br/&gt; Brown, Maxine
D.; Johnson, Andre E.; Renambot, Luc&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of
Illinois - Chicago&lt;br/&gt; Chicago, IL 60612-7227&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Dev.:
Dev. of OmegaTable and OmegaDesk ? Instruments for Interactive Visual Data
Exploration and Collaboration&lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This
project, developing instruments for interactive visual data exploration and
visualization, provides a powerful, easy-to-use information-rich
cyberinfrastructure instrumentation in support of scientific discovery. Advanced
visualization instruments serve as the eyepieces of a telescope or microscope,
enabling researchers to view their data in cyberspace, and better manage the
increased scale and complexity of accessing and analyzing the data. The
OmegaTable and OmegaDesk are such eyepieces. The former supports multiple users
sitting or standing around a table, and the latter is a single-user device that
will ultimately replace the desk in one?s office. Both unify ultra-high
resolution computer-enhanced collaboration workspaces and autostereoscopic
virtual environments with multi-touch-sensitive surfaces so that users can
intuitively point, write, touch, and manipulate the information displayed, and
communicate and share this information with remote colleagues. These instruments
act as digital assistants, anticipating and enabling those who work with them,
benefiting global scientific collaboratories as well as providing a foundation
for new computer science research. For the Electronic Visualization Lab (EVL) at
UIC, these instruments represent the culmination of decades of experience and
expertise developing immersive environments, from the room-size CAVE in the
early 1990s, to the office-sized Immersa Desk in 1994, to GeoWall in 2000, and
the more recent ultra-high resolution Lambda Vision tiled display wall and
autosteoscopic Varrier tiled-display wall. Each new generation of display
technology provides some advanced features ? higher resolution, unencumbered
autostereoscopic viewing, multi-Gigabit network connectivity, and intuitive user
interfaces - better coupling worldwide scientific virtual organizations, and
better integrating scientific workplaces with advanced cyberinfrastructure.
OmegaTable and OmegaDesk combine all this functionality in one set of
instruments, enabling communities to view and share high-resolution 2D, 2.5D,
and 3D stereoscopic imagery over distance and to manipulate the imagery with an
intuitive touch interface. The most unique capability lies in their ability to
display 2D and 3D stereoscopic imagery simultaneously, without users needing to
wear 3D glasses of head-tracking equipment. The instruments open new
opportunities in virtual reality, human-computer interaction, high-speed
networking, scientific visualization, and Grid
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project enables state-of-
the-art equipment, opportunities, and supervision to enhance student education
(providing scientific communities with highly integrated virtual-reality
collaboration environments), to work with industry to commercialize new
technologies that advance science and engineering, and to continue on-going
partnerships with domain scientists world-wide. In addition to enhancing
education, the instrument provides summer internships and enables jobs upon
graduation. Society as a whole has much to gain by the possibilities to solve
complex environmental, medical, and economic issues that these instruments
offer. &lt;br/&gt;