* 0821965
* Simulation and Modeling in Technology Education (SMTE)
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/2008,01/31/2015
* David Burghardt, Hofstra University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Russell
* 01/31/2015
* USD 3,219,616.00

Simulation and Modeling in Technology Education (SMTE) is a five-year project
that develops and researches the academic potential of a hybrid instructional
model that infuses computer simulations, modeling, and educational gaming into
middle school technology education programs. These prototypical materials use
3-D simulations and educational gaming to support students learning STEM content
and skills through developing solutions to design challenges. The virtual
environment allows students to analyze and improve their designs by changing
variables and observing how their changes affect design performance. Once the
designs are optimized on-screen, students will construct physical models and
compare their functionality and effectiveness to the simulated virtual models. A
uniqueness of the Project is the development of an innovative Web-based
instructor design interface and a library of objects to enable instructors to
modify the context of the design problems to fit different instructional and
geographic settings. The research investigates the transferability of the model
and its potential to improve STEM teaching and learning. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project incorporates a cyber-enabled engineering design approach
that integrates science and mathematics and uses contemporary technological
tools and pedagogical strategies. The content is driven by the concepts and
skills identified in the K-12 Standards for Technological Literacy (STL). The
partners are Hofstra University?s Center for Technological Literacy, the State
University of New York at Buffalo, the NSF National Center for
Telecommunications Technologies, Bloomsburg University in Pennsylvania, and the
City University of New York.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research design includes
a test of three conditions: the experimental (hybrid) condition; the gaming and
simulation only condition that involves students in the virtual tasks only; and
students doing physical modeling task. Testing will involve 12 teachers and 240
students with data collected in six assessment domains. Data will be analyzed
using a variety of multivariate statistical analyses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;