* 0821941
* Base Excision Repair of DNA Damage in Nucleosomes
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* David Pederson, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2012
* USD 450,000.00

BASE EXCISION REPAIR OF DNA DAMAGE IN
NUCLEOSOMES.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT: DNA damage occurs in all organisms,
both spontaneously and as a result of exposure to various environmental insults.
Oxidative damage to DNA, which accounts for most of the naturally occurring
instances of DNA damage, is repaired via the Base Excision Repair (BER) pathway.
The enzymes that carry out BER have been extensively studied using naked DNA
templates, but there is very little information on how these same enzymes gain
access to their substrates in the nuclei of eukaryotic cells, where the DNA is
packaged into chromatin. The fundamental subunit in chromatin is the nucleosome,
which consists of DNA wrapped around a protein core. To elucidate mechanisms by
which BER enzymes gain access to damaged DNA in chromatin, the PI and his
collaborator established a model system in which nucleosomes, with defined DNA
lesions at pre-determined sites, are assembled in vitro and incubated with
selected, purified human or bacterial BER enzymes. This model system will be
used first to determine if the efficiency of excision of damaged bases from
nucleosomal DNA is influenced by the chemical nature of the damage itself or by
possible nucleosome-imposed constraints to changes in DNA conformation that must
occur during BER (e.g., base flipping). Second, preliminary studies indicate
that certain human BER enzymes are more efficient than the equivalent bacterial
enzymes at processing DNA damage in nucleosomes. Deletion mutants will be used
to identify domains within the human enzymes that account for this elevated
efficiency. Finally, oxidative damage to DNA sometimes occurs in clusters, and
attempted BER of closely juxtaposed lesions can lead to double-strand DNA breaks
that may be lethal or mutagenic. Model nucleosomes containing DNA damage
clusters will be used to determine how the packaging of DNA in chromatin affects
the frequency or pattern of BER-induced, double strand break formation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: The research embodied in this project
will provide new information on how BER enzymes are recruited to and act on DNA
damage in chromatin, an important area of inquiry where, at present, very little
is known. Because such damage must be repaired to ensure the survival of
individual organisms and their capacity to propagate from one generation to the
next, this information will be relevant to the many scientists who study DNA
packaging, genome stability, or other metabolic transactions involving DNA.
Results from this research project will be broadly disseminated through the
research literature and presentations at national and international meetings. In
addition, the PI and his collaborator deposit all data in the UVM BioDesktop
repository, and this information is posted on the web as soon as the
corresponding article is accepted for publication. This project also will
enhance the scientific infrastructure at UVM by strengthening the ongoing
scientific interactions between the PI, whose lab has expertise in chromatin and
DNA replication, and Dr. Susan Wallace, whose lab has expertise in BER. Finally,
this project will provide high quality training opportunities for undergraduate
and graduate students. The multidisciplinary efforts in both laboratory groups
encompass biochemical and molecular methods as well as genetic, bioinformatic
and crystallographic approaches that collectively provide a stimulating
environment for students and postdoctoral trainees. Both the PI and his
collaborator have solid records of training these individuals. Both teach
undergraduate and graduate courses in a Department that offers two undergraduate
majors and provides students in these majors the opportunity to conduct
laboratory research. The Department's graduate program is among the most highly
regarded of the graduate programs in the biological sciences at the University.
Special attention is paid to cultivating students from underrepresented
backgrounds. Thus, this project will help strengthen our national scientific
infrastructure.