* 0821257
* US-Egypt Workshop:  U.S. Participation in Project JEBEL Workshop; Sharm El-Sheikh, Egypt, October 2008
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2013
* Robert Stern, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 06/30/2013
* USD 27,489.00

0821257 &lt;br/&gt;Stern&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support U.S. Participation in a ?US-Egypt Workshop on Northern Arabian-Nubia
Shield-Project JEBEL?, to be held in Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt in October 2008. The
US organizer is Dr. Robert Stern, Center for Lithospheric Studies, University of
Texas at Dallas. The Egyptian organizer is Dr. Osama Kassem, National Research
Center, Cairo, Egypt. The project JEBEL (Jordanian and Egyptian Basement
EvoLution) is funded for three years by the Swedish government through a grant
to Prof. Vicky Pease of Stockholm University. It resulted from a Planning
Workshop held in Egypt in February 2007, and attended by scientists from 8
different countries. The Swedish grant covers research and travel by Swedish,
Egyptian, and Jordanian participants only, with U.S, Saudi, Norwegian, and
German scientists to secure funding in their respective countries. This award
will support the participation of four U.S. scientists in two field research and
planning workshops for this new international research effort. The first
workshop will be held in October 2008 in Egypt and the second to be held in
Jordan in winter 2009-2010. Both workshops will discuss results of research to
date and discuss future research priorities. Four days of field trips to key
geologic localities in the southern Sinai and discussions are planned, in tandem
with a day of research presentations and planning. Because US participation was
key to the success of the 2007 workshop, and will be important for success of
Project JEBEL, both the Swedes and the U.S. sides want to continue the US
scientists? participation in this effort, which should lead to a complementary
NSF effort. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: Project JEBEL focuses on four
challenges: 1) understanding the Neoproterozoic evolution of Jordan, the Eastern
Desert of Egypt (EDE), and in particular the central EDE, via geochronological,
geochemical, stratigraphic, and structural studies; 2) facilitating geological
correlations across the Red Sea, extrapolation of economic zones, and
constraining palinspastic reconstructions of the Red Sea region; 3) correlating
Neoproterozoic terranes and paleogeography within the Neoproterozoic orogen; and
4) contributing to understanding the development of the Neoproterozoic Earth
environment. The results will be useful for estimating total offsets across the
Red Sea from geologic markers. The northern part of the Arabian-Nubian Shield is
one of the least studied parts of the major Pan-African Orogen that extends the
full length of the African continent, and these workshops will focus
international attention on the area. The two U.S. senior scientists, Dr. Stern
and Dr. Peter Johnson (of JV Associates Ltd.) will have major inputs because of
their extensive experiences in the region. &lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The
involvement of both a current (Kamal Ali) and a former (Dr Mohamed Abdelsalam)
PhD students of Dr. Stern will be of considerable benefit, and meets the goal of
supporting early-career researchers. The involvement of the US team will
potentially lead to new partnerships in research effort involving US scientists
in a developing EU-Egypt-Jordan initiative, potentially providing important
information on the geology of this region. The results from the workshops and
research papers are expected to be widely disseminated, as Dr Stern has set-up a
website for this project: http://www.utdallas.edu/~rjstern/egypt/. The
observations made in the workshops will be used in this wider venue for virtual
field guides and giving other investigators access to the observations. This
project is being supported by the Office of International Science and
Engineering and the Division of Earth Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;