* 0821247
* MRI: Acquisition of a IM-Q-TOF Mass Spectrometer
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2011
* Frank Miskevich, Texas A&M University-Commerce
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 07/31/2011
* USD 310,000.00

CBET-0821247&lt;br/&gt;Angel&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MRI project involves the
acquisition of a state-of-the-art IM-Q-TOF spectrometer will enable a
collaboration of faculty from four departments at Texas A&amp;M University-
Commerce (A&amp;M Commerce) to conduct cutting-edge biochemical research. The
research programs and the training of students from the chemistry, biology and
environmental sciences, agriculture, and health and human performance
departments will benefit tremendously from this
instrument.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves seven multidisciplinary
collaborations to utilize the unique capabilities of an IM-Q-TOF instrument. Dr.
Angel and the Science and Technologies instrument technician, Richard Miller,
will manage the IM-Q-TOF and provide necessary training to other collaborators
on the operation and capabilities of the instrument. Acquisition of the IM-Q-TOF
mass spectrometer will allow students to achieve highly sought-after mass
spectrometry training and research experience. These are essential tools in
proteomics; a research field that has promising potential for expanding and
advancing our knowledge of protein functions and the factors that influence the
onset of disease. The research projects made possible through acquisition of an
IM-Q-TOF will help faculty integrate research with education and will increase
the scientific awareness among the students to adequately prepare them for
future scientific/technological opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: The acquisition of a state-of-the-art IM-Q-TOF mass spectrometer will
advance the knowledge of both faculty and students as carefully designed
research projects are developed, conducted and evaluated. The IM-Q-TOF will
provide a unique capability for enabling a wide range of research by offering
exceptional qualities for bioanalytical chemistry, proteomics and structural
studies of mid-tolarge size biomolecules for the research projects involved. The
PI will research specific areas using the IM-Q-TOF including: investigating the
self-assembly of metal-peptide complexes; characterizing the structures of
metal-peptide complexes; measuring the gas-phase, metal-binding affinities of
peptides; exploring the energy-resolved, gas-phase reactivity of metal-peptide
complexes; determining the solution phase, metal-binding affinities and
hydrolysis kinetics of peptides; developing Q-TOF methods for wine quality
control. The PI will also support collaborative research detailed in this
proposal: Studies of Zn, Cu and Fe Metal-Peptide Complexes; Mass Spectrometric
Study of Palladium and Platinum Aqua Complexes as New Proteomics Reagents;
Identification of Glycolipids in Stem Cells; Determining Metabolites Induced
Under Extreme Exercise; Design and Synthesis of Porphyrin Receptors for Anions
and Molecules; Flavonoid Interactions with Segments of Amyloid Beta Peptide and
Tau Protein; and, Isolating Scent Chemicals Utilized by Snakes for Hunting
Prey.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Advanced mass spectrometry techniques
are a vital part of the explosion in knowledge in biochemical research. There
are tremendous possibilities for a non-Ph.D. granting institution to attract,
retain, and graduate students with sophisticated instrumentation knowledge as
well the experience of being a part of significant scientific research. Students
and faculty from eighteen 2-year colleges in Northeast Texas will have the
opportunity of collaborating with university faculty and students on research
projects using this instrument. The total enrollment of these colleges is over
70,000 with 20,000 of these involved in science courses, and over 23% of the
students from underrepresented groups. The nature of the instrumental training
and research provided by A&amp;M-Commerce will also be fully conducive in
providing appropriately trained personnel for the rapidly developing
bioanalytical, proteomic, bioengineering and biochemical career markets. The
huge requirement for qualified candidates and knowledge in these rapidly growing
science fields will be partially supplemented by the research conducted by
highly qualified faculty at A&amp;M-Commerce.