* 0821868
* MRI: Acquisition of Imaging Stations and Server Space for the Digitization and Online Access of Research Specimens
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Shelley James, Bernice P Bishop Museum
* Standard Grant
* Vicki Martin
* 08/31/2011
* USD 100,000.00

MRI: Acquisition of imaging stations and server space for the digitization and
online access of research specimens. Shelley A. James (PI) and Shepherd Meyers
(Co-PI) Department of Natural Sciences, Bishop Museum, Honolulu, Hawaii

Bishop Museum, the Hawaii State Museum of Natural and Cultural History, was
awarded $100,000 for the purchase and implementation of three integrated sets of
research instrumentation: microscope imaging station (stereo and compound
microscope, digital camera, auto-montage software); herbarium imaging station
(high resolution digital camera, low UV and heat lighting); and a server for
data storage and online access (4-TB hard drive space, backup system). The
instrumentation is critical to the study and documentation of the plants and
animals of the Hawaiian Islands and Pacific region, including taxonomic
description and revision, biodiversity assessment, invasive species detection,
and collections digitization for research.

Specimen digitization will avoid damage of collections from excessive handling
and shipping, and significantly increase the accessibility of the collections to
local, national, and international scientific communities and the general public
through searchable online databases. The funded imaging stations will provide
training opportunities for interns, students, and visiting researchers including
Hawaiian, Pacific Island, and female scientists. Images will be used in web-
based information dissemination, online identification keys, and other
scientific and educational products to promote a greater understanding of the
natural ecosystems, management of endangered species, and the prevention and
eradication of invasive species in Hawaii and the Pacific.