* 0821124
* MRI: Acquisition of Atomic Force Microscopes for Nanoscience Education. Research. and Outreach
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Tonya Coffey, Appalachian State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2009
* USD 380,457.00

Technical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests NSF support for
acquisition of a research grade advanced atomic force microscopy (AFM) system
and a portable AFM ideally suited for teaching, training, and outreach. This
instrumentation will help to establish a state-of-the-art scanned probe
microscopy (SPM) research and outreach program for the advancement of
nanoscience and nanotechnology at Appalachian State University (ASU) in addition
to providing the unique opportunity of training for undergraduate and graduate
students interested in pursuing careers in science, technology, and engineering.
Funding of this grant will encourage and promote a higher level of research in
nanoscience at ASU and will be utilized to further projects which nclude
nanotribology, plasmonic bio-sensing, beam induced chemistry, noble metal
nanoparticle templating, molecular self- assembly, and renewable energy
initiatives. ASU is shifting its priorities to increase efforts on research in
response to the needs of our state while maintaining and enhancing our
traditional strengths in science education. In order to further this goal, it is
necessary to provide state-of-the-art research equipment to faculty and students
so as to facilitate leading edge research capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;Our
intradepartmental collaborations at ASU as well as with NCSU, Duke, Army
Research Office and NC regional industries will ensure this investment will have
positive impacts on and off campus. ASU has a strong background in involving
undergraduates in cutting edge research (www.osr.appstate.edu
&lt;http://www.osr.appstate.edu&gt;). We plan to involve ASU graduate and
undergraduate students in research projects utilizing the instrumentation. We
believe that the proposed instrumentation and the collaboration with other
institutions will help strengthen ASU?s development in education by exposing
students to current research efforts, training students on the proposed
instruments, and preparing students for careers in industry that require this
type of instrumentation for quality assurance and root cause failure analysis.
In addition to the research grade AFM, we propose to purchase a portable AFM for
in- class demonstrations and active learning opportunities for ASU students. We
will also use the portable AFM for community outreach education and recruiting
efforts via visits to regional public schools (over all grade levels) and
interactions with outreach groups, such as the Mathematics and Science Education
Center, sponsored by the Department of Mathematics here at ASU. The acquisition
of the portable AFM would aid in future outreach activities such as scholar
weekends at ASU, the Duke TIP academy at ASU, and, to target education of
minority groups, visits to inner city schools in the greater Charlotte area. We
will also use the portable AFM to create active learning modules to be posted on
our website that will be shared with other educators who wish to integrate AFM
in the classroom to excite students in the hope they will continue to pursue
nanotechnology related studies in
college.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Layperson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
acquisition of a research grade and educational atomic force microscope (AFM)
for ASU?s Dept. of Physics &amp; Astronomy will ensure that ongoing nanoscience,
nanotechnology and renewable energy research on campus will continue to further
knowledge within the respective scientific communities. Funding of this grant
will encourage and promote a higher level of research in nanoscience at ASU and
will be utilized to further projects including nanotribology, plasmonic bio-
sensing, beam induced chemistry, noble metal nanoparticle templating, molecular
self- assembly, and renewable energy initiatives. ASU is shifting its priorities
to increase efforts on research in response to the needs of our state while
maintaining and enhancing our traditional strengths in science education. In
addition, the instrumentation will be used for outreach in western NC middle and
high schools, as well as provide active learning for students on ASU?s campus.
The AFMs will encourage student interest in nanoscience as well as science,
technology, engineering and mathematics and ensure that undergraduate and
graduate students will have hands-on experience with and knowledge of skills
needed to contribute to a high technology workforce critical for growing the
economy of NC and the US.