* 0821896
* Transcriptional Regulators Link Patterning and Proliferation during Carpel Margin and Ovule Development
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2014
* Robert Franks, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ben Holt
* 07/31/2014
* USD 423,645.00

The mechanisms that coordinate cellular proliferation and three-dimensional
positional information during organ development are poorly understood. Accurate
regulation of these control mechanisms is important because they affect a
diversity of biological events from reproductive development to the cancerous
growth of cells. The investigators are using the flowering plant Arabidopsis
thaliana to study the coordination of patterning and cell proliferation during
the development of the seed pod. The investigators apply molecular genetic and
genomic approaches to understand the control of gene expression at the level of
transcription. Their work seeks to clarify the role of a family of
transcriptional regulatory proteins that coordinate the proliferation of cells
that generate ovules, the precursors of the seeds. By turning on and off genes
during the development of the seed pod, these transcriptional regulators
determine where, when and to what extent seeds will develop within the seed pod.
The investigators hope that a better understanding of these biological events
will enable the generation of higher yielding seed crops as well as shed light
on organ development and cancerous growth in animals. The project also includes
training opportunities for postdoctoral researchers and graduate and
undergraduate students. Results from the project will be widely disseminated
through publication in research journals and the internet. Furthermore, the
primary investigator leads an outreach group of University researchers, from
professors to undergraduates, that designs and presents hands-on demonstrations
in North Carolina classrooms. These visits serve to excite local K-12 students
about questions in genetics and developmental biology. This person-to-person
contact with children and their teachers will bring an enthusiasm for science
and science education to the wider community.