* 0821936
* Population Biology of a Lateral Gene Transfer from Wolbachia to Drosophila ananassae
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* John Werren, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 08/31/2011
* USD 532,000.00

Recent work has shown that transfer of genes (lateral gene transfer, LGT) from
the bacteria Wolbachia to their multicellular hosts, once thought rare, is in
fact widespread. These events range from the transfer of short DNA fragments to
the insertion of nearly the entire Wolbachia genome into the genome of the fly,
Drosophila ananassae. The long-term effects of such LGTs are unknown. This work
will explore the consequences of LGT in D. ananassae. The following questions
will be addressed: 1) How have bacterial genes evolved since transferring into
D. ananassae? 2) What is the frequency of transferred genes in natural and
experimental populations? 3) What are the fitness and functional consequences of
the insert? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given that millions of species are infected
with Wolbachia and other intracellular bacteria, the contribution of LGT to the
genetic capabilities of animals could be significant. It is therefore important
to assess how bacterial genes change once transferred, and how they contribute
to animals? biochemical abilities. The educational component of this proposal
builds on previous work developing a high school laboratory series using
Wolbachia to promote an integrative educational approach across biological
disciplines, creating an opportunity for students to make new scientific
discoveries while learning.&lt;br/&gt;