* 0821258
* MRI:    Acquisition of an Interdisciplinary Facility for High-Performance Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2011
* Penny Rheingans, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 07/31/2011
* USD 200,000.00

Proposal #: CNS 08-21258&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Gobbert, Matthias K.; desJarding,
Marie E.; Olano, Thomas M.; Rheingans, Penny; Sparling,
Lynn&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Maryland - Baltimore County
&lt;br/&gt; Baltimore, MD 21250-0002&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Acq.: Acq. of an
Interdisciplinary Facility for High-Performance
Computing&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project,
creating a high-performance computing cluster with many nodes and a state-of-
the-art InfiniBand interconnect, aims to form the central resource for high-
performance computing dedicated to support interdisciplinary research and
training across the entire campus. Supporting 23 researchers and ten departments
and centers, the cluster provides an opportunity to foster an emerging community
of interdisciplinary researchers interested in computational science. The
facility enables the solutions of scientific problems several magnitudes larger
than currently possible. The project brings together researchers from Computer
Science, Mathematics, Physics, Biology, Statistics, Economics, and Engineering
(Electrical, Mechanical, Civil, and Environmental). In the earth sciences, the
research helps to reduce uncertainty in policy decisions about water quality in
the Chesapeake Bay watershed, allows analysis of terabyte-scale data sets for
understanding climate change and its natural anthropogenic origins, and provides
insights into the predictability of hurricane intensity. In Engineering, the
research helps to assess the reliability of short-pulse laser systems in
communication systems. Biomedical research tries to establish the links between
protein structure and disease, and also directions in the design of
biomaterials. Applications in geodesy and geomagnetic data assimilation improve
understanding of the Earth?s gravitational field and basic processes within the
Earth?s core. The basic research in visualization of complex systems, the
development of efficient parallel algorithms, and the utilization of graphics
hardware for scientific computing all have a broad range of practical
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;Improving research
collaborations, the instrumentation should lead to scientific and technical
advances, have deep impact in education and research training of all users, and
contribute to workforce training. Moreover, the increased collaboration and
communication makes it easier to involve undergraduates and underrepresented
groups in the area in this undergraduate and minority-serving institution.