* 0821442
* MRI: Acquisition of a Scanning Electron Microscope for Research and Training in the Biological and Materials Sciences
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2009
* Leslie Watling, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Steven E. Ellis
* 07/31/2009
* USD 307,370.00

A grant has been awarded to the University of Hawai?i at MÃ¢noa (UHM) to acquire
a field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM) to support research and
training in the biological and materials sciences. The instrument of choice is a
Hitachi S-4800-I which will be housed in the Biological Electron Microscope
Facility (BEMF) on the UHM campus. The new FESEM will be used by researchers to
obtain images to study sensory structures of invertebrates and fishes, to
examine changes in morphology due to genetic mutations or manipulations in
various animal models, and in taxonomic studies of microorganisms,
invertebrates, vertebrates and plants, often involving Hawaii?s unique biota or
introduced pests. The FESEM will also be used by materials scientists and
engineers to examine surfaces of nanotechnology devices such as biosensors, fuel
cell membranes, batteries, photovoltaics and various
nanocomposites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, the FESEM will support a wide
range of educational and outreach activities including demonstrations for K-12
science classes, as part of laboratory sessions for undergraduate and graduate
university courses in biology and engineering, in specialized workshops for
community college faculty and students and for minority biomedical trainees, and
by undergraduate and graduate students and postdoctoral associates conducting
research with UHM faculty. Use of the FESEM by researchers from local
biotechnology, nanotechnology and educational entities will contribute to
economic expansion and diversification, university-private partnerships and
training opportunities for university students in the private sector. One of the
high-profile users is Dr. Dennis Kunkel (www.denniskunkel.com), a world renowned
educator and creator of scientific books, calendars, museum exhibits and
posters.&lt;br/&gt;