* 0821406
* MRI: Acquisition of a Wavelength Dispersive X-Ray Fluorescence Spectrometer for Use in Undergraduate Materials and Forensic Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Maria Rosado, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2009
* USD 227,422.00

Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work outlined in this proposal aims
to create a multiple user facility for non-destructive high-resolution
compositional analysis using wavelength dispersive x-ray florescence (WDXRF)
spectroscopy. The facility will enhance existing research and educational
programs particularly those investigating materials that are electrically
insulating or contain light elements as well as enhance the development of new
interdisciplinary programs. WDXRF allows quantitative elemental analysis from Be
to U with a spot size that can be varied between 500 &amp;#956;m and 35 mm. The
instrument can provide reliable results over a wide range of concentrations from
1 ppm to tens of percent and for materials with thicknesses from sub Ã… to
50&amp;#956;m. Acquisition of the instrument will allow the advancement of
several important research projects such as the use of combinatorial techniques
to investigate the fundamental chemical/structural/property relationships in MAX
phases, an interesting set of compounds with a unique combination of refractory
and tribological properties. It will also be used to investigate the mechanism
of degradation of magnetorheological elastomers by cycling. The instrument will
be essential in reconstructing life patterns and cultural adaptation in the
semiarid regions of Chile through bioarchaeological investigations of bones
found in that region. In addition, WDXRF will be used to study the role of
stoichiometry on oxide-based materials for microwave and actuator applications.
Adding the instrumentation also has the potential to enhance the economy of the
local region as it can be used for non-destructive testing of new electronic
devices fabricated at the newly constructed Innovation Center at the South
Jersey Technology Park located on the Rowan University
campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
work outlined in this proposal aims to create a multiple user facility for non-
destructive mapping of chemical composition using wavelength dispersive x-ray
florescence (WDXRF) spectroscopy. The facility will enhance existing research
and educational programs particularly those which investigate materials that
contain light elements like carbon and oxygen. In particular, this instrument
will be used to advance the development of new materials for protective
coatings, examine the degradation process of ?magnetic rubber?, optimize novel
materials for cellular communication, and further our understanding of the
lifestyle of the ancient cultures of Chile. This instrument will be used by many
students in a variety of courses and will be an important part of the upcoming
minor in Forensic Science. The acquisition of this instrument will also enhance
the local economy by improving our ability to attract high-tech companies to the
region through the on-campus Innovation Center at the South Jersey Technology
Park.&lt;br/&gt;