* 0821077
* Student and Participant Support for the 2008 Gordon Research Conference on Plasma Processing Science (GRC-PPS-2008)
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2009
* Uwe Kortshagen, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Arvind Atreya
* 04/30/2009
* USD 20,000.00

CBET-0821077&lt;br/&gt;Kortshagen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
participation of junior scientists in the 2008 Gordon Research Conference on
Plasma Processing Science (GRC-PPS), to be held July 13-18, 2008, at Mount
Holyoke College, South Hadley, MA. Plasma technology, a focus of the GRC-PPS,
has recently been identified as an area of national importance in the National
Research Council-sponsored report Plasma 2010. The field is quite
interdisciplinary and international, and other countries than the US have larger
programs of research and development. It is thus important to expose US students
and other researchers to the geographic and ethnic diversity of the fields
science and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In its tradition of being a forum
for the exchange of cutting-edge ideas and knowledge in the area of plasma
processing science, the biennial GRC-PPS brings together a diverse,
international spectrum of attendees. The format of Gordon Research Conferences
is to have relatively few invited talks, limited attendance, and ample time for
interactions to provide scientists with ample opportunities for discussions and
networking. The present conference will bring 21 invited speakers from industry
and universities in the US, Western Europe, Southeast Asia, and Australia, one-
third of whom are women. Speakers will cover a broad range of plasma-processing
topics in sessions on Plasmas in liquids; Plasma synthesis and treatment of
materials, nanomaterials and powders; Plasma sprays and thermal processing;
Plasma in Biology and Medicine; Plasma-aided combustion and plasma actuators;
Plasma processing for microelectronics and mechanics; Plasmas for renewable
energy; New plasma sources, sensors and applications; and Plasmas related to
environmental aspects. Engaging junior scientists and engineers in this
worldwide field will benefit both them and the larger plasma-research community.