* 0821370
* MRI: Acquisition of a Field Emission-Scanning Electron Microscope for Nanoscience Research and Education
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Jingbo Liu, Texas A&M University-Kingsville
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 07/31/2011
* USD 307,250.00

CBET-0821370&lt;br/&gt;Ramirez&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Texas A&amp;M University-
Kingsville (TAMUK), a Hispanic Serving Institution, seeks funding
to&lt;br/&gt;acquire a Field Emission-Scanning Electron Microscope (FE-SEM)
instrument to enable&lt;br/&gt;research in nanoscience in environmental
engineering and physical science and to enhance&lt;br/&gt;current analytical
infrastructure. This instrument will allow researchers in South Texas
to&lt;br/&gt;conduct research and educational activities of important local,
regional and national needs.&lt;br/&gt;Multidisciplinary research areas
immediately benefiting from the use of the proposed FESEM&lt;br/&gt;instrument
are in the Departments of Environmental Engineering, Chemical
Engineering,&lt;br/&gt;Chemistry and Biology at TAMUK. The FE-SEM will be used
in research activities related to the&lt;br/&gt;National Science Foundation's
mission and focus including 1) adsorption of hazardous air&lt;br/&gt;pollutants
onto engineered nanomaterials; 2) identification and exposure assessment
to&lt;br/&gt;manufactured nanoparticles in the environment; 3) characterization
of sol-gel derived catalysts&lt;br/&gt;applied for green energy; 4) structural
characterization of micro and nano fibers from novel flash&lt;br/&gt;spinning
processes; 5) silica deposition in the calcareous foraminiferan ammonia
parkinsoniana;&lt;br/&gt;6) effects of particle aggregation/disaggregation and
precipitation on the transport of fine&lt;br/&gt;suspended sediments and
contaminants in river systems; 7) high performance
organic&lt;br/&gt;semiconductors for field effect transistors; and 8)
characterization of reverse osmosis&lt;br/&gt;membrane damage and fouling.