* 0821967
* DR - K12 R&amp;D Geometry Assessments for Secondary Teachers (GAST)
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2014
* Elizabeth Jakubowski, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 09/30/2014
* USD 3,081,716.00

Geometry Assessments for Secondary Teachers (GAST) represents a collaborative
partnership among faculty and staff at the University of Louisville, the
University of Kentucky, Florida State University, Alpine Testing Solutions, and
Horizon Research, Inc. to develop a knowledge framework and assessments for
secondary mathematics teachers' geometry knowledge for teaching. The framework
for the assessments will be designed to collect validity evidence for predicting
effective geometry teaching and improving student achievement.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geometry has become an important secondary school subject
to prepare students for both postsecondary and work experiences. With the advent
of new curricula and technology, the purpose and nature of geometry has changed
dramatically in secondary schools across the country. Geometry teachers, to be
effective, must have a deep and relevant knowledge of geometry and its
applications. The framework of teachers' geometry knowledge for teaching
developed by GAST teams of mathematics educators, mathematicians, and classroom
teachers will describe the geometry knowledge needed by secondary teachers to
teach effectively and improve student achievement. This project will apply
models of teacher knowledge developed by researchers at the University of
Michigan, Michigan State University, and the University of Georgia to build the
framework and subsequent assessments. The assessments will undergo field testing
and psychometric analysis to in order to provide predictive evidence of
effective geometry teaching and student achievement in geometry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Past research on secondary teachers' mathematics knowledge
have relied on indicators of teacher knowledge like course grades,lists of
courses, and teaching experience. GAST will provide measures of teachers'
geometry knowledge for teaching that provide predictive evidence of classroom
performance and student achievement.The framework and assessments developed in
the project could be used by: (1) researchers to explore teachers' geometry
knowledge for teaching and its impact on instructional practices and student
achievement and to measure relationships among teachers' geometry knowledge,
their attitudes and beliefs, their classroom performance, and student
achievement; (2) project directors and evaluators of projects, institutes, and
other professional development programs and postsecondary course instructors to
assess the degree to which secondary teachers possess geometry knowledge for
teaching and to determine program impact on this knowledge; and (3)
mathematicians, teacher educators, school administrators, and practicing and
prospective teachers to provide diagnostic information about teachers' geometry
knowledge for teaching.