* 0821466
* MRI: Acquisition of a Genome Sequencer System for Research and Education
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Linda Strausbaugh, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Vicki Martin
* 08/31/2011
* USD 511,736.00

Dramatic advances have fueled widespread proclamation of the 21st Century as the
?Century of Biology? with high expectations that genome sciences will provide
revolutionary findings and applications. One key innovation to solving problems
as diverse as improving agriculture and human health to preserving biodiversity
is the recently developed genome sequencer. Acquisition of this instrumentation
will enable faculty, staff and student members of &gt; 30 research groups across
multiple campuses to conduct transformative research. Research foci include: the
genomic basis and evolution of pathogenesis/symbiosis; adaptation to extreme
environments; novel regulation of proper development; genetic basis of complex
characteristics; measurement and conservation of biodiversity; forensic identity
typing; and innovative computational approaches to genome science
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Capabilities acquired through this award will
help educate the next generation of integrative genome scientists through a
number of formal activities, including undergraduate genomics laboratories. They
will prompt the creation of new versions of innovative, modular laboratories
that are part of both an award-winning Professional Science Master?s program
(designed to enhance economic development and national competitiveness) and
interdisciplinary doctoral training. Enhanced genomics training plays prominent
roles in workshops to provide continuing education for faculty from institutions
serving under-represented groups, and to recruit diverse graduate student
cohorts. The close proximity of the University?s campuses to the instrument
manufacturer provides an excellent opportunity for academic-industrial
collaborations and student internships. &lt;br/&gt;