* 0821557
* MRI:    Acquisition of Mobile Robot Systems for Autonomous Multiple-Robot Cooperative Control Research
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2011
* Morrison Obeng, Bethune-Cookman University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 07/31/2011
* USD 222,975.00

Proposal #: CNS 08-21557&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Obeng, Morrison&lt;br/&gt; Wang, Jing;
Wu, Xiaohe&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Bethune-Cookeman College &lt;br/&gt; Daytona
Beach, FL 32114-3099&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Acq.: Acq. of Mobile Robot Systems for
Autonomous Multiple-Cooperative Control Research&lt;br/&gt;Project
Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project, acquiring networked mobile robotic systems,
aims to advance research on cooperative motion planning and control of multiple
heterogeneous mobile robots to be used in the Robotics and Embedded Systems
Research Lab (RESRL) in this undergraduate institution. Implementation of
energy-efficient and biologically motivated algorithms for cooperative motion
planning and control enables the development of a reliable networked autonomous
mobile robot system capable of operating in partially known, changing, and
unpredictable environments. The work focuses on analysis and design of
theoretically provable cooperative control laws for networked nonlinear dynamic
systems. Currently, few results are available for cooperative control of truly
nonlinear dynamic systems such as nonholonomic robots. Thus, this project
involves the design of a robust, locally optimal hierarchical cooperative
control strategy for networked nonholonomic constraints and obstacles avoidance
issues. The development and implementation in software and in hardware of the
algorithms addresses the following relevant fundamental issues. &lt;br/&gt;-
Trajectory generation for multiple mobile robots with kinematic nonholonomic
constraints,&lt;br/&gt;- Optimal trajectory tracking with modeling uncertainties
in friction and actuator saturation, and&lt;br/&gt;- Less restrictive
biologically-motivated local cooperative control algorithms which enable
collision avoidance among robots and with obstacles in dynamic and unpredictable
environments.&lt;br/&gt;Lyapunov argument and M-matrix theory are employed for
rigorous proof of multi-robot system stability resulting from derived
cooperative control algorithms. Experimental validations of the technical
solutions are planned. These tests address realistic difficulties, such as wheel
slippage, friction, actuators saturations, sensor and measurement noise, and
communication delays adding knowledge of useful guidelines to the design and
applications The research and expected results should have immediate
applications in industry for factory automation, transportation, intelligent
highway systems, large scale sensor networks for environmental sampling, and
cooperative search and information acquisition in hazardous
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;This project
enhances collaborative multidisciplinary research between computer engineering,
computer science, and environmental science. Around 120 students across those
programs will be involved and trained in this undergraduate HBCU college.
Research will also be disseminated by workshops and conferences.&lt;br/&gt;