* 0821471
* MRI: Acquisition of Nanolithography Instrumentation for Research and Education at Boston College
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Michael Naughton, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2010
* USD 550,000.00

Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program will employ nanolithography
instrumentation in a range of research and education activities in the fields of
physics, biology and chemistry at Boston College. More importantly, it will
foster and strengthen research, training and classroom collaborations between
these fields in emerging integrated science areas such as cancer detection,
solar cells, artificial vision, metamaterials, and nanoscale SPM. The
instrumentation will be extremely important components of integrated science at
BC, expanding the capabilities of its recently-built clean room from the
microscale to the nanoscale. It is comprised of two high-level SEMs, one each
adapted for electron beam nanolithography and focused ion beam nanomachining.
The former is a JEOL JSM-7001F field emission scanning electron microscope
outfitted with Nabity nanometer pattern generation system and Oxford EDS. It has
a magnificaition range of 10X to 1,000,000X, and a resolution of 1.2 nm at its
maximum accelerating voltage of 30 kV. The latter is a JEOL JIB-4500 Multibeam
SEM+FIB system, an LaB6-based focused ion beam/ focused electron beam instrument
with a multi-gas injection system for ion- or electron-beam-assisted deposition
as well as ablation. It also has a Kleindieck quad-probe insert for in situ
four-probe nanomanipulation and nanoscale electrical probing, as well as a
rotational tip with microgrippers for TEM lift-out and other uses. The combined
instrumentation will be used by at least 11 faculty members, and their research
groups, in three departments at BC. This amounts to about 50 individuals, not
counting students in the two undergraduate and graduate courses (1 each) in
Integrated Science being codeveloped by the PIs, and also not counting
anticipated usage external users from area colleges and local companies. The
instrument vendor, JEOL, has agreed to fund a nano-instrumentation post-doc for
two years to help train the instrumentation user
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoscale materials such as nanowires, nanotubes,
and molecular materials provide the smallest building blocks for future
electronic, magnetic, and optical microsystem and nanosystem devices, having not
only reduced size but often greatly improved or novel characteristics. For many
such systems, intrinsic physical and biochemical properties are only now being
revealed, through collaborative, ?integrated science? efforts involving
physicists, chemists, biologists, physicians, and engineers. The small
dimensions of nanostructures demand specialized tools for their fabrication,
characterization, manipulation and actuation. Scanning electron microscopes
(SEM) outfitted for electron beam lithography (EBL) and for focused ion beam
(FIB) use are the most effective solutions to this need. The Focused Ion Beam
system uses a narrow beam of charged atoms (ions) to either ablate or deposit
material on a substrate or sample specimen, with not only nanometer-scale
resolution but three-dimensional capability. FIB thus complements EBL, and
together, full nanofabrication capabilities are enabled. The new instrumentation
for this project will be used by faculty members and their undergraduate
students, graduate students and postdocs in three departments at Boston College
(Physics, Chemistry and Biology), to support a growing number of funded and
future research projects in integrated science areas such as nanoscale magnetic
microscopy, carbon nanotube-enabled drug delivery, and a nanoengineered retinal
implant visual prosthesis. Many of these projects currently make use of EBL and
FIB systems at other universities on a fee basis, with less-than-satisfactory
results stemming largely from inadequate and aperiodic access, lack of quality
control, and contamination during transport. The instrumentation will also be
used by faculty and students at local colleges, and by local commercial
entities, both on a fee-basis. Undergraduate and graduate students in physics,
chemistry and biology, including women and members of minority populations, will
be guided in lecture, teaching laboratory, and research laboratory settings to
use the EBL and FIB systems to conduct cutting-edge nanoscience and technology
experiments, via collaborative research groups and two new, cross-listed
integrated science courses developed specifically around these instruments, and
co-taught by the PIs from the three departments. They will be able to create,
measure and manipulate micro- and nanostructures in fundamental and applied
scientific research. In doing so, they will not only gain knowledge of the
frontiers of science, but will also use the experience in integrated science to
prepare for careers in the modern world of nanoscience, medicine and technology.