* 0821520
* MRI: Acquisition of Instrumentation on Experimental Studies on Interactions of Unsteady Flows and Dynamical Boundaries
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Michael Shelley, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2012
* USD 117,108.00

This award will make possible the purchase of a system of Particle Imaging
Velocity (PIV), a universal research microscope, a rheometer and a few smaller
equipments. With these instrumentations, the investigators will study a number
of fluid problems that involve unsteady fluid flows interacting with mobile
boundaries. In particular, it is planned to study the free flight of a rigid
wing that is flapped at prescribed wave forms. The PIs will address questions
related to the generation of thrust at early stages as the wing initiates a
unidirectional flight. They will also study the effects of a flapping wing that
is able to pitch during its flight, and compare its performance to a non-
pitching wing, as well as the instability associated with flapping flags and the
mechanism by which forced flags produce different types of wake structures. This
experiment will address the question of the connections and differences between
a flapping flag and a swimming fish. Moreover, it is well known that fluid
pumping and animal locomotion share many common aspects, and can be studied
using similar theoretical treatments. The planed study will investigate the
transport of fluid using anisotropic geometry (ratchets) and the swimming of a
model organism (C. elegans) in viscous fluids. The studies will be extended to
complex fluids, since nonlinear responses take place in these systems even at
low Reynolds numbers. The requested instrumentations will realize a fundamental
improvement at the Applied Mathematics Laboratory (AML), which will allow the
investigation of dynamical boundary problems in moving fluids with added
precision and flexibility. The research projects will involve scientists at all
levels, ranging from faculty members to motivated undergraduate and high-school
students.