* 0821682
* MRI: Acquisition of Polarized Light Microscope and Cold Filter Plugging Point Analyzer for MSU-Northern Bio-Energy Innovation and Testing Center
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2010
* Nestor Soriano, Montana State University-Northern
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 08/31/2010
* USD 71,375.00

CBET-0821682&lt;br/&gt;Soriano&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the environmental, economic and operational benefits
of utilizing biodiesel have been well proven and recognized, its poor cold-flow
properties still remain a major concern for consumers. Poor cold-flow properties
leads to clogging of filter which is the most common operability problems
encountered in using biodiesel, especially in cold regions such as Montana. This
project seeks assistance in acquiring a Polarized Light Microscope (PLM) coupled
with temperature control system and Cold Filter Plugging Point (CFPP) Analyzer
for MSU-Northern's Bio-Energy Innovation and Testing Center (the Center) to
expand the Center's capabilities in conducting research on cold-flow properties
of biodiesel. The requested instruments are powerful tools in understanding the
crystallization behavior of biodiesel leading to the improvement of biodiesel
and biodiesel blends cold-flow properties and filterability. These instruments
will also be utilized for training and instruction purposes as the Center is
actively institutionalizing an Associate Degree in Applied Chemistry with
emphasis on biodiesel production technology and biodiesel quality assurance. The
instruments will also be utilized by Biology and Water Quality Departments at
MSU-Northern for instructional and research purposes. The instruments will be
made available to students from other MSU campuses and nearby tribal colleges
interested in conducting undergraduate and graduate research at MSU-Northern.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of
PLM and CFPP Analyzer for the Center will contribute in building the
University's capability to become a research oriented institution as a strategy
to attract more students in the science and technology programs. The Center's
research endeavors are in conjunction with Montana's Agro Energy Plan that aims
to revitalize 32 counties and 6 Indian Reservations in the state through
bioproduct and renewable energy development. Acquisition of the PLM and CFPP
analyzer for the Center will expand the Center's capabilities to do basic and
applied research on biodiesel crystallization and filterability, which is one of
the major hurdles in biodiesel commercialization. These instruments are powerful
tools in developing technologies to improve the cold flow properties of
biodiesel that will definitely pose a great impact in biodiesel promotion,
acceptance and utilization, especially in Montana considering its cold climate.
Important research findings will be published in peer-reviewed scientific
publications and will be presented in national and international scientific
meetings. Moreover, future participation in Agricultural Trade Shows and active
collaboration with Montana's Department of Agriculture will enhance information
dissemination and biodiesel promotion throughout the region. The Center is also
actively collaborating with several existing and emerging bio-based industries
in Montana to whom the instruments will be made available.