* 0821852
* MRI: Acquisition of a Laser Lithography Tool
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2009
* John Wager, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2009
* USD 210,000.00

NSF Program: MRI PI: Pallavi Dhagat&lt;br/&gt;MRI: Acquisition of a Laser
Lithography Tool&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
research is to develop low-cost electronics, sensors for medical diagnostics and
environmental safety, and novel solid-state memory devices. The approach is to
use direct write or maskless lithography techniques for rapid and inexpensive
prototyping of device designs. Thus, the acquisition of a laser lithography tool
capable of directly writing patterns on a photo-resist coated substrate is
proposed. Presently, there is no equivalent tool at any of the Pacific Northwest
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The research spans
diverse areas, including fabrication of transparent and printed electronic
circuits, investigation of electrical properties of carbon nanotubes, and
understanding of the physics of surface acoustic waves in magnetic thin films.
The equipment proposed for acquisition is ideally suited to support research
needs at a university - it provides economical, sub-micron lithography with ease
of use and maintenance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The tool will be
designated as a shared resource, available to regional academic institutions and
small businesses for research and education. It will facilitate a broad range of
research activities in the microfabrication of electronic, fluidic and
mechanical devices. Graduate and undergraduate students assisting in the
cleanroom will gain experience in mask design, layout and fabrication. The
equipment is also indispensable to the educational innovations, including micro-
electromechanical systems (MEMS) fabrication, planned in the undergraduate
microprocessing laboratories. The principal investigators will participate in
the summer outreach programs coordinated by Oregon State University to expose
high-school and under-represented minority students to microfabrication tools
and techniques.