* 0821590
* MRI: Development of a high-pressure MOCVD for III-nitride semiconductor devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2008,12/31/2013
* Raphael Tsu, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 12/31/2013
* USD 322,774.00

0821590 MRI Abstract (Ed Stokes, UNC Charlotte)

The objective of this research is to develop a super-atmospheric-pressure MOCVD
(metal-organic chemical vapor deposition) epitaxial deposition system for group-
III nitride semiconductor materials. Such a system does not presently exist in
the United States. III-nitrides are of interest as critical active materials
optoelectronic devices (light emitting diodes, laser diodes, and solar cells)
and transistors. The development complements ongoing investment at UNC
Charlotte.

The intellectual merit is in enabling basic research on III-nitride
optoelectronic materials, and through understanding of connections between
device performance, material properties, defect formation, and growth
conditions. The track record of participants is excellent and adequate resources
are in place for conducting this work. The proposed research is not incremental
but fundamental in the study of ultra-low defect material growth. A proposed
photoluminescence system will provide a means for quantitative analysis of
radiative efficiency of semiconductor materials.

The broader impact of this program is to provide unique optoelectronic
heterostructures to many device researchers including: (1) UNC Charlotte faculty
and students in several departments, (2) selected high school student interns
through established UNC Charlotte programs, (3) businesses operating within the
Charlotte Research Institute, and (4) as part of the Optics User Facilities,
faculty and researchers at other institutions. Students will benefit by directly
operating the reactor, and also by fabricating devices using novel materials
provided. Societal impact is considerable, through increased lighting efficiency
and improved solar cell technology.