* 0821913
* RIG: Regulated Intramembrane Proteolytic Activation of Membrane-anchored Transcription Factors in Anabaena
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2009
* Ruanbao Zhou, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* LaJoyce Debro
* 02/28/2009
* USD 171,960.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt; The regulation of gene transcription is one of the
most important mechanisms used by cells to respond to alterations in their
internal or external environment. To ensure a rapid response, transcriptional
regulators are often synthesized and stored in a dormant form, becoming active
only in response to a specific signal. Much of the biological interest in
transcriptional responses focuses on how the activity of transcription factors
is regulated. Sequestration of transcription factors away from their DNA
targets, by temporary attachment to cellular membranes, is emerging as an
elegant mechanism to regulate their activities. Several membrane-anchored
transcription factors (MTFs) have been experimentally identified whose access to
the transcriptional machinery is regulated by proteolytic cleavage from the
membrane. This process is broadly referred to as regulated intramembrane
proteolysis (RIP). RIP is a newly discovered mechanism that controls many
important signaling pathways conserved from bacteria to humans. The discovery of
an essential role for RIP in biologically relevant processes makes it important
to understand the full gamut of RIP function. However, RIP is little understood
and so far there has been no systematic study of RIP in any organism. This
project is for a genome-wide study of RIP in Anabaena variabilis 29413, a
multicellular cyanobacterium, capable of simultaneously carrying out
agriculturally relevant O2-producing photosynthesis and O2-labile N2-fixation,
as well as bio-solar H2 gas production. In addition, its vegetative cells can
differentiate into three other types of cells in response to environmental
changes, which presents a rare opportunity to investigate gene regulation of
several differentiation processes in a single bacterium. Given its unique
capabilities, A. variabilis provides a very attractive experimental system to
study fundamental biological problems, especially for agriculture and bio-energy
related problems. An analysis of the genomic sequence of A. variabilis
identified 19 putative RIP genes that encode 5 RIP proteases and 14 MTFs.
Literature surveys imply that some orthologs of the putative RIP genes may be
involved in regulation of stress responses, chloroplast development, cellular
differentiation, cell-cell communication, and photosynthesis, as well as aerobic
N2-fixation. Therefore, the 19 putative RIP genes in A. variabilis may play
important biological roles. The aims of the project are 1) to obtain clues for
the cellular functions of 19 putative RIP genes by inactivating these genes; 2)
to determine the expression patterns of these genes for further definition of
their functions during A. variabilis growth and development, and in response to
various stress conditions; 3) to determine the proteolytic activities of 5
putative RIP proteases in a reconstituted E. coli system; and 4) to identify
specific MTF/RIP protease pairs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;
The PI has a history of mentoring students and in this project will broaden
participation through outreach activities in an established collaboration at
Michigan State University with a minority female professor who participates in
the Charles Drew program. The Charles Drew Program is a retention and academic
enhancement program for high-achieving undergraduate students and graduates from
underrepresented minority groups. The PI will mentor students in the program,
provide career development guidance to the participants, and serve as a research
advisor to interested students. In this project the PI will provide hands-on
research experiences to four undergraduates. &lt;br/&gt;