* 0821254
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Cyber-enabled Benchtop Single Crystal X-ray Diffractometer for Small Molecule Structure Analysis for Research and Educational Purposes.
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Michael Blanda, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2011
* USD 124,880.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation program (MRI), Benjamin
R. Martin and colleagues Gary W. Beall, Michael Blander, and Debra Feakes from
the Texas State University-San Marcos will acquire a single-crystal X-ray
diffractometer of the so-called mini-type that will also benefit a consortium of
five schools across Texas. These schools have established a collaborative
research program. The instrumentation will strengthen research endeavors and
spark new explorations in areas involving sulfide and selenide materials, solid
state linkage isomerism and ligand substitution in transition metal cyanide
complexes, conformational isomers of immobilized calix[6]arenes, polyhedral
borane anions, sulfido-bridged iron compounds and magnetostructural studies of
Ni(II) dimers, preparation of titanium complexes as well as a variety of topics
proposed by collaborators from Lamar University, San Antonio College, Texas
Lutheran University and Sam Houston State University. The collaborating
institutions will place a strong emphasis on hands-on graduate and undergraduate
involvement in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technique of single-crystal
X-ray crystallography allows accurate and precise determination of the full
three dimensional structure of a molecule, including bond distances and angles,
and it provides accurate information about the spatial arrangement of molecules
relative to the neighboring molecules. These studies will have an impact in a
number of areas ranging from synthetic chemistry to systems of biological
interest and cleaning of the environment.