* 0821766
* MRI: Acquisition of Robotic Hardware for Humanoid Research  in Cognitive Science and Engineering
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* David Noelle, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2011
* USD 492,500.00

This award establishes a humanoid robotics facility at the University of
California, Merced to be used by cognitive scientists and engineers to
investigate (1) how embodiment constrains models of human cognition, (2) how
people naturally interact with humanoid robots, and (3) how the design of
robotic control systems can best address the cognitive issues surrounding human-
robot interaction. The centerpieces of this facility will be a fully mobile
humanoid robot and a humanoid torso equipped with two human-like dexterous arms
and a vision system mounted on a fully actuated head. Though much work on
humanoid robots has focused on solving fundamental engineering problems
associated with robust operation in real world environments, the proposed
facility will support research that uses the robot as an instrument to test
hypotheses of human cognition or that augments robotic capabilities in a manner
sensitive to the cognitive limitations of human-robot coordination. As a
scientific instrument, a humanoid robot can be used to present precise,
controlled motions and patterns of interaction to human experimental
participants, offering new methods for probing human responding in interactive
contexts. The embodied perceptual and motor capabilities of such a robot also
make it a challenging testbed for computational models of human cognitive
processes. Developing cognitive systems that appropriately support human-robot
interaction will reify and test our understanding of embodied perception,
humanoid motor coordination, and cooperative
interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed facility is also intended to
support interdisciplinary research at the boundary between cognitive science and
engineering. Emerging cognitive research on human-robot interaction has the
potential to transform robotics research and result in practical innovations in
the design of humanoid robot control systems. These additional engineering
contributions will be extremely valuable, as robots will be equipped with
physical and cognitive abilities that are appropriate for human environments,
and with communication and coordination skills that are appropriate for human-
robot collaboration. Indeed, robotic assistants have already demonstrated
potential in numerous application areas, including physical therapy, care for
the elderly and disabled, collaborative work, and astronaut support during space
exploration. Though recent technological innovations have allowed for the
development of reliable and affordable robotic mechanisms that mimic human
bodies, many questions related to the intelligent control of these bodies
remain. By supporting the exploration of models of human cognition within a
robotic framework, and by generally applying insights from cognitive science to
the problems of embodied perception and motor control, practical progress is
expected in domains such as locomotion in cluttered environments, spatial
awareness and spatial reasoning, dexterous object manipulation, task-oriented
attention and perception, imitation and learning, life long adaptation, and
multi-modal social interaction and coordination with humans, including the use
of natural gestures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This facility will advance the
development of integrated research and teaching programs at UC Merced, a new
campus located in an economically challenged region with low educational levels.
The availability of this equipment will grant students access to unique training
opportunities in Cognitive Science, Artificial Intelligence, Motion Planning,
Computer Graphics, Computer Animation, Computer Vision, Machine Learning, Robot
Algorithms, and Humanoid Robotics.&lt;br/&gt;