* 0821667
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Massively Parallel Sequencing Instrument System
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* George Grills, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Vicki Martin
* 08/31/2011
* USD 600,000.00

A grant has been awarded to Cornell University for a Roche 454 Genome Sequencer
FLX. This new DNA sequencing instrument will enable creative research with
potential for breakthrough discoveries. The 454 system enables massively
parallel DNA sequence detection and analysis. The instrument will be operated by
the Cornell University Life Sciences Core Laboratories Center as a university-
wide shared research resource, which will enable cost effective access to this
new technology. The instrument will be used for whole genome assembly,
sequencing of targeted regions, mutation detection, genotyping, and genome-wide
measurements of gene expression and gene regulation. The instrument will be an
essential tool in research that includes studies on genetic markers for improved
crop breeding, bacterial and fungal pathogens capable of causing disease in
plants and animals, insecticide and fungicide resistance, the regulation of
metabolism and of the immune response, the regulation of fertility, flowering
and fruit ripening in plants, and genome level regulation of crop
biomass.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will place state-of-the-art sequencing
technology into university research and education programs. The 454 instrument
will be part of outreach programs that facilitate the integration of research
activities into the teaching of science at the high school, undergraduate and
graduate educational levels. The instrument will expand shared resources for
research and research training, stimulate use of a new technology by researchers
and students, and foster the development of new sequencing research
applications. The 454 instrument will play a crucial role in advancing knowledge
and understanding in a wide variety of life science research.&lt;br/&gt;