* 0821487
* MRI:   Acquisition of Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectrometer for Cyber Facilitated Regional Use
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Roman Dembinski, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2011
* USD 376,134.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation program (MRI), Professor
Mark W. Severson and colleagues Amanda Bryant-Friedrich, Roman Dembinski from
Oakland University will acquire a 400 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)
spectrometer equipped with multinuclear capabilities. The acquisition of the NMR
will impact research in chemistry as well as biological, bioinorganic and
radiation chemistry, and chemical toxicology. This instrumentation will aid in
integrating research and education and will open new research avenues for
members of the scientific community not only at Oakland University but also
within Southeastern Michigan. The relationship between Oakland University and
its neighboring community colleges and universities has facilitated the
involvement of a record number of students representing many ethnic and cultural
groups represented in southeastern Michigan in the scientific
enterprise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy
is one of the most powerful tools available to chemists for the elucidation of
the structure of molecules. It is used to identify unknown substances, to
characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and to study the
dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution. Access to state-of-the-
art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out frontier
research. The results from these NMR studies will have an impact in synthetic
organic/inorganic chemistry and biochemistry.