* 0821250
* MRI: Acquisition of a Leica Confocal Microscope to Develop a Visual Imaging Center
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Stephen Wolniak, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Vicki Martin
* 08/31/2011
* USD 464,846.00

In this project, a group of five principal investigators (Drs. S. Wolniak, I.
Mather, J. Kwak, L. Pick and C. Delwiche) describe a plan to use a new-
generation laser scan confocal microscope for a variety of experiments on living
cells and tissues. Experiments focus on the trafficking of proteins and other
molecules in cells, on the development of a ciliary apparatus in developing
sperm cells, on the regulation of uptake of carbon dioxide by plant leaves, on
mechanisms leading to the specific distribution patterns of growth factors in
developing fly embryos, and on algal parasite development. The microscope
permits live cell imaging using both modern confocal scanning and multi-photon
excitation for penetration into thick specimens. The specific instrument to be
purchased with these funds is a Leica SP-5, which will be equipped with four
lasers and dual detectors for prism-based spectroscopic detection (to
distinguish among overlapping signals) and resonance detection (for rapid
imaging of sensitive cells). These features will greatly enhance the imaging
capabilities of faculty and students who use the instrument. The microscope will
be installed in a Shared Core Microscopy Imaging laboratory, where several other
heavily used instruments are already housed. The core lab is overseen by Ms. Amy
Beaven, a research support technician, who is most capable of providing training
and overseeing the use of the microscope. Beyond the five major users of this
microscope, there is an additional group of seven individuals who list
themselves as occasional users of this instrument. Their research interests
center on the development of the visual system in mammals, the dynamics of
antigen presentation in immune cells, the structure and function of phloem in
plants, the formation, development and maintenance of neurons in flies, and on
programmed cell death in flies and mammals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This core
laboratory provides access to state-or-the-art microscopes to over eighty
faculty and students who are currently working at the University of Maryland and
to approximately twenty collaborators and colleagues at nearby institutions.
These microscopes are far too expensive to purchase and maintain in individual
research laboratories, but they are essential for critical imaging of cells and
tissues in ongoing research projects. A critical mission of the institution is
training students in modern techniques with state-of the-art instrumentation.
Thus, both research and training are conducted at the Visual Imaging Center. A
formal training course in light microscopy is taught by S. Wolniak and A. Beaven
each fall semester to approximately a dozen graduate students and
undergraduates. These students receive hands-on training with the
instrumentation currently housed in the laboratory, and they generate images of
their samples with the microscopes. Students will be trained on the SP-5 through
this course. In addition, practical training on the microscopes is conducted on
an as-needed basis. Over 120 individuals have been trained in the Visual Imaging
Center during the last six years through formal and informal mechanisms.