* 0821319
* MRI:    Acquisition of Equipment to Establish a Secure and Dependable Computing Infrastructure for Research and Education at Cleveland State University
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Chansu Yu, Cleveland State University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2012
* USD 198,000.00

Proposal #: CNS 08-21319&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Zhao, Wenbing&lt;br/&gt; Fu,
Yongijian; Sridhar, Nigamanth; Yu, Chansu&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Cleveland State
University &lt;br/&gt; Cleveland, OH 4415-2214&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Acq.: Acq.
of Equipment to Establish a Secure and Dependable Computing Infrastructure for
Research and Education at Cleveland State University&lt;br/&gt;Project
Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project, acquiring server and networking equipment for
activities in the area of secure and dependable computing, supports research in
enterprise distributed systems, wireless mobile networks, and sensor networks.
Projects include&lt;br/&gt;- Byzantine fault tolerance for long-running,
nondeterministic systems,&lt;br/&gt;- Performability in wireless mobile
networks, and&lt;br/&gt;- Hybrid emulation of wireless sensor
networks.&lt;br/&gt;Novel methods are sought for providing Byzantine fault
tolerance to long-running, nondeterministic distributed systems. Performance in
highly stressed mobile wireless network is investigated in terms of high node
mobility and strong interference, as is understanding of nodes? boundary
behavior under extreme conditions seeking novel methods to survive the stress
via cooperation. Lastly, a novel framework for hybrid emulation of wireless
sensor networks is proposed to enable affordable experimentation at scale. The
instrumentation consists of a cluster of servers connected by a managed high-
speed switch forming a dynamically-configurable distributed computing testbed,
servers to join the PlanetLab Consortium, and networking equipment to connect
the testbed with an existing wireless network testbed. &lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;This project should have broad impact on security and
dependability education. The tools and methodologies produced will be used by
collaborators both in academia and industry (e.g., factory automation and
highway work-zone safety). The infrastructure and outcomes will be integrated
with the education curriculum; courses on fault tolerant computing and
performance analysis will be developed. Moreover, the team collaborates with
high schools providing research experience for teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;