* 0821671
* MRI: Acquisition of a 600 Mhz NMR Spectrometer at the University of Southern California
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Mark Thompson, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Vicki Martin
* 07/31/2011
* USD 538,270.00

A grant has been awarded under the NSF's MRI program to the University of
Southern California under the supervision of Dr. Richard W. Roberts and Dr. Mark
Thompson. Funds from this grant will be used to purchase a 600 MHz NMR
spectrometer that will be accessible to all departments at USC. Nuclear Magnetic
Resonance spectroscopy (also known as NMR) is arguably the most versatile
technique available for studying molecules. This instrument will allow
scientists at USC to determine the structures and movements of molecules with
detail down to less than 1 billionth of a meter, a nanometer. As such, this
instrument will have a major positive impact on USC's scientific goals in the
areas of 1. Biomedical Nanoscience, 2. Imaging, and 3. Energy. In particular,
the instrument will be used 1) to determine the structures of biological
molecules (DNA, RNA and proteins) needed for basic research, new therapies, and
diagnostics, 2) to examine the motions of biological molecules, 3) to measure
the interactions of drugs and drug-like molecules with their therapeutic
targets, 4) to study chemical reactions in great detail, and 5) to explore new
chemical methods and materials relevant to energy production.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior to this grant, USC lacked a modern biomolecular NMR
in an open user facility. The first impact of this instrument will thus be to
provide a new training and research tool for user groups involved in this
project. This includes 18 faculty, 14 undergraduates, 104 graduate students and
54 postdocs across 6 academic departments and 5 schools within USC. Second, this
grant will enable establishing a general structural biology colloquia at USC
integrating this instrument (NMR) with other methods used to determine the
structures of molecules, such as X-ray crystallography. Finally, this instrument
will be used as a recruiting and training tool and for the USC TRIO and USC MESA
programs aimed at serving disadvantaged, science-oriented high school juniors
and seniors.