* 0821900
* Molecular Organization of Yeast Chromosome I - Control of Meiotic Pairing and Recombination
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* David Kaback, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey-RBHS-New Jersey Med
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 07/31/2011
* USD 553,000.00

Reciprocal recombination (crossing over) between homologous chromosomes
(homologues) is believed to be required for proper meiosis I segregation. The
mechanisms that control recombination so that each pair of homologues undergoes
crossing over are not known. In Saccharomyces cerevisiae and humans, small
chromosomes have higher meiotic reciprocal recombination rates (cM/kb) than
large chromosomes, and in S. cerevisiae, rates of reciprocal recombination have
been shown to respond directly to chromosome size. One set of recent
experiments, however, suggested that size-dependent control of crossing over was
not a general feature in all strains or on all chromosomes. As it has been
proposed that size-dependent control of recombination is an essential feature of
the mechanism guaranteeing crossing over between homologues, the investigator
plans to find out if it indeed occurs in all strains and chromosomes and, if it
does not, to begin to determine why it might not be occurring. The decreased
rates of recombination on large chromosomes have been proposed to be due to
increased crossover interference. Interference is defined by the apparent
inhibition of additional meiotic reciprocal recombination events observed near
the site of a crossover. The molecular mechanism of interference and how it
might respond to chromosome size are not known. It has been suggested that the
density of meiotic recombination-inducing double-strand break (DSB) sites is
greater on small chromosomes than on large ones. If this is indeed the case,
then chromosome size-dependent control of recombination (and, perhaps,
interference) might act by controlling DSB formation. To test this idea, the
investigator plans to analyze DSB formation on chromosome I constructs of
different sizes. The investigator has also discovered that the most distal
euchromatic DNA undergoes meiotic recombination at a higher rate than more
interior sequences, suggesting that chromosome position also regulates
recombination. The investigator will determine whether chromosome position does
actually affect recombination rates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The next part of this
project involves the meiotic synaptonemal complex (SC). The precise function of
this structure is not known, but it has been proposed that it may serve as a
regulator of meiotic recombination. The investigator has produced a functional,
fluorescent ZIP1-GFP fusion protein that labels SCs in living cells. He has used
this protein to show that SCs undergo dynamic movements and changes in their
distribution. The role of these movements is unknown but they could play a role
in facilitating recombination. He now proposes to label axial elements with
REC8-CFP and, through the use of fluorescence video microscopy, examine the
dynamics of pairing and SC movements. These studies should provide new insights
into the molecular mechanisms controlling recombination and chromosome synapsis,
processes that lead to proper meiotic chromosome
segregation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In most species, proper chromosome segregation
is essential for the production of normal gametes (e.g. sperm, eggs, pollen, and
ascospores). Identifying mechanisms that ensure proper chromosome segregation
will provide a better understanding of how meiotic divisions occur. A better
understanding of these mechanisms could lead to greatly improved plant breeding
and animal husbandry. Having this research carried out at UMDNJ in Newark will
also be important for the scientific education of both graduate and medical
students at that institution, and for the undergraduates from neighboring
institutions (NJIT, Rutgers) who will actively participate in the project.
Furthermore, UMDNJ's location has been instrumental in the investigator's
significant success in enabling gifted underrepresented minority students to
participate in research. He will continue this effort with the aim of producing
outstanding scientists from UMDNJ's environs. The opening of Newark's Science
High School one block from his laboratory should further increase his and his
laboratory's impact upon Newark's secondary school population as well.