* 0821083
* GROUP TRAVEL:  Support for US MAB Reserve Representation at the 3rd World Congress of Biosphere Reserves, Madrid Spain, 2008
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/2008,06/30/2010
* Knute Nadelhoffer, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 06/30/2010
* USD 39,000.00

This award will support participation of 13 representatives from the U.S. Man
and the Biosphere (MAB) Reserves network in the 3rd World Congress of Biosphere
Reserves on February 4-9, 2008 in Madrid, Spain. Participants will assist in
evaluating implementation of the UNESCO Biosphere Reserve program and will help
elaborate an Action Plan for the World Network of Biosphere Reserves, which
include 47 Biosphere Reserves in the U.S. The US has not been an official
participant in the MAB Biosphere Reserves activities for over two decades.
Participation will allow existing and prospective U.S. MAB Reserves to reconnect
with the World Network. Many existing and possible future Reserves are
affiliated with networks such as the U.S. Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER)
Network and the Organization of Biological Field Stations (OBFS). U.S.
participation should enhance linkages among activities at MAB Reserves and these
existing networks. U.S. representatives are affiliated with U.S. MAB Biosphere
Reserves. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;U.S. participants will cultivate capacity
building opportunities and address topics including: 1) promotion of
collaboration among ecological researchers and research networks; 2) increased
promotion of research, education and outreach; 3) enhanced comparability,
exchange, and preservation of ecological data from sites around the world; 3)
development of best ecosystem management practices; 4) education of the next
generation of scientists, and; 5) development of strategies for addressing
trans-boundary issues (e.g. migratory species, sustainable development,
stewardship and management of genetic resources). A report to the NSF and the
U.S. National Commission for UNESCO describing partnership opportunities
identified during the Congress will be produced.&lt;br/&gt;