* 0821331
* MRI: Development of a Meteorological  Radar Network for Puerto Rico's West Coast
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2008,09/30/2014
* Jose Colom, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 09/30/2014
* USD 1,731,766.00

Objective: The main goal of the proposal is the development of a network of
three short-range dual polarized X-band Doppler radars for the Puerto Rico's
west coast. This weather-sensing network will achieve breakthrough improvements
in sensitivity and resolution for sampling storms, thermodynamic state, and
other critical variables throughout the entire troposphere.

Intellectual Merit: In Puerto Rico, where complex orography limits the use of
traditional long-range radar systems, the deployment of a network of short range
radars is an attractive alternative to observe the weather. While current
technology has been successfully used for many years to provide weather
forecast, better coverage and resolution of the lower atmosphere is desired to
help the scientists to understand weather phenomena that is undetected under the
long-range radar beam. To achieve this goal, a network consisting of three
X-band radars that will have the ability to monitor the earth's lower
troposphere is proposed. The network will provide precise weather forecast to a
region in Puerto Rico plagued by intense rain and flash floods, but the lack of
precise data and the complex orography of the Island has lead to poor prediction
of these events.

Broader Impact: The proposed instrument will help fill the coverage gaps in the
lower troposphere currently undetected by NEXRAD in Western P.R. As a result
this will help in the protection of life/property in the West of the Island in
the event of severe weather conditions. This technology can then be used in
regions in the World with similar geographical and weather conditions as in
Puerto Rico.