* 0821345
* MRI:   Development of a High-Performance Database Appliance for Geospatial Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2015
* Naphtali Rishe, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 07/31/2015
* USD 1,316,000.00

Proposal #: CNS 08-21345 PI(s): Rishe, Naphtali D. Christidis, Evangelos; Li,
Tao; Rangaswami, Raju Institution: Florida International University Miami, FL
33174-2516 Title: MRI/Dev.: Dev. Of a High Performance Database Appliance for
Geospatial Applications Project Proposed: This project, developing a high-
performance next-generation hardware/software instrument able to efficiently
perform complex geospatial and other queries, enables close-to-storage complex
operations related to geospatial data transformation and querying, including
data search with information retrieval (keywords), structural (SQL), and
geospatial criteria. This replicable instrument consists of a scalable storage
and computation cloud comprising an array of processors, each equipped with
solid-state disks (SSD) and mechanical disks. This coupling of processors to
SSDs allows an order of magnitude in performance improvement for many geospatial
problems. The work entails adapting existing spatial database management,
querying, and interface systems to this new architecture and deploying open-
standard APIs. The instrument will include a base-map comprising nationwide
aerial photography, street vectors, demographics, and cadastre data. For
completeness of the basemap, most of the data (40TB) already assembled,
ameliorated, and mosaiced for the TerraFly project that will be ported into the
instrument, requires expansion. The instrument facilitates several areas in
computer science research, including query algorithms, storage systems,
geographic information systems (GIS), and data mining, feature recognition, and
visualization. Examples of enabled research on algorithms range from
optimization of query filtering on keywords 'containment in the objects'
description to enriching spatial query languages to incorporate IR constraints
and creating complex personalized ranking functions that consider the shape,
location, and textual description of objects. Many examples involve feature
recognition, appropriately serving multiple computer science and disaster
mitigation research areas. Moreover, the enablement of real-time multi-
dimensional indexing, combined with the multitude of geospatial data, also
facilitates applied research in disaster management (e.g., use of high-
resolution hurricane impact models to predict the possibility of damage on a
house-by-house basis).

Broader Impacts: This project enables applications in environmental monitoring,
transportation, education, public health, and safety. By providing efficient
spatial and temporal management of data needed by many constituencies such as
disaster management, the instrument broadly benefits society. Specifically, the
instrument impacts computer science and disaster mitigation research nationwide.
Once the instrument is successfully commercialized, it should also serve many
critical government and business applications requiring high-performance
querying of very large geospatial databases. Furthermore, many students in this
Minority Serving University (MSI) are likely to be inspired to continue towards
a graduate degree and/or benefit by continuing their careers in science and
engineering.