* 0821816
* MRI: Acquisition of a Parallel Computing and Visualization Facility to Enable Integrated Research and Training in Modern Computational Science, Mathematics, and Engineering
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Randolph Bank, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2012
* USD 351,449.00

This award provides funding for the acquisition of critically needed
&lt;br/&gt;computational and visualization equipment in support of UCSD's
recently &lt;br/&gt;launched Computational Science, Mathematics, and Engineering
(CSME) &lt;br/&gt;Doctoral Program (http://csme.ucsd.edu/). The expenditure will
&lt;br/&gt;be highly matched (thirty percent) by the University of California,
by &lt;br/&gt;both funds and infrastructure. The resulting CSME training
facility will &lt;br/&gt;provide direct access to CSME students for design of
effective computational &lt;br/&gt;strategies, development of methods tuned to
large parallel environments,&lt;br/&gt;and testing of code efficiency
(scalability) on a meaningful-sized computer. &lt;br/&gt;The CSME program offers
integrated research and training in the modern &lt;br/&gt;tools of computational
science. The objective of the program is to address &lt;br/&gt;the essential
need to produce the next generation of scientists that will &lt;br/&gt;provide
the solutions to the major problems of our time: climate change,
&lt;br/&gt;anthropogenic pollution, and energy diversity as well as continue the
&lt;br/&gt;quest for the understanding of fundamental problems of physics,
chemistry &lt;br/&gt;and biology. This CSME facility will also provide benefits
to the broader &lt;br/&gt;UCSD computational science community by providing a
focus for many similar&lt;br/&gt;computational research programs on the campus.
The CSME Program is based &lt;br/&gt;in the Center for Computational Mathematics
(CCoM) at UCSD &lt;br/&gt;(http://ccom.ucsd.edu/), and directly involves faculty
from five core &lt;br/&gt;academic departments (mathematics, chemistry, computer
science and &lt;br/&gt;engineering, mechanical and aerospace engineering, and
physics), and also &lt;br/&gt;involves in a less direct way nearly all major
science and engineering &lt;br/&gt;units at UCSD.&lt;br/&gt;