* 0821713
* MRI:   Development of Configurable Cyberphysical Instrument for Real-time Hybrid Testin
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2010
* Shirley Dyke, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 06/30/2010
* USD 516,000.00

Proposal #: CNS 08-21713&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Dyke, Shirley J.&lt;br/&gt; Gill,
Christopher; Lu, Chenyang&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Washington University
&lt;br/&gt; St Louis, MO 63130-4899 &lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Dev.: Dev of A
Configurable Cyberphysical Instrument for Real-Time Hybrid
Testing&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project,
developing a Cyber-physical Instrument for Real-time hybrid Structural Testing
(CIRST), &lt;br/&gt;supports the development and evaluation of new system
design, implementation, and analysis techniques involving both cyber (computer
hardware and software) and physical elements. The work aims to advance the
state-of-the-art regarding real-time hybrid testing of structural systems,
validate the next generation of structural monitoring and control systems, and
study realistic limitations on issues such as fault tolerance, reliability, and
stability in cyber-physical systems. The challenge in real-time hybrid testing
revolves around the timely and appropriate coordination of&lt;br/&gt;? Applying
the input motions and forces to physical components and&lt;br/&gt;?
Communicating values of the input motions and forces to simulated
components.&lt;br/&gt;Actuator dynamics, complex interactions between the cyber
and physical elements and computational time delays all hamper the ability to
conduct accurate tests. Precise temporal synchronization, timely interactions,
high fidelity numerical models of the physical components and predictive
modeling and control techniques are thus crucial elements for integration
control and simulation of such complex system dynamics. Thus, configurability
and real-time operation constitute the instrument?s novel aspect. It is expected
to provide the ability to consider large variety of structures and configuration
in a single series of tests, and to operate and control those large-scale tests
at finer time scales. The instrument should enable validation of new real-time
scheduling and resource management techniques while facing the very realistic
constraints needed to achieve real-time control. This time-scale aware
distributed real-time control system component integrates and extends existing
open-source tools and system software. Each experiment may be set up and
controlled using an interactive dashboard that will provide visual tools for
real-time data observation and analysis. CIRST will use the adjacent shake table
facility for acceptance testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Details
for this unique instrument will be documented through the project website and
made available to the research community, including open-source distribution of
system software and design documentation. Moreover, the instrument will enable
training students through workshops. Several courses will also employ the
instrument.&lt;br/&gt;