* 0821693
* MRI: Acquisition of Advanced Scanning Proton Microprobe Analytical Endstation for Biological Applications
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2008,05/31/2010
* Karl Hasenstein, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Vicki Martin
* 05/31/2010
* USD 127,120.00

A grant has been awarded to the University of Louisiana at Lafayette to acquire
advanced detectors and instrumentation for a scanning proton microprobe (SPM)
specially designed for research in the biological sciences. An SPM operates by
scanning a highly focused high energy proton beam across the surface of a sample
and the various forms of radiation emitted when the protons strike the sample
can be used to detect, quantify, and locate the constituent atoms in the sample
as well as produce images of the surface and subsurface structure. With the
acquisition of this instrumentation researchers will have a vastly improved
capability to nondestructively analyze sensitive biological materials at
microscale dimensions. Some of the immediate applications where this advanced
system will have a significant impact for researchers include evaluation of
specific drug uptake mechanisms related to treatment of pediatric brain tumors,
monitoring uptake and fluctuations of heavy metals and other pollutants in
trees, 3-D tomography of single cells, and analysis of gravity sensing
structures in organisms.

The wide range of research applications provided by this advanced SPM analytical
system will encourage collaborations among faculty, postdoctoral research
associates, and students while offering unequaled educational opportunities in
biology, physics, and environmental sciences. Importantly, the significant
interdisciplinary teamwork fostered by utilization of this instrumentation will
accelerate the dissemination of new scientific knowledge. In addition, the
association of the principal investigator with two Louisiana Department of
Education Mathematics and Science Partnership Programs offers a rare opportunity
for K-12 and community outreach to introduce this leading edge technology to the
public.