* 0821794
* MRI-Consortium:   Acquisition of a Supercomputer by the Front Range Computing Consortium
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2013
* Henry Tufo, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 07/31/2013
* USD 2,796,500.00

Proposal #: CNS 08-21794&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Tufo, Henry M.&lt;br/&gt; Julie,
Keith; Loft, Richard D.; Mandel, Jan; Syvitski, James P.&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Colorado - Boulder&lt;br/&gt; Boulder, CO
80309-0572&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Acq.: Acq. of a Supercomputer by the Front Range
Computing Consortium&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This
project, acquiring instrumentation to investigate and address the technical
obstacles to practical petascale computing for CU-Denver, CU-Boulder, and NCAR,
explores the interplay of multi-core, intra-socket and inter-node parallelism in
a variety of applications and additionally studies extreme application
scalability, (issues critical to the petascale era). The work enables the
researchers from the Front Range Computing Consortium (FRCC) to make discoveries
in multiple areas through the supercomputing instrument with peak performance
(over 100 TeraFLOPs). Access to this critical state-of-the-art Track 3
computational instrumentation enables HPC-driven problems such as Earth-System
Sciences (e.g., climatology, critical oceanography, meteorology, land surface
dynamics), Biotechnology (e.g., genomics, structural biology, microbial
ecology), renewable energy applications; Material Science (e.g., nano-structured
composites), turbulence, turbulent magnetic dynamos, and laser-plasma
acceleration, and Computational Science. The instrument proposed combines Sun?s
highest density Constellation assemblies, Intel?s next generation Nehalem-EP
microprocessors, a custom InfiniBand QDR-based mesh interconnect, NVIDIA
accelerators, and Sun Thumper storage modules to produce a highly balanced I/O
rich, and cost-effective computing system. This new instrument, deployed within
the integrated framework of the FRCC, offers a broad spectrum of investigators
the necessary computational ecosystem to advance their research and strengthen
their collaborations with national laboratories. Because the HPC manifested by
NSF cyber-infrastructure hierarchy calls for ?a significant number of systems
with peak performance in the 50-500 teraflops range, deployed and supported on
the local level by individual campuses and research organizations,? the
instrument fits into the NSF cyber-infrastructure hierarchy as a track 3 system
and will have a software environment that allows it to peer seamlessly with
other NSF cyber-infrastructure investments. Exhibiting potential to benefit
other Directorates and Offices, this work undoubtedly directly benefits GEO,
MPS, BIO, ENG, OCI, and CISE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;This project brings together a broad and diverse set of
disciplines to focus on key research priorities. The Consortium also decreases
the barrier for collaboration between researchers at institutions along the
Front Range, thereby accelerating scientific discovery, increasing scientific
productivity, and fostering vibrant HPC ecology. Moreover, the instrumentation
facilitates focused education, training, outreach, and support. Courses offered
through this initiative are a vital component of training the next generation of
scientists and engineers in the areas of modeling and scientific computing,
numerical analysis, applied analysis, and high performance computing. The
instrumentation supports ten historically black colleges and universities
through distance learning courses and leverages existing mentoring programs such
as NCAR?s Summer Internship in Parallel Computational Science (SIParCS), UCAR?s
Significant Opportunities in Atmospheric Research and Science program (SOARS),
and the CU Boulder?s Summer Multicultural Access to Research Training (SMART)
programs.&lt;br/&gt;