* 0821664
* Numerical Simulation of Multiphase Flows in Porous Media
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Frederico Furtado, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 08/31/2009
* USD 41,075.00

The Department of Mathematics at the University of Wyoming will purchase
computer equipment which will be dedicated to the support of research in the
mathematical sciences. The equipment will be used for several research projects,
including in particular: the numerical simulation of three-phase porous-media
flows, the investigation of the the scale-up problem for such flows, the
development of particle tracking schemes for nonlinear conservation laws and of
parallel adaptive multi-scale finite element methods that can be applied to
them. The projects aim at advancing the state-of-the-art in modeling and
simulation of fluid flow in porous media such as oil reservoirs and aquifers.
They will explore new computational algorithms, both for sequential and parallel
computers, the incorporation of complex fluid physics, and eventually will apply
these methods to the study of enhanced oil recovery techniques which are already
used in the state of Wyoming as well as elsewhere in the United States. Thus,
the projects will have a large social impact on the state of Wyoming, due to its
concentration of natural resources in gas, coal and oil reservoirs, and
ultimately on the U.S. maintaining its leadership role in applied computational
science in a field of high importance to today's world economy. On a different
scale, the projects span several disciplines and are tuned to the University of
Wyoming mission of interdisciplinary computational science in its academic plan.
Existing research links between the Departments of Mathematics, Statistics,
Chemical and Petroleum Engineering, Chemistry, Computer Science, as well as the
Institute for Enhanced Oil Recovery and the School for Energy Resources will be
stimulated, and will result in attracting additional students in the existing
programs. The project is coupled tightly with an on-going education plan aimed
at developing both an undergraduate and a graduate curriculum in Computational
Science, to be offered through some of the above departments above as a minor.
This minor has already been approved at the College of Arts level for the
Mathematics Department where the emphasis will be on training students in high-
performance computing and its use in the study of complex physics, with first
undergraduate students expected this Fall. Other departments and the graduate
program are expected to follow gradually over the next couple of years.