* 0821700
* MRI: Development of an IM-TOF Instrument for a Structural Biology Center
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* David Russell, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2011
* USD 1,396,567.00

The National Science Foundation is awarding Texas A&amp;M University funds to
develop a next generation, bioanalytical ion mobility-mass spectrometer (IM-MS).
This new IM-MS will advance state-of-the-art high-throughput mixture analysis,
enhance structural studies of biomolecules, and develop new bioinformatic tools
to extract chemical information from IM-MS data. Although significant progress
has been made in developing IM-MS, the complexity of current instrument designs
and associated computational data interpretation impose obstacles to non-expert
users. Successful completion of our research goals will significantly improve
operational capabilities, i.e., sensitivity, resolution, primary and higher
order structural information, while providing user-friendly computational data
interpretation tools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This instrument will be housed in
the LBMS, a core facility of the Structural Biology Center located in the newly
constructed Interdisciplinary Life Sciences Building (ILSB) at Texas A&amp;M
University. The environment of the ILSB will enhance student training and
research by providing cutting-edge research capabilities to end-users. Bio-
analytical students in the LBMS, 19 students/post-docs, 7 females and 4
underrepresented minorities, will work directly with leading instrument
specialists and researchers from areas of protein folding, proteomics, and
plant, structural and systems biology on problem-driven technology development
and transfer. These interactions and the on-going IM-MS collaborations with
academic, government, and industrial laboratories serve to accelerate
technological development and transfer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;