* 0821474
* MRI:   Development of a Vision-based Real-Time Body Motion Tracking Instrument for Advanced  Radiation Treatment
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Susanta Hui, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2013
* USD 256,000.00

This cross disciplinary project for instrument development combines the fields
of computer vision (and computer science overall) with radiation therapy and
behavioral sciences. This project is a joint venture among the Medical School,
the Psychology Department, and the Institute of Technology. The goal is to
develop a minimally invasive, full-body, patient tracking system to be used with
the helical tomotherapy system currently in use at the institution. The purpose
of this effort is to detect when a patient becomes misaligned during radiation
treatment. Adding visual feedback to the helical tomotherapy treatment should
improve the safety of the patient, reduce the considerable treatment time, and
improve the cure rate. It should be noted that the proposed instrument has a
wide variety of implications for other forms of radiation therapy and medical
systems that require a specific patient pose with respect to the medical device.
In order for these devices to revolutionize the treatment field, the interaction
of the patient with the device should be studied from a behavioral sciences
point of view. In this project, behavioral sciences will play an important role
in capturing the behavioral patterns exhibited when the patient is in treatment,
and in devising new patient placement protocols with profound impacts on cancer
treatment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the early stages of this development, the
proposed instrument will not be used in human trials, focusing instead on the
following tasks:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Development of efficient computer vision
algorithms (structured light) for detecting the patient's movements in a non-
intrusive way that simultaneously offers the possibility for creating a closed-
loop helical tomography instrument,&lt;br/&gt;- Selection of features, so
cumbersome reflective markers are no longer needed,&lt;br/&gt;- Creation of the
probabilistic framework necessary to utilize the features found from multiple
calibrated cameras to determine the probability distribution of likely body
positions,&lt;br/&gt;- Incorporation of behavioral science research that
utilizes cyber-enabled principles to create patient-friendly medical devices and
treatments, and&lt;br/&gt;- Experimental validation of the proposed instrument
and improvement of the instrument with cyber-enabled behavioral science
input.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
introduces computer vision methodologies/hardware and cyber-enabled behavioral
science research to radiation therapy with the objective of having safer and
more effective radiation treatment. It may cause fundamental changes in the way
that humans and medical devices interact. Educational programs will enable
training to the instrument/methodologies. Some of these methodologies will be
included in the curriculum. A website will be developed for dissemination of
findings. Users from around the world will be given access. Outreach programs
involving demonstrations to pertinent groups will be created.