* 0821736
* MRI:   Development of a Flexible Instrument and Tools for Experimental Research in Next-Generation 9-1-1 Services
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2013
* Krishna Kavi, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 07/31/2013
* USD 416,000.00

Proposal #: CNS 08-21736 PI(s): Dantu, Ram Guturu, Parthasarathy; Kavi, Krishna
M. Institution: University of North Texas Denton, TX 76203-5250 Title: MRI/Dev:A
Flexible Instrument and Tools for Experimental Research in Next Generation 9-1-1
Services Project Proposed: This project, developing a flexible instrument and
tools for research to understand and analyze next-generation 9-1-1 services,
contributes to the process of planning next-generation emergency communication
infrastructure. The instrument will house and evaluate the techniques for
locating 9-1-1 callers, securing public safety answering points (PSAPs),
ensuring continuous availability of 9-1-1 services during large-scale
emergencies, providing neighborhood notifications, improving interagency
coordination, and enhancing 9-1-1 services for the deaf and hearing-impaired
through video phones and instant messaging. Additional goals include measuring
the performance of LoST (location to service translation), LCP (location
configuration), and SIPLC (SIP location conveyance) protocols used in PSAP;
developing a tool for performance measurements for call processing and security
(PSAP), translating the development efforts to engineering guidelines, and
disseminating the results across government organizations, standards bodies such
as the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), and the National Emergency Number
Association (NENA) and 9-1-1 centers. NENA and Denco 9-1-1 center support
testing and validation of the tools and instrument. Thus, the project develops -
A flexible, high performance instrument and tools for locating callers,
specifically to investigate security and scalability of next-generation 9-1-1
technology, - The instrumentation required for investigation of several research
issues related to 9-1-1 notifications during disaster, and - A dissemination and
educational program to transfer the results to industry and government agencies.

Broader Impacts: This project enables new research and education in 9-1-1
services. Workshops will be organized (3 have been held in VoIP security) and
dissemination will be forthcoming. The research projects enabled will be helpful
to deaf and hearing- and speech-impaired individuals.