* 0821839
* Acquisition of a High-Performance Cluster-Grid for Research and Education in Computational Sciences
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Jianchao Han, California State University-Dominguez Hills Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2011
* USD 57,168.00

Proposal #: CNS 08-21839&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Han, Jianchao&lt;br/&gt; Beheshti,
Mohsen; Nahapetian, Ani&lt;br/&gt;Institution: California State University ?
Dominguez Hills&lt;br/&gt; Carson, CA 90747-0001&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Acq.: Acq.
of a High Performance Cluster Grid for Research and Education on Computational
Science&lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project, acquiring cluster-
grid instrumentation to fulfill the need for high-performance, contributes to
computer science, biology, chemistry, bioinformatics, homeland security,
sociology, psychology, and environmental sciences research and education. The
high-performance cluster grid is expected to enable a quantum-leap in the
computing capabilities accessible to the investigators. Diverse project
directions include: &lt;br/&gt;- Extending statistical techniques to situations
with interval uncertainties&lt;br/&gt;- Discovering gene interactions and gene-
disease associations in online medical literature (using clustering,
classification, and association mining technology), &lt;br/&gt;- Automating
computer network intrusion detection and prevention (integrating firewall and
applying data mining technologies in computer network traffic data collected by
SNORT), &lt;br/&gt;- Developing an efficient and interactive online examination
and assessment system(using knowledge-based expert system technology),
and&lt;br/&gt;- Designing and implementing healthcare and patient information
management system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt; This project
forms a foundation for new research capabilities at this minority-serving
institution, impacting researchers and educators throughout the campus and
beyond. It promotes the formation of research teams that may overcome
traditional cultural and communication barriers enabling interdisciplinary
approaches to technological and scientific challenges. The instrumentation
provides students with the skills to cope with a rapidly changing workplace.
Students will learn to communicate and interact with researchers of different
disciplines, a valuable skill at this time.