* 0821910
* Collaborative Research:  Design and Analysis of Compressed Sensing DNA Microarrays
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2007,02/29/2012
* Olgica Milenkovic, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 02/29/2012
* USD 502,805.00

The diverse functions performed by a living cell during her life cycle are
controlled and regulated through complicated gene- and protein- interaction
networks. Any pattern of irregular behavior of genes in the network can lead to
cell malfunctioning, cell death, or the emergence of diseases like cancer. It is
therefore of crucial importance to recognize erroneous gene interaction patterns
and compare them to those in healthy cells. For this type of study, one of the
most frequently used bioengineering systems is the well known DNA microarray
device. DNA microarrays consist of grids of spots containing unique genetic
identifiers for each of the tested genes, capable of generating snapshots of
gene activity in terms of selective DNA sequence annealing. Microarrays have
also found many other applications in the field of molecular biology, most
notably for the purpose of detecting hostile microbial agents in food, water,
and in the air. One of the main drawbacks of current microarray designs is that
they are, for the purpose of whole genome studies, severely underutilized;
similarly, for biosensing applications, existing microarray systems cannot be
used for simultaneous identification of a large number of microorganisms and
their strains due to technological limitations.

The investigators study novel array architectures, termed compressed sensing DNA
microarrays. The research involves finding DNA probes that serve as group
identifiers for classes of microorganisms; designing sparse sensing matrices for
DNA group identifiers; developing compressed sensing reconstruction algorithms
capable of handling saturation effects arising due to high agent concentration
levels; characterizing the fundamental trade-offs between distortion and sensor
dimension for non-linear arrays; and, analyzing the complexity of integrating
compressed sensing microarrays into existing biosensor networks.