* 0821110
* MRI: Acquisition of an LC/MS/MS to Enhance Undergraduate Research and Teaching
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Paul Edmiston, College of Wooster
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2011
* USD 226,115.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation program (MRI), Melissa
M. Schultz and colleagues Paul Edmiston and Mark Snider from the College of
Wooster will acquire a liquid chromatograph/triple quadrupole mass spectrometer
(LC/MS/MS). The instrument will be used to (1) quantitatively determine
contaminants such as fluorochemicals and antidepressant pharmaceuticals in
environmental, (2) examine the non-conserved amino acids and their role in
molecular evolution, (3) measure rates of uncatalyzed reactions, specifically
the hydrolysis of creatine to determine the catalytic proficiency of creatinase
and other enzymes, (4) structurally elucidate synthesized light-emitting
polymers, their synthetic precursors, and supramolecular complexes of monomeric
model system, (5) address the role of DNA methylation in neurodegenerative
diseases. The co-PIs will also use the instrumentation as a tool for education
and outreach both within and beyond the College of Wooster.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mass spectrometry (MS) is a technique used to probe
intimate structural details and to obtain the molecular compositions of a vast
array of organic, bioorganic, and organometallic molecules. It is one of the
fastest growing and most widely used analytical instrumentation techniques.
Because of this, it is important for undergraduate students to be exposed to the
technique. In addition, this research is expected to have a positive effect on
the environment. To a first approximation a tandem mass spectrometer can be
thought of as two mass spectrometers in series connected by a chamber that can
break a chemical species into pieces.