* 0821727
* MRI:    Acquisition of Cyberinfrastructure for Computational Research (CCR)
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Cecilia Clementi, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 07/31/2011
* USD 499,949.00

Proposal #: CNS 08-21727&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Mellor-Crummey, John&lt;br/&gt;
Clementi, Cecilia; Nakhleh, Luay; Nordlander, Peter A.; Tezduyar, Tayfun
E..&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Rice University &lt;br/&gt; Houston, TX
80309-0572&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Acq.: Acq. of Cyberinfrastructure for
Computational Research (CCR)&lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project,
acquiring instrumentation and operating a computational cluster for research
(CCR), enables code development, medium scale computation, preparation of
scalable codes for execution on national-scale resources, post-processing and
visualization of results from remote supercomputers, and research training.
Projects range from development of enabling technologies, such as programming
models and performance analysis tools for parallel systems, to computational
science and engineering research that includes techniques for automated
verification of complex hardware and software designs, data mining of multiple
whole genomes, studying large-scale ecological dynamics, determining the
properties of nanophotonic structures through simulation, simulating protein
dynamics to study flexibility and function, modeling transport properties in
biophysical systems, and understanding fluid structure interactions in
physiological systems and engineering designs. The increase in the number of CPU
hours available for shared research computing contributes to support the
explosive growth of computational research. Hence, more tightly coupled
computing can be supported at a higher scale; a centralized computing facility
can be scheduled for higher utilization; a single system can be operated and
administered (rather than collections of cluster for individual research groups,
and may effectively on-ramp national resources. Operating this modest-size
computational cluster locally complements the TeraGrid and accelerates research.
In particular, higher bandwidth and lower latency to the desktop from a local
system better supports code development using interactive tools with graphical
user interfaces (e.g., for debugging, performance, and scalability analysis, and
data visualization) while preparing codes for execution on national-scale
resources. Indeed, computation is an indispensable tool for scientific inquiry
and complements traditional approaches of theory and
experimentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;CCR enhances
the graduate research and training of hundreds of students and post-doctoral
fellows in science and engineering. It provides educational experience for
undergraduate and graduate students through its use in courses that integrate
high performance computing and computational problem solving. Furthermore, a
boot-camp will familiarize students with high performance computing and teach
computational problem solving skills. The instrument also contributes to
recruiting and serves as an educational tool in the Alliance for the Graduate
Education and the Professoriate (AGEP), a successful program in attracting
members from underrepresented groups into higher education, thus broadening
their educational experience.&lt;br/&gt;