* 0821741
* MRI:   CRON:   Development of a Cyberinfrastructure Reconfigurable Optical Network for Large-Scale Scientific Discovery
* CSE,OAC
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2013
* Sitharama Iyengar, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2013
* USD 495,181.00

In this proposal, we propose to develop a Cyberinfrastructure for Reconfigurable
Optical Networks (CRON). With supercomputing facilities and storage resources
geographically dispersed across the US and around the globe, the success of
scientific applications and collaborations relies increasingly on high-speed
optical networks. The development and deployment of national and international
optical networks and regional networks make it possible for more scientists,
research and educational institutes to connect and collaborate at previously
unachievable levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;However, there is a critical gap
between the research projects and the deployed high speed networks, caused by
the following problems: (1) Limited physical resource ? e.g., the expensive
resource of the LONI network has limitations on the number of simultaneous
users, and there are many research and/or educational institutions in Louisiana
that cannot access the networks due to the last mile problem.; (2) Unmodifiable
environment - because the currently deployed networks are used for production as
well as research, individual users cannot impose on other users by modifying
environmental parameters, such as network protocol stacks and operating systems;
and (3) Partial environment ? applications or protocols developed for one
specific high speed network should work correctly over all kinds of different
networks, irrespective of different network bandwidths and delays. However, each
deployed physical network has one physical characteristic, such as bandwidth and
delay.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to bridge the gap
between physical networks and research by developing a virtual networking and
computing cyberinfrastructure, CRON, that provides integrated and automated
access to diverse networking environments. To provide the virtual environments,
CRON consists of two components: hardwares including a switch, optical fibers,
network emulators and softwares automatically reconfiguring the hardwares based
on users? demands. CRON resolves the critical issues by achieving three key
objectives: (i) Unlimited virtual networking resource CRON will enable
researchers to explore new network technologies and rapidly assess their impact
on applications irrespective of physical limitation and allow educators to
introduce the state-of-art networking environment to students who cannot access
those physical networks. (ii) Reconfigurability CRON will allow researchers and
educators to modify the virtual environments without interfering with others who
share CRON. (iii) Complete environment CRON will provide all kinds of networking
environments, including regional networks and global transoceanic optical
networks.&lt;br/&gt;