* 0821381
* MRI: Acquisition of an LC-MS Facility for Research and Education in Metabolic Systems Biology
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2008,10/31/2011
* David Kaplan, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 10/31/2011
* USD 275,495.00

CBET-0821381&lt;br/&gt;Lee&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: A biological
entity such as a cell or tissue is increasingly recognized as a complex system
with intertwined functions and structural features. These functions and features
generally cannot be directly attributed to a specific molecular component of the
system; rather, they arise from the many layers of interactions between these
components. In this regard, the analysis and design of both natural and
engineered bio-systems will benefit from integrated models and measurements that
characterize the global behavior of these systems. Given the molecular nature of
biological systems, a crucial determinant of their global character is their
chemical profile. The goal of this program is to establish a multi-user
instrumentation facility for chemical profiling, with emphasis on metabolite
analysis. The metabolite profile of a biological system cumulatively reflects
the states of gene expression, protein expression, and the cellular environment
as well as multidirectional interactions among these elements. Moreover,
metabolites are direct intermediates of life-essential biochemical pathways,
and, in conjunction with appropriate models, may be used to quantitatively asses
the activities of these pathways in intact cells and tissues. The core research
projects of this program seek to develop, apply, and validate methods and models
for the acquisition and analysis of quantitative metabolite profiling data.
These methods and models will be used for the global analysis of cellular
metabolism and its interactions with various other specialized biochemical
pathways. Three core projects are planned to explore the use of metabolic
profile data in the contexts of system description (e.g. biomarker
identification) as well as in-depth analysis of both small (natural product) and
large molecule (cellulose) biosynthesis. The core projects are: (1) pathway
analysis of liver drug toxicity; (2) synthesis and characterization of novel
bacterial cellulose-based biomaterials; and (3) metabolic engineering of new
routes for natural product synthesis in heterologous hosts. In addition to the
project-specific outcomes, we expect to obtain broadly applicable metabolomics
technologies, e.g. specific measurement protocols and bioinformatics tools, that
will enable future studies seeking to better understand the global regulation of
cellular biochemical activity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
&lt;br/&gt;Research: The envisioned metabolomics facility is a much needed
addition to the instrument infrastructure of Tufts University's main campus that
will broadly support research activities at the university and other nearby
institutions. We plan to integrate the metabolomics facility with other core
laboratories of a newly established, inter-departmental research complex of the
school, and provide an easily accessible and affordable analytical technology
resource for this research community. Outreach activities are planned to also
attract users from nearby academic institutions (e.g. Northeastern University)
currently lacking a similar facility. &lt;br/&gt;Education: The instrument
facility will also extend the educational possibilities at Tufts. The metabolite
profiling facility will become an invaluable resource for training young
scientists across levels (undergraduates, graduate students, and post-doctoral
fellows) in state-of-the-art methods for biochemical data acquisition and
analysis. Importantly, the program will recruit and support students to actively
engage in peer-training. In addition, the instruments will directly facilitate
on-going new course development efforts aimed at promoting interdisciplinary
learning. &lt;br/&gt;Benefits to courses include: direct participation of
students in the generation of real data for a modeling and algorithms class;
direct exposure to modern analytical instrumentation by undergraduates in
laboratory classes; and generation of a new laboratory unit on field sample
analysis for an environmental chemistry class. &lt;br/&gt;Outreach: Specific
activities are planned to enhance participation by members of under-represented
groups and first-generation college students through Tufts' Computer Science,
Engineering, and Mathematics Scholars (CSEMS) program.