* 0821428
* CAREER: Alluvial Fan Form Quantification to Advance Geographic Science and Education
* SBE,BCS
* 08/31/2007,04/30/2009
* Thad Wasklewicz, East Carolina University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 04/30/2009
* USD 30,140.00

The analysis of the form of the Earth's terrain has lagged significantly behind
research of the processes that produce those forms in geomorphology.
Furthermore, a considerable amount of geomorphic research has focused on two-
dimensional analyses that quantify shape rather than the three-dimensional
spatial form of surficial features. These emphases have produced a situation
whereby current understanding of continuous terrain is not equated with
repeatable, measurable attributes but rather with qualitative or simplified
empirical interpretations. This Faculty Early-Career Development (CAREER) award
will support research to quantitatively assess the three-dimensional form of
alluvial fans. Alluvial fans are depositional features that result from
sedimentary deposition of alluvium, debris flows, colluvium, or a combination of
all three at the foot of a steep slope. The objectives of this line of research
are to produce a detailed understanding of alluvial fan form and to use this
information to generate a precise process-response model explaining fan
evolution in arid as well as humid environments. High-resolution terrain data
for a set of alluvial fans will be gathered using global positioning system
(GPS) surveying, airborne laser-swath mapping (ALSM), and soft-copy
photogrammetry techniques. The investigator will convert the terrain data into
grid-based digital elevation models (DEM). In addition, spatial information on
fan sedimentary units will be gathered using ground-penetrating radar (GPR). The
DEM and sedimentary data will be integrated, stored, analyzed, and visualized
using a geographic information system (GIS). Several geostatistical and spatial
statistical procedures will be performed to analyze the spatial arrangement and
relationships of the internal and external structure identified in the alluvial
fans. The spatial relationships will be used to produce the process-response
model. The model will be innovative because form will have equally quantifiable
measures to compare with the depositional units. The study results and data will
be readily transferable to the classroom providing active-learning experiences
based on innovative data collection, theory, and analytical educational
experiences at the undergraduate and graduate levels. The investigator intends
to get underrepresented students participating in research and assisting them by
fostering a dynamic student-centered learning environment

The anticipated outcomes of this research should provide a quantitative
explanation for similarity and differences between fans generated from disparate
processes as well as an assessment of how form varies under different
environmental settings. The findings will show how the spatial arrangement of
sedimentary units impacts alluvial fan surface morphology. Quantification of
alluvial fan form and its relation to formative processes are topics with
scientific, applied, and educational merit. The use of arithmetical and
statistical techniques will provide repeatable and comparative values that will
advance the understanding of form in geographic science. The capacity of the
current research to produce accurate information on fan form promotes direct
application of these measures for improving conditions of human settlements and
protecting them from natural hazards. Urban sprawl in many cities throughout the
world has caused development to expand onto fan surfaces. Inhabiting these
environments places people at risk and puts a burden on society to pay for
damages from flooding and debris flows. Scientific inquiries are beginning to
unravel some of the causal mechanisms associated with flooding, channel
avulsion, and debris flows on fans, and this study will elucidate how they link
to fan morphology. Precise information about alluvial fan form therefore should
help produce better tools for hazard mitigation and a firmer factual knowledge
base that engineers can use to develop safer building pads and structures. The
project also will provide integrative learning opportunities for undergraduate
and graduate students.