* 0821224
* MRI: Development of a Full-Muller-Matrix Spectroscopic Ellipsometer for Far-IR Radiation at the National Synchrotron Light Source (NSLS-BNL)
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Andrei Sirenko, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2010
* USD 502,400.00

Technical Abstract:

This MRI Proposal focuses on the development of a full-Muller-matrix
spectroscopic ellipsometer for a broadband spectral range of the far-infrared
synchrotron radiation. This ellipsometer will be installed at one of the
infrared beamlines of the National Synchrotron Light Source (NSLS) and will
become available to General User experimental programs at NSLS, and in the
future, at NSLS-II. The proposed instrument will establish closer collaboration
between different Universities working with the THz and far-infrared
spectroscopy and will support interdisciplinary projects in Condensed Matter
Physics. The unique features of the proposed development include simultaneous
measurements of normalized spectra of the Muller-matrix components (including
the 4th row and 4th column) with the help of rotating retarders and polarizers
providing direct information about the real and imaginary parts of both
electrical permittivity and magnetic permeability tensors of the investigated
materials. The proposed instrument will facilitate analysis of dielectric and
magnetic properties of multiferroic materials, ultra-thin high-K dielectric
films, magnetic nanostructured oxides, superconducting films, and other strongly
correlated materials. The sample properties will be studied under the influence
of an external magnetic field up to 10 T, under uniaxial pressure up to 10
kbars, and in the temperature range between 4 and 350 K. The integration between
fundamental research, new instrumentation development, and the education of
graduate and undergraduate students, as well as a close collaboration between
Universities and Brookhaven National Lab are other important aspects of this
proposal.

Non-Technical Abstract:

This MRI Proposal focuses on the development of an advanced spectroscopic
ellipsometer for far-infrared and THz spectral ranges. This instrument will
utilize the advantages of the brightest manmade source of radiation at the
National Synchrotron Light Source (NSLS). Upon development, this ellipsometer
will be installed at the infrared beamline of NSLS and will become available to
the broad team of beamline Users. The proposed instrument will establish closer
collaboration between different University groups working in the field of THz
and far-infrared spectroscopy and will support interdisciplinary projects in
Condensed Matter Physics. The unique features of the proposed ellipsometer
include measurements and analysis of linear and circular polarization of light
reflected from the samples providing direct information about dielectric and
magnetic properties of the investigated materials. The proposed ellipsometer
will facilitate analysis of materials for the future nanoelectronics, such as
multiferroics, ultra-thin high-K dielectric films, magnetic nanostructured
oxides, superconducting films, and other strongly correlated materials. The
sample properties will be studied under the influence of an external magnetic
field, under uniaxial pressure, and in the temperature range between 4 and 350
K. The integration between fundamental research, new instrumentation
development, and the education of graduate and undergraduate students, as well
as a close collaboration between Universities and Brookhaven National Lab are
other important aspects of this proposal.