* 0821504
* MRI: Acquisition of a 400 MHz NMR Spectrometer to Enhance Faculty and Undergraduate Research and Chemical Education at the University of West Georgia
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Victoria Geisler, University of West Georgia
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2011
* USD 344,325.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation program (MRI), Megumi
Fujita and colleagues Victoria Geisler, Partha Ray, and Spencer Slattery from
the University of West Georgia will acquire a 400 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
(NMR) spectrometer with an inverse probe, auto-tuning unit, Dewar for low-
temperature control, anti-vibration system and sample changer. The requested
instrument will allow research in organic/inorganic areas and will also provide
enhanced capacity by allowing investigation of paramagnetic samples, a wide
range of nuclei, variable temperature operations, and water suppression of
aqueous samples. Specific areas of research that will be directly impacted by
the instrument include: (i) development of transition metal catalysts for
environmentally benign oxidation, (ii) the design of ligand-bridged bi- and tri-
metallic molecular switches with tunable metal-metal coupling, (iii) the
synthesis of pyrimidodiazipine-based folates as potential anti-tumor agents, and
(iv) inhibition of faulty signaling by Protein Kinase C via synthesis of
sphingosine analogues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools available to chemists for the
elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is used to identify unknown
substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and
to study the dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution. Access to
state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out
frontier research. The results from these NMR studies will have an impact in
synthetic organic/inorganic chemistry, biochemistry and the environment.