* 0821204
* MRI: Acquisition of a Laser Scanning Confocal Microscope to Advance Research and Research Training Opportunities at San Francisco State University
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Ursula Simonis, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Vicki Martin
* 08/31/2011
* USD 633,669.00

A grant has been awarded to San Francisco State University (SFSU) under the
supervision of Dr. Diana Chu to purchase a Laser Scanning Confocal Microscope
for the Cell and Molecular Imaging Center (CMIC). The instrument includes
efficient and sensitive spectral detectors to allow analysis of high-resolution,
3-dimensional reconstructions of fluorescently-labeled samples. This will
advance studies that uncover mechanisms of embryonic development using Xenopus
and chick, intracellular signaling in plants, and the design of cancer therapy
compounds. Multiple lasers and precise control over excitation and emission
wavelengths will enable the simultaneous use of a broad range of fluorophores
that are required to understand chromatin function in worms, gene expression in
ants and crabs, and chromosome positioning in mammals. On-site access will allow
live imaging to capture rapid chromosome movements in C. elegans and transient
cell signals in chick muscle development. The sensitivity, resolution, and speed
of this instrument will permit SFSU researchers to employ advanced imaging
techniques to address new research questions at the forefront of their
respective fields in developmental biology, chemistry and mathematics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research SFSU scholar-teachers conduct will be
integrated with closely mentored training using this system to enhance the
career development of SFSU students, 35% of whom are under-represented
minorities and 58% women. This diversity is reflected in the 11 investigators
included in this proposal, which includes 5 women, 3 Latinos, and 1 Native
American. Individual research projects and courses in fluorescence and confocal
microscopy will prepare students for success at PhD institutions and
biotechnology companies. Affordable access to this system will also enhance
collaborations between researchers at neighboring institutions and the diverse
faculty and students at SFSU.