* 0821385
* MRI:  Development of a Rubidium Spin Filter as a Source of Polarized Electrons
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Timothy Gay, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 08/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

A team of University of Nebraska-Lincoln physicists will develop a novel, "turn-
key" polarized electron beam source. The use of polarized electrons is
widespread in physics, from probing the spin-structure of nucleons and nuclei to
studies of magnetic domain structure and the spin-dependence of atomic
collisions. State-of-the-art polarized electron sources are based on GaAs
photocathode technology. While this source has significant advantages over other
available methods, it is very difficult to operate. In university settings, the
learning curve for reliable operation by a graduate student of these sources is
routinely measured in months or years, not weeks. At accelerator facilities such
as CEBAF or MAMI, dedicated staffs of technicians and Ph.D.s maintain and
operate these sources. The polarized electron source to be developed is based on
new technology: the optically-pumped rubidium spin filter. In this scheme,
unpolarized electrons diffuse under the action of an electric field through a
target of optically-pumped Rb and a buffer gas. As the electrons collide with
the spin-polarized Rb, they become polarized via exchange collisions. They are
then extracted and formed into a beam. A proof-of-principle experiment has
already demonstrated this technique. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Such a source is
expected make many current experiments easier, and it would also extend the
range and quality of the data they produce. More importantly, it may lead groups
with no current expertise in polarized electron technology to consider new types
of experiments. As an example, spin-polarized low-energy microscopy (SPLEEM), a
powerful technology for the study of magnetic surfaces, is currently used in
only a few labs around the world due to the operational complexity of the GaAs
sources it employs. A spin filter would make such technology much more
accessible to the general condensed matter community. Students and postdocs
working on the development of the Rb spin filter will receive training in state-
of-the-art optical instrumentation and technology. The key element of this
source is optical pumping, which is an enabling technology for other fields,
such as nuclear physics and medicine. The faculty involved with this project
have been very effective at integrating undergraduate students into their
research programs. They have made a particularly strong effort to hire and
mentor women and underrepresented minorities early in the academic "pipeline."
The results of this instrument development effort will be broadly disseminated
through refereed scientific publications, and the potential for
commercialization will be evaluated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;