* 0822659
* Synthetic Biology Workshop will be held April 3-4, 2008 at the Howard Hughes Medical Institute Janelia Farms campus in Ashburn, Virginia
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2008,03/31/2009
* Jef Boeke, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 03/31/2009
* USD 32,420.00

This award will support a two day invitation-only workshop titled "Toward a
Synthetic Biology: NSF- NASA Joint Workshop at HHMI Janelia Farm", to be held on
April 3 and 4, 2008 at the Howard Hughes Medical Institute Janelia Farms campus
in Virginia. Approximately 30 individuals will be invited to make short
presentations, followed by ample time for discussion. Each speaker will be asked
to present a vignette regarding what they believe to be a specific opportunity,
which then will be vetted through collegial discussion with the other workshop
participants. A series of broad questions permeating the new discipline of
Synthetic Biology will be identified and addressed. Such questions include: What
new scientific principles can be expected to emerge through the implementation
of synthetic biology? What types of practical, industrial, biomedical, or other
benefits might realistically accrue from the selective and targeted application
of this emerging technology? Because synthetic biology, like many new
technologies, has the potential for misuse, leaders from the bioethical
community also will be prominent participants at the workshop.

The broader impacts of the workshop are the deliverables that are anticipated.
The workshop will enumerate and clarify the theoretical and practical, short-
and long-term goals of synthetic biology research. Such goals could assist in
developing a strategic long-term view of funding initiatives for a variety of
government agencies. Since the emerging discipline Synthetic Biology is
interdisciplinary in nature, future development of the field is likely to
stimulate the interaction and cross disciplinary training between engineering,
the natural and biological sciences, and the public policy arena. Synthetic
Biology can potentially provide the foundation for an entire new industry; thus
crystallizing the focus of the field could have a major impact on economic
development. Finally, the outcomes of the meeting will be summarized in a white
paper produced by the session chairs and meeting organizers after the conclusion
of the meeting and provided to the NSF and NASA as a guide for incorporating the
emerging discipline into their respective portfolios of funded research.