* 0822573
* International Collaboration in Chemistry: Design, Synthesis and Application of New Materials for High Performance Polymer Solar Cells
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2008,04/30/2012
* Yang Yang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 04/30/2012
* USD 427,849.00

In this award, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program, Prof. Yang
Yang of the University of California-Los Angeles will carry out research that
aims to achieve high performance polymer solar cells. This will be achieved via
design and synthesis of novel n- and p-type organic materials with desired
properties to enhance the optical absorption, appropriate energy levels to
optimize the open circuit voltage; and high carrier mobility to enhance the
short circuit current. These new materials will be applied to two categories of
photovoltaic devices including (1) Polymer solar cells using new designed p-type
materials as electron donors and PCBM as the electron acceptor, (2) Non-
fullerene based polymer solar cell using new synthesized n-type materials as
electron acceptors and new designed or commercially available p-type materials
as electron donors. The intellectual merit of the research will be embodied in
both basic scientific research with important technological impacts. In this
international collaborative program with Prof. Yongfan Li in the Chinese Academy
of Sciences (CAS), Prof. Yang will collaborate with Li's group closely by weekly
Internet meetings, exchange students, and frequent visits by the PIs, resulting
in a productive situation for education and research. In addition to the broader
scientific impact in this proposed research, Prof. Yang aims to have six to
eight PhDs produced in this field. It is also our intention to include 6
undergraduate students to work with our PhD students to become familiar with the
field of organic electronics. Finally, two mini-symposiums will be held, one in
the second year (UCLA) and one in the third year (Beijing), to enhance the
intellectual exchange in the organic photovoltaic
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This international collaborative research project is
supported jointly by the NSF and the National Science Foundation of
China.&lt;br/&gt;