* 0822671
* Joint Quantum Institute:  Processing Quantum Coherence
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* Christopher Lobb, University of Maryland, College Park
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jean Allen
* 08/31/2014
* USD 14,700,000.00

This award to the Joint Quantum Institute (JQI) provides support to enable high-
risk, speculative experimental and theoretical activity in the control and use
of quantum coherence and entanglement - the basis of a second quantum
revolution. The combination of Information Theory with Quantum Mechanics has
created the new field of Quantum Information Science (QIS), which has the
potential to revolutionize how information is processed and stored. Quantum
coherence and quantum entanglement are universal to all quantum physical
systems, in much the same sense that the processing of information is
independent of the information's physical embodiment. Future success in
propagating quantum coherence, preparing complex quantum entangled states, and
managing decoherence will likely hinge upon the interconversion of quantum
coherence among various physical platforms, for example: solid-state photon
sources, individual ions, ultracold atomic gases in optical lattices, and
superconducting devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Physics Frontiers Center (PFC)
at JQI will facilitate the integration of Atomic, Molecular and Optical (AMO)
and Condensed Matter (CM) systems for the study of QIS through three major
activities: (1) Correlated and Topological Matter with Cold Atoms will create
and investigate topological and other novel forms of quantum-correlated matter
in cold atomic and molecular systems. Using probes of single-particle properties
and measures of quantum entanglement, this activity will provide insight into
the emergence and dynamics of exotic phases in real or artificial condensed-
matter systems. (2) Supercircuits at the AMO/CM Interface will bring together
AMO and CM techniques and perspectives to treat "supercircuits": superconducting
electrical circuits and mechanical circuits of atomic gas superfluids. A
combination of AMO/CM couplings and AMO/CM analogies will provide new insights
into supercircuits and superfluidity as well as develop new tools for quantum
information. (3) Quantum Optics with Semiconductors and Atoms will investigate
methods to transfer coherence and create entanglement between matter and light
and to produce complex many-body entanglement in semiconductors and atomic
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The emergence of QIS has propelled a convergence
of CM and AMO physics. Graduate students and post-doctoral associates supported
through the PFC will be trained at that interface. A the high school level, the
PFC will institute a program to enrich the teaching of physics and mathematics
in Prince George's County (PG) high schools, including offering paid summer
research internships to as many as six PG County Public School teachers. The
teachers will work alongside scientists in PFC projects and will meet weekly
with JQI fellows to discuss their summer experiences, current science topics,
and issues they confront in their classrooms. The PFC will have an informative,
educational, and topical web site, an active seminar series, a program of JQI
travelling lecturers, and an annual open house. The PFC will support, maintain,
and expand the Physics Lecture Demonstrations at UMD, and develop new channels
to disseminate findings to both the scientific and non-technical communities.