* 0822083
* Travel Support for MASS 2008 Conference; Atlanta, GA; September 29 to October 2, 2008
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Dharma Agrawal, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sajal Das
* 06/30/2009
* USD 10,000.00

International Conference on Mobile Ad-Hoc and Sensor Systems (MASS) is an
emerging conference in the area of mobile and sensor networks. MASS is fully
sponsored by IEEE Computer Society. This conference traditionally brings
together researchers in the broad field of wireless and sensor networks. Earlier
research on wireless networks and mobile computing has concentrated on single-
hop networks, where network nodes communicate directly with a fixed
infrastructure, such as cellular or satellite systems. However, multi-hop
communication needs to be supported in conferences, hospitals, battlefields,
rescue operations, and monitoring scenarios, where network nodes communicate via
other network nodes. More recently, wireless community networks (a. k. a.
wireless mesh networks) have been proposed as alternatives for providing
Internet access in new (business and residential) areas. This conference aims to
address multi-hop ad-hoc and sensor networks systems, covering topics ranging
from physical issues to the applications aspects.

Participation in conferences such as IEEE MASS is an extremely important part of
the graduate school experience, providing the opportunity to interact with peers
and more senior researchers, thus having the opportunity to be exposed to
leading edge work in the field of wireless and sensor networks. The travel
support will enable US-based graduate students to attend and present their
research results in this important IEEE conference. Since the travel support in
most of the NSF awards is quite limited to students (who are authors), this fund
will enable the awardees not to divert research funding for travel.

