* 0822819
* Collaborative Research: Campaigns in a New Media Age: How Candidates use the World Wide Web
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2010
* James Druckman, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2010
* USD 32,316.00

The advent and profusion of the Internet has transformed many aspects of life,
including politics. Scholars have made some headway in documenting how the
Internet affects things like citizen deliberation, news consumption, and
political participation. Less attention, however, has been given to how the
Internet affects the conduct of electoral campaigns, which serve as the
fundamental link between citizens and their representatives.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The investigators aim to fill this gap by continuing an ongoing study
of how United States congressional candidates use the Internet in their
campaigns. The investigators have constructed an extensive and theoretically-
grounded framework for collecting candidate website data that includes measures
of both political strategy and technology use. Over the last three campaigns
(2002, 2004, 2006), they have used this instrument to collect data from more
than 700 Senate and House candidates' websites. These data are further augmented
with detailed information about the candidates' backgrounds, the
districts/states, and the campaign. In 2008, the investigators will continue
their data collection while incorporating a number of new features into their
procedures. They will, for example, code sites multiple times over the course of
the campaign as well as having the sites archived for future reference.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will have broader impacts in that all of the
data will be made publicly-available and will constitute a valuable resource for
researchers and the public-at-large. Researchers will be better able to test
theories of campaign behavior using information from candidate websites which,
unlike other campaign communications (e.g., television ads), provide a
representative, unmediated, and holistic portrait of what campaigns are trying
to communicate. This project also serves the wider public interest by providing
empirical evidence that will help in evaluating the ever-increasing amount of
speculation and punditry concerning politics and the Internet. Moreover, this
project will provide detailed information that will help inform citizens about
the many ways in which congressional candidates go about seeking their
support.&lt;br/&gt;