* 0822950
* DDIG: Culture, Trauma, and Health: Social Suffering in Guatemala
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2008,11/30/2010
* Clarence Gravlee, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 11/30/2010
* USD 14,965.00

Graduate student Brian Tyler, under the supervision of Dr. Clarence C. Gravlee,
will explore how social and cultural factors shape the health effects of
traumatic experience in a former refugee community in Guatemala, a decade after
the formal cessation of civil war. The specific goals are (1) to integrate
existing research in anthropology and epidemiology on the embodiment of trauma;
(2) to explore inter- and intra-cultural variation in cultural models of
traumatic experience; and (3) to test whether cultural meaning mediates the
relationship between traumatic experience and health. The researcher will
conduct 12 months of field research using qualitative and quantitative methods.
In the first phase, he will use participant observation and two rounds of
ethnographic interviews to explore cultural models of traumatic experience. The
first set of interviews will elicit narratives about traumatic experiences and
culturally appropriate ways of coping with these experiences. The second set of
interviews will elicit structured ethnographic data to assess the level of
agreement and intra-cultural variation in cultural models of trauma and coping.
In the second phase of the project, the researcher will conduct a small
epidemiologic survey to test whether culturally-grounded measures of traumatic
experiences explain more variation in individual mental and biological health
outcomes than do conventional biomedical measures. The project is significant
for both theoretical and practical reasons. Theoretically, the project addresses
key limitations of previous biomedical and anthropological research on the
health consequences of traumatic experiences. One limitation of existing
biomedical research is that researchers typically focus on the individual and
neglect how sociocultural context shapes mental, biological, and behavioral
processes. By contrast, previous anthropological research, which typically seeks
to capture how experience is culturally constructed, has not systematically
connected sociocultural context back to individual health outcomes. This study
bridges the gap between biomedical and anthropological research by testing how
shared constructions of traumatic experience relate to individual well-being. In
practical terms, this study will contribute new knowledge about the social and
cultural influences on population health that may inform future interventions to
reduce the burden of poor health among victims of traumatic experiences.