* 0822980
* STTR  Phase II:  Next Generation Digital Data Recovery System
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Yuhong Yu, Digital Assembly LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 08/31/2010
* USD 559,525.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II research project
proposes to research and bring to market the next generation digital data
recovery techniques. The problem of restoring lost data from a damaged digital
device arises routinely in digital forensics and data recovery. In many advanced
cases of digital storage failure currently available file recovery techniques
based on disk storage information fail. During the Phase I of this project a
software framework was developed for file carving. Using this framework a
software library and a user interface to carve fragmented files from a disk
image, called Adroit was implemented. Adroit currently supports carving of JPEG
fles, structured documents (such as HTML, source code, plain-text fles, etc.),
and Microsoft office documents. In tests conducted, Adroit recovers more files
than tools currently available in the market. Furthermore, the validation and
user interface component built into Adroit excels at allowing the user to guide
the technology to recover more data with much less effort. The problem of
recovery of information from bits and pieces of digital data, in the absence of
storage meta-information to tie the pieces together, is equivalent to the
problem of having hundreds/thousands of jigsaw puzzles mixed into together. The
challenge of identifying if a piece of data belongs to a specific file or file
type is daunting. The preliminary research conducted in Phase I has demonstrated
the viability of developing domain specific techniques to identify the type of
data fragments and the use of file type specific algorithms to reconstruct
files.

The broad impact of this technology and its commercialization are: 1) it will
change the nature of the data recovery market and make possible unprecedented
recovery of data in a variety of situations; 2) it will save countless users the
agony of losing valuable data. Be it important data that is needed for a
company's survival or an emotionally valuable photograph of a proud parent or
child; 3) it will provide law enforcement officials with an increased ability to
gather evidence and prosecute their cases more effectively; 4) it will provide
counter-terrorism experts the ability to glean crucial evidence that they may
have otherwise missed.