* 0822697
* International Collaboration in Chemistry:  Directed synthesis of graphene nanoribbons
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2008,02/29/2012
* Clifford Henderson, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 02/29/2012
* USD 440,000.00

With the support of the Organic Dynamics Program in the Chemistry Division and
the Office of International Science and Engineering, Professors Laren Tolbert
and Clifford Henderson at the Georgia Institute of Technology will work with
collaborators Professors Klaus Mullen and Andreas Hirsch at the Max-Planck-
Institute for Polymer Research and the University of Erlangen, respectively, on
the synthesis and characterization of graphene nanoribbons. Graphene, a two-
dimensional planar allotrope of carbon, has attracted considerable excitement as
an electronic material beyond conventional silicon and compound semiconductors.
A new bottoms-up oligomer approach to the synthesis of graphene ribbons on solid
surfaces is proposed, free of structural defects, based upon oxidative aryl-aryl
coupling reactions and Diels-Alder chemistry. Graphene nanostructures will be
created directly through a novel "hot-tip nanolithography" technique, which uses
a resistive heater within the atomic probe tip to locally convert graphene
precursors into functional nanostructures on a surface. This technique will take
advantage of the tremendous success and extensive literature in synthesizing
free-standing graphitic molecules by a number of groups, including the
collaborators on this project, as well as the exciting new hot-tip
nanolithography methods pioneered by Professor Henderson and his collaborators.

This proposal will use the unique but complementary capabilities of the group of
four international investigators, each of whom supplies a critical piece of
overall technology, to bring to bear the power of systematic organic synthesis.
This potential breakthrough technology may open up a new and potentially
transformative approach to nanocircuit design and strengthen the ties among
several heretofore unlinked groups. The international collaboration will provide
a unique educational experience for Ph.D. students and create a new interactive
consortium. Moreover, Georgia Tech is one of the leading producers of graduates
in science and engineering from underrepresented groups, and the groups of
Henderson and Tolbert have an extensive record in the education of these
students. Such groups will be targeted in soliciting candidates for
participation in this project.