* 0822512
* Re-Sounding Voices: "Healing with Lament" in the Contemporary Finnish Lament Revival
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,01/31/2011
* James Wilce, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 01/31/2011
* USD 156,422.00

Dr. James Wilce, of Northern Arizona University, will undertake research on the
intentional reinvention of the practice of lament in Finland as a
psychotherapetic practice as well as nationalist revival movement. Laments are
spontaenous crying-songs, once found throughout the world. Cultural activists in
Finland are consciously seeking to revive lament through formal instruction and
have produced hundreds of new lament practioners. Revivalists argue that not
only will the return of lament preserve and protect Finnish culture, but also
that old ways of "healing with lament" are effective in modern society, even
though what was once a practice with magical power to help the dead is now
viewed as therapy for individuals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will
investigate the movement and the claims of its practioners through surveys,
interviews, administration of psychiatric scales, archival research, particpant
observation, videotaping, and analysis of lament performance. Research will be
carried out in rural and urban areas, with a focus on areas where lament is
being publicly discussed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Social scientists have observed
that modern industrial societies increasingly have valorized a wide range of
therapetic practices for individuals. This research will contribute to
understanding this phenomenon by careful exploration of the relation between
national culture, culture revival, adult language socialization, and mental
health. The research also will contribute to furthering international research
ties between an American university and a Finnish university, as well as to the
education of graduate students.