* 0822667
* 2008 NSF-MEXT Young Researchers Exchange Program
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2008,02/28/2009
* Chad Mirkin, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Glaucio H. Paulino
* 02/28/2009
* USD 78,200.00

2008 NSF-MEXT YOUNG RESEARCHERS EXCHANGE
PROGRAM&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This proposal seeks support for
an innovative exchange program for young scientists and engineers working in the
area of nanoscience and nanotechnology. Jointly funded by the United States
National Science Foundation (NSF) and the Japanese Ministry of Education,
Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (MEXT), this program will support
fifteen US researchers and thirteen Japanese researchers, by providing a venue
to develop professional relationships and explore new research frontiers in
nanotechnology. In March 2008, the team from Japan will visit seven US
institutions for tours of facilities. The trip will be enhanced by a symposium
at Northwestern University with speakers from both the US and Japanese teams. In
October 2008, the US team will visit five institutions in Japan for reciprocal
tours of facilities and a final symposium.&lt;br/&gt; The US and Japan recognize
the potential widespread impact of prospective applications resulting from the
pioneering research being conducted in the broad arenas of nanoscience and
nanotechnology. Additionally, both countries recognize that multi- and inter-
disciplinary teams facilitate research success and that constructive research
and training efforts in this emerging field must span international boundaries.
The proposed program addresses these needs by engaging researchers at a time in
their careers when professional connections are being forged. It lays a
foundation for lasting, productive future associations, and increases the
likelihood of successful global research collaborations and outcomes. Further
educational benefits are realized through the symposiums, which are open to
academic communities in both countries&lt;br/&gt;