* 0822518
* The 2007 FIND PIs Meeting
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2008,01/31/2009
* Andrew Bernat, Computing Research Association
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 01/31/2009
* USD 29,940.00

This award is to the Computer Research Association (CRA) to coordinate a
Principle Investigators' (PIs') meeting in November 2007 for the NSF FIND
(Future Internet Network Design). The PIs' meeting is a chance to bring
researchers together to learn about the work of other research projects and to
provide a forum to discuss new ideas and future directions. CRA supports the
important work of the FIND programs by acting as the facilitator and organizer
of the FIND Workshop for FIND researchers to foster information sharing,
community building and the generation of research directions for participants in
the FIND programs. CRA is in a unique position to provide support to the FIND
workshop because this organizational mission is to support research and advanced
education in computing and in this capacity brings CRA staff into regular
contact with many of the departments funded by FIND grants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CRA facilitates the workshop by providing staff support.
As the workshop organizer, CRA is responsible for a number of tasks both prior
to and during the workshop such as registering participants, organizing the
program, distributing handouts, and arranging and staffing the meeting site. The
2007 NSF Future Internet Network Design PI Meeting will be held November 27-28,
2007, at the Westin Hotel in Ballston. CRA will work with the FIND program staff
to assemble the program elements. The purpose of the FIND meetings that bring
together principal investigators and invited experts is to build a research
community to meet the challenges of creating new internet architectures that
meet the demands of the 21st century. This meeting focuses on preliminary ideas
on how to begin to build architectures by beginning with ones that address the
needs of particular classes of applications such as content based applications,
real-time applications with high need for security, and networks under times of
crises. In addition this meeting will bring together relevant researchers from
industry and from other countries to discuss potential collaborations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
presentations at the meeting will provide PIs with education on what other
research efforts are being funded through NSF FIND, as well as interactions with
other researchers and invited guests who do work related to FIND topics, and
will revitalize efforts to generate new and exciting research endeavors. CRA has
organized similar workshops for research community the last 7 years.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this
information attendees have the opportunity to associate themselves with other
researchers in their field and possibly form research collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;