* 0822967
* A Cross-Cultural Study of Integration to the Market and Indigenous Health in the Ecuadorian Amazon
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Flora Lu, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2012
* USD 259,562.00

Ecuador's Amazon houses extraordinary levels of plant and animal biodiversity,
plays a key role in global climate processes and carbon cycles, and supports the
physical and cultural survival of indigenous and traditional forest people.
However, because of petroleum exploitation, colonization, infrastructure
development, urbanization, and land clearing for agriculture and cattle
ranching, since 1990, Ecuador has had the highest rate of deforestation in the
entire Amazon Basin. These processes also have led indigenous populations to
become increasingly involved in the market economy, with profound economic,
health, and cultural implications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Flora Lu and Dr.
Mark V. Sorensen, both of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, will
undertake research on the health consequences of increasing integration to the
market among a cross-cultural sample of five native Amazonian populations of
northeastern Ecuador. The research will (1) investigate variation in health, and
(2) examine the mechanisms through which market integration influences health
through reciprocity networks, mobility, diet, and access to and use of medical
care. The project integrates methodologies from ecological, cultural, and
biological anthropology. Research methods to be employed include focus groups,
cultural domain analysis, dietary intake interviews, and time allocation
studies, as well as anthropometric assessment and biomarkers of current
infection, anemia, and vitamin A status. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
one of the few cross-cultural and interdisciplinary studies of indigenous
economics and health. It builds on long-term collaborative and comparative
research in the region and develops a model based on linking empirical data on
market integration with biocultural outcomes. Theoretically, this research
furthers understanding of the connections between cultural behavior,
socioeconomic context, and health, with implications for biocultural resilience,
human behavioral ecology, and life history theory. The broader impacts of this
project will be seen in its relevance to promotion of indigenous well-being,
direct public communication to policymakers, and promotion of education and
training of Ecuadorian and United States students.