* 0822672
* Political Turbulence and Supreme Court Politics in Democratizing Latin American Nations
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* C.Neal Tate, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Christian A. Meissner
* 08/31/2010
* USD 195,996.00

Visions of Latin American democratization assume that independent courts play
crucial roles in providing a rule of law for politics, government, and economic
relations in a liberal state. This project conducts exploratory research into
the roles of courts in Latin American nations that are continuing their efforts
to democratize, often under turbulent political and economic conditions that
challenge understandings that courts in democratic societies will have
institutional autonomy and be staffed by independent and impartial
judges.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;There has been real growth in the scholarly
literature by social scientists on courts and judges in Latin America's
wealthiest, most populous, and most studied nations, To complement this
research, this project focuses on other nations that are of interest as
contrasts to the more-studied group and on their own. It pays special attention
to Ecuador and Uruguay, as representatives of very different patterns of
national and judicial politics. As research access and data availability allow,
the project also focuses on court roles in other less-studied nations. To guide
the research, the P.I. will organize (using non-NSF resources) a conference of
scholars responsible for the most important recent research on Latin American
judiciaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In Ecuador and Uruguay, the project generates
data from personal interviews with political and legal elites, researches
documentary sources, gathers systematic data on judicial selection, recruitment
and careers, and creates a decisions database from the case records of the
supreme courts. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will enrich the descriptive
foundation and the basis for more sophisticated theorizing about courts and
judges and the interaction between turbulent politics, judicial institutions,
and the rule of law. The research supports training two junior scientists, who
will join the ranks of well-qualified investigators of Latin American judicial
politics. It creates a database on the courts of Ecuador and Uruguay to enrich
the resources available to the sociolegal community.