* 0822179
* Dynamic Nature of Algal Symbioses: Consequences for Host Fitness in an Intertidal Alga-Anemone Association.
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2008,03/31/2014
* Gisele Muller-Parker, Western Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Liliana Jaso-Friedmann
* 03/31/2014
* USD 469,539.00

Anthopleura elegantissima is the most abundant sea anemone in intertidal
communities of the northeast Pacific Ocean. This dominant invertebrate plays an
important role in the ecology of these systems. Because of the unique symbiotic
relationship A. elegantissima has with two distinct photosynthetic algae, it is
also important as a model to help us better understand symbiotic partnerships
and how they respond to a changing environment. The relative abundance of the
two algae in A. elegantissima populations along the outer coast of Washington
State will be assessed. This will provide a barometer for climate change; the
distributions and abundances of the two symbiont species are predicted to shift
if, for example, temperature or light levels change. This prediction is based on
the different physiological tolerances of the algal symbionts (one prefers
cooler, low-light environments while the other does better in warmer, high-light
environments). In laboratory studies, the relative value of each symbiont will
be tested by measuring their impact on growth and reproduction of the anemone
host. Anemones will be exposed to different levels of natural sunlight, and
sexual reproduction, asexual division, and body growth will be monitored. Health
of the symbionts will also be measured in terms of photosynthetic productivity
and division rate. Results of the work will provide valuable insights into the
ecology of an important and abundant intertidal species. Results will also be
important for developing testable hypotheses about how other long-lived species
with multiple symbiotic partners (e.g., lichens and corals) will be affected by
climate change-related shifts in symbiont complements. This project will engage
in symbiosis research 14 undergraduate and 2 graduate students, including
members of groups underrepresented in science. Elements of the project will be
incorporated into existing undergraduate courses and an elementary school
outreach program, and also disseminated through public lectures.