* 0822789
* Faculty Scholars Award: Demographic Methods and Below Replacement Fertility in Bulgaria
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2010
* Kristen Ghodsee, Bowdoin College
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 07/31/2010
* USD 31,624.00

This Faculty Scholar Award will allow Dr. Kristen Ghodsee of Bowdoin College,
Maine, to travel to the Max Planck Institute for Demographic Research in
Rostock, Germany. There she will receive training in quantitative demographic
methods and also collaborate with researchers who have been collecting
demographic data on the fertility decline in Bulgaria. In recent years, Bulgaria
has had such a low natural growth rate (-0.7 percent) that its population is
declining. Bulgaria's birth rate of 1.29 per woman is now far less than the rate
of 2.1 children per woman that is necessary to replace the current population.
Bulgaria's population stood at 7.9 million in 2001, but the United Nations now
projects that by 2050 this figure will shrink by 31 percent, which would be the
second steepest decline in all of Europe. More importantly, the United Nations
estimates that the percentage of the Bulgarian population over age 65 will
increase from 16 percent in 2000 to 30 percent in 2050, meaning that there will
be fewer people of working age to support an ever-increasing number of
pensioners. However, at the same time that Bulgaria as a whole has faced a
severe population decline, some minority groups have had higher-than-average
birth rates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Such ethnically marked differential fertility
has become increasingly common in small nations, often leading to political
unrest. Dr. Ghodsee's training in demography will allow her to investigate
systematically the nature of declining and differential fertility in Bulgaria,
as well as its economic, social, and political consequences. Bulgaria thus will
be a case study of a wider phenomenon. This award will support scientific
investigation of an issue of increasing social significance and it will
contribute to the professional development of a junior social scientist.