* 0822999
* SBIR Phase II:  BP 1 - Microwaveable Bioplastic Packaging
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2008,01/31/2012
* Laura Hollingsworth, PolyNew Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 01/31/2012
* USD 756,000.00

This Phase II SBIR research develops innovative nanotechnology to allow the use
of bioplastics for food packaging. Polylactic acid (PLA) is an environmentally
beneficial bioplastic made from renewable resources; however, the properties of
PLA are limited. This makes it unsuited for use in microwaveable food packaging.
In Phase I, university expertise resulting from earlier NSF funding was used to
formulate a bioplastic with suitable properties, including cost. In Phase II, a
viable manufacturing route towards food packing trays will be demonstrated at
the pilot plant level working in close collaboration with a large industrial
manufacturing partner.

The broader impacts of this Phase II SBIR research will be manifold. The new
bioplastics are quantitatively more environmentally benign that petroplastics.
Bioplastics are made form renewable resources and therefore simultaneously help
decrease dependence on foreign oil while providing environmental benefits. Using
a domestic biomass resource provides a competitive advantage against low labor
cost manufacturers like China helping to stem job losses in the plastics
industries. Presently, polystyrene is largely used for tray applications and
foamed with 3-5 weight percent hydrocarbons. PLA can be foamed with carbon
dioxide so the new technology has the additional benefit of displacing at least
1 million pounds per year of the pollutant volatile organic carbons (VOCs).