* 0822100
* Construction of High Resolution Physical Maps for Large Plant Genomes
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Shahryar Kianian, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 02/28/2013
* USD 3,116,121.00

&lt;br/&gt;PI: Shahryar F. Kianian (North Dakota State University -
Fargo)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPIs: Anne M. Denton (North Dakota State University
- Fargo), Oscar Riera-Lizarazu (Oregon State University), Ming-Cheng Luo
(University of California - Davis), and Yong Qiang Gu and Gerry Lazo (University
of California - Davis/USDA-ARS)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Complete sequencing of
large and complex genomes of many crop plants such as wheat and other cereals
provide a daunting challenge to the genomics community. In order to develop a
complete map and finished sequence of the 3.2 Gb human genome, an independent
high-resolution marker scaffold composed of 40,322 unique sequence tagged sites
was constructed using ninety whole-genome radiation hybrids (RHs). This RH-based
physical map was then used to order sequence information for more than 15,000
contigs to create the complete human genome map. The success of RH mapping in
humans has inspired its use in the construction of complete physical maps for
the majority of animal genomes prior to complete sequencing. This project will
use a simple yet elegant method of developing high-resolution RH physical maps
that will be used to anchor existing bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC)
contigs and clones for the 4.2 Gb D-genome of hexaploid wheat. This anchoring
and alignment will complement a larger effort by the international wheat
genomics community to develop a global physical map and whole-genome sequence of
this genome. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The tools, methods, and knowledge developed
in this project can be applied to other crop species and will facilitate the
construction of physical maps at a fraction of the cost of current methods. The
maps generated will provide easy access to genes of biological and agricultural
importance and will enable the development of new strategies to manipulate wheat
to better serve the needs of a growing world population. In addition, the
information developed in this project will allow for comparative analysis of
wheat with rice, maize and other grass genomes to address important biological
questions regarding gene organization and chromosome evolution. Access to the
tools, methods, and knowledge developed in this project will be available
through the project website (http://wheat.pw.usda.gov/RHmapping). Seed for all
lines will be available by contacting project personnel or through the USDA
National Small Grains Collection (Aberdeen, ID). In addition to the training of
project students and postdoctoral associates, the project will partner with
minority serving institutions including Mississippi Valley State University and
the University of Puerto Rico - Mayaguez to engage minority undergraduate
students with an eight-week summer research training program in molecular
genetics and bioinformatics.