* 0822114
* International Collaboration in Chemistry: Novel Instumentation for Modern Elemental Speciation Analysis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Gary Hieftje, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 08/31/2011
* USD 455,000.00

The Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program in the Division of Chemistry
supports work of Prof. Gary Hieftje and collaborator Steven Ray at Indiana
University for an International Collaboration in Chemistry involving Prof.
Volker Hoffmann at the Leibniz Institute for Solid State and Materials Research
and Prof. Wolfgang Buscher at Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität Münster to
devise and characterize a novel instrument that can determine metal-protein
characteristics directly from a gel electrophoresis (GE) separation. The
instrument employs a pulsed glow discharge, which volatilizes analytes by means
of argon-ion bombardment of the protein-containing spots on a GE plate. The
volatilized proteins and associated metals are lofted into an energetic region
within the glow, where they are atomized and emit light with wavelengths
characteristic of each element present. Analyzing the emitted light then enables
the identification of the identity and concentration of each element present,
and indeed of the proteins themselves. This capability is made more efficient
through use of an imaging spectrometer, which permits all the protein-containing
spots on a GE plate to be examined simultaneously. This international
collaborative research project is supported jointly by NSF and the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the
research come in several forms. Both graduate and undergraduate students
participate in instrument development and application. Special efforts are made
to include underrepresented groups. Because the proposed studies are inherently
multidisciplinary, collaboration with investigators in the biological sciences
is important to success. Similarly, students involved in the proposed studies
will have the opportunity to visit the laboratories of collaborators in Germany,
where they will be exposed to an international group of scientists and visitors.
The students will also attend international conferences where their findings
will be presented. Finally, because GE is a fundamental tool of biochemical
analysis, significant advances in detection technology will have wide-ranging
impact.