* 0822896
* SBIR Phase II:  Cilk++
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2010
* Matteo Frigo, Cilk Arts, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 07/31/2010
* USD 325,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II research project aims to
develop software technology to enable C++ programmers to easily program
multicore chips produced by the leading processor hardware vendors. Physical
limits are driving chipmakers to produce chips containing multiple processor
cores, but existing methods for programming multicore chips are error-prone and
difficult to use. The potential outcomes of this research project will enable
C++ programmers to easily parallelize applications to run on multicore
processors without restructuring their legacy applications. Cilk++ is a simple
set of language extensions to C++, which, together with a powerful runtime
platform, allows multicore processors to be programmed easily. Market research
shows that global variables pose a major barrier to parallelizing legacy code.
This research project seeks to understand the linguistics, implementation, and
applicability of hypervariables, a new construct designed to solve data-race
problems created by parallel accesses to global variables. The results of the
project include software implementations of hyper-variables in the context of
Cilk++, including modifications to the Cilk++ language, compiler, tools and
runtime platform. Additionally, the project will produce engineering design
documents, user documentation, and training and educational materials, and will
evaluate this technology in customer applications.

In 2008, the leading processor manufacturers will ship over 100 million
processors, with forecasts for over 75 percent of such processors be multicore.
On the software side, the C++ programming language has become the standard
langauge for developing applications that run on uniprocessor-based platforms.
Although C++ programmers number well over 3 million, most lack the specialized
training to use create correct, high-performing parallel programs. This research
project will allow ordinary developers to multicore-enable legacy code and bring
new multicore applications to market, thereby fulfilling the potential of
multicore technology to help users of computers and personal appliances be more
productive and to take advantage of the increased performance of computers in as
diverse areas as health care, shopping, scientific advancement, entertainment,
financial planning, and more. This research will advance the understanding of
how multicore computers can be programmed effectively. The lessons of Cilk++,
and the innovation of hypervariables in particular, will generalize to other
programming languages, such as Java, C#, and Fortran. The educational and
training materials will educate software engineers in parallel programming and
expose them generally to the subtle issues of concurrency.