* 0822748
* Neural Mechanisms of Short-Term Memory
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* John Jonides, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Alumit Ishai
* 08/31/2014
* USD 550,000.00

Complex tasks frequently require holding in mind several ideas at once. For
example, when performing mental addition we must juggle several numbers in mind
while applying operations to update those numbers. It is well-established that
there are distinct limits to the amount of information that can be held in mind
at any given time and that these limits have a close relationship to our
abilities to reason and to comprehend -- in short, to our intelligence. However,
the fundamental architecture of the short-term memory system responsible for
these capacity limits remains unclear. Recent psychological research suggests
that distinctions can be drawn between a single piece of information at the
forefront of the mind, other information that is being held in mind, but
currently not the focus of attention, and information that is not being held in
mind, but available in long-term memory. The goal of this project is to
understand the brain mechanisms responsible for representing these different
states of information. With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr.
John Jonides and colleagues at the University of Michigan will investigate the
architecture of short-term memory using functional magnetic resonance imaging.
The research will examine neural responses as human volunteers retain, retrieve,
and update information in the various putative states of short-term memory. In
addition to traditional measures that afford brain localization of function, the
research will employ analyses that examine functional networks of brain
activation, thus elucidating brain mechanisms by which short-term memory is
achieved. The work will also examine neural responses to different types of
information, such as verbal, spatial, and pictorial information and examine the
brain networks involved in subserving short-term memory of each
form.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since much of human intelligence depends on capacity
limits of short-term memory, understanding how the brain implements short-term
memory could have substantial impact on cognition as a whole. The understanding
furthered by this research may inform methods that aim to increase short-term
memory capacity and intelligence. This research project will also provide
comprehensive training functional magnetic resonance imaging techniques to
undergraduate and graduate students involved in the project. Findings from this
study will be disseminated widely through publications and a seminar.