* 0822978
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Genetic Studies of Sex Determination in the 20th Century
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Nam Ha, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2011
* USD 8,000.00

The PIs propose a study of the history of the genetics of sex determination, the
development of male and female organisms. It will focus on the first sixty years
of the twentieth century. For most of this period, sexual difference was
understood principally in terms of hormones rather than genes. The project will
focus instead on genetics and in doing so try to answer the following questions.
First, why were scientists interested in seeking a genetic basis for sex and how
have their concepts of sex changed over time? How did geneticists contend with
other biologists, particularly endocrinologists, in explaining the emergence of
sexual difference, and how did researchers try to reconcile the different
explanations for sexual difference? Second, were such disciplinary and
epistemological fault-lines consequential in broader understandings of sex and
sexuality? Did the existence of divergent perspectives destabilize biological
deterministic accounts of sexual difference? Third, how has knowledge about
genetic sex determination circulated between scientists and non-scientists, and
what were the social and political effects of such
knowledge?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Tracing the problem of sex
determination as it changed over time is a novel approach to telling the history
of genetics that will provide new insights into how the production of scientific
knowledge is not always dependent upon theory. Rather, scientists can rely upon
a common problem to organize a diverse array of materials, organisms, and
technologies and allow the problem itself to evolve with this array. The project
will contribute to a greater understanding of the constructions of scientific
disciplines and authority since it will examine the maneuvers made by
geneticists during a time when they gained increasing scientific legitimacy,
even though they did not enjoy complete hegemony over a problem on which their
discipline had been partially founded. Finally, the project will demonstrate the
dynamic relationship between studies of genetic sex determination and broader
concepts of sexual difference and biological determinism: hence, this study
necessarily integrates the histories of biology and of gender and
sexuality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This dissertation will address
an issue which continues to be pressing and relevant to modern society: the
circulation of knowledge between scientists and the public. Likewise, it will
provide insights into how a historically significant science funding program
operated, and how science and the institutions which fund scientific research
might organize themselves for mutual advantage. Further, the project will reveal
the history behind current understandings of genetic sexual difference, a topic
that is still hotly debated. Finally, the project will explore the place of
politics in science, and the social and ethical consequences of genetic
knowledge, especially when that knowledge is applied to the realms of law and
medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funds for this project were provided by a joint
venture of the BIO and SBE directorates known as "Impacts of Biology on
Society," which is administered via the STS program.