* 0822189
* Collaborative Research: R&D: Cyber-Enabled Design Research to Enhance Teachers' Critical Thinking Using a Major Video Collection on Children's Mathematical Reasoning
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2008,12/31/2012
* Sharon Derry, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Edith Gummer
* 12/31/2012
* USD 866,946.00

The four-year research and development project, among Rutgers Robert B. Davis
Institute for Learning (RBDIL), Rutgers University Libraries, and the University
of Wisconsin (Madison), is addressing the frontier challenge of supporting STEM
teachers' practice and development using cutting-edge cyber-enabled technology.
It is leveraging the Video Mosaic Collaboratory (VMC), an interactive digital
environment supporting video-based teacher professional development and related
research, being offered through the Rutgers University Libraries cyber
infrastructure, currently under development with NSF support. The VMC contains
indexed video cases from the video collection from RBDIL with accompanying data
on students' mathematical reasoning, an extensive collection based on NSF-
supported research spanning two decades.

A systematic design research study is being conducted utilizing RBDIL's video
collection to support designing and sharing adaptable mathematics teacher
professional development interventions and to generate testable hypotheses about
factors influencing intervention success. Diverse school and university sites in
New Jersey and Wisconsin are developing video-based instruction appropriate to
local contexts. A multi-site experimental design containing within-site
comparison groups is testing the hypothesis that well-designed interventions
based on teachers studying videos of children's thinking can increase their
performance on measures of expertise that include knowledge of mathematics,
children's mathematical reasoning, and related beliefs.

The project is demonstrating the use of cyber-enabled technologies to build and
share adaptable interventions for pre and in-service teacher growth that
effectively make use of major video collections and have high promise of success
at multiple sites. The cyber infrastructure being provided by the VMC and
significantly extended through this project is supporting development and
documentation of additional interventions for teacher professional development
using this video collection, as well as other videos that might be added in the
future by teacher educators or researchers, including those working in other
STEM domains.