* 0822724
* Collaborative Research Grant - Toxic Ignorance and the New Right-to-Know:The Implications of Biomonitoring for Regulatory Science
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Rachel Morello-Frosch, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2012
* USD 366,785.00

This project, funded by the Science, Technology, and Society Program, examines
how biomonitoring technology is reshaping stakeholder struggles over the future
of regulatory science that governments use to regulate chemicals. Specifically,
the researchers analyze the regulatory, policy, industry, scientific, and legal
implications of chemical biomonitoring research in the United States, due to its
proliferation in the government, academic and environmental health advocacy
arenas. "Civic epistemology" is used as the theoretical foundation for
elucidating how knowledge claims regarding biomonitoring are made and contested
through regulatory science processes and institutions. Research relies on data
generated by interviews, participant observations, media and document analysis,
and investigates the following themes: 1) the impacts of biomonitoring research
on regulatory science and knowledge production in environmental health policy;
2) whether and how stakeholders (communities, industry, scientists, consumers,
and environmental advocacy organizations) engage in debates about the potential
and pitfalls of biomonitoring that may re-shape the landscape of regulatory
decision-making and environmental policy; 3) whether and how industry has
responded to biomonitoring evidence to change its production, through strategies
such as product substitution and toxics use reduction; and 4) whether and how
biomonitoring may be changing the evidence and standards of proof used in toxic
tort cases.

Biomonitoring could potentially shift the scientific, regulatory, and public
gaze in ways that will transform knowledge production in the environmental
health sciences. This project aids sociology and science and technology studies
to examine how political context shapes civic epistemologies about the impact of
chemical body burdens on community environmental health. It also provides a
vehicle to explore knowledge production under conditions of novel uncertainty,
at the intersection of social movements, science, political economy, and public
policy. Civic epistemology theory remains underdeveloped, particularly in terms
of how regulatory science intersects with community movements, policy-making,
legal systems, and corporations. This project helps fill this gap by
investigating how biomonitoring debates can reshape these other domains.

This project is directly relevant to a broad range of critical policy and
regulatory issues, including public health screening and surveillance, community
right-to-know, toxic tort litigation, environmental justice claims, chemicals
policy, public oversight of industrial production, and regulatory science. The
interdisciplinarity of the research team will ensure that the project generates
new conceptual and empirical resources for improving regulatory science and
environmental health policy, specifically in chemical risk assessment, standard-
setting and the treatment of scientific uncertainty, and in the development of
new, deliberative, and publicly engaged regulatory regimes and forms of
scientific knowledge production.