* 0822744
* STTR Phase II:  Splintered Topologically Close-Packed (TCP) Offload Engine for Grid Computing and Bandwith-Delay Product (BWDP)
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2008,01/31/2011
* James Awrach, SeaFire Micros, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 01/31/2011
* USD 585,308.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II research project
addresses the challenges of networks with extreme bandwidth delay products. Bulk
data transfer over such networks used by national research laboratories and
aerospace companies need to be provided with the endpoint resources required to
ensure high performance in a cost effective manner. The outcomes of this project
attempts to provide compatibility with present and future versions of GridFTP.
The project addresses these challenges through the use of a novel offload
engine. During the Phase I project, the feasibility of deriving and simulating
the offload engine architecture, firmware, and creation of intellectual property
(IP) for low-cost, high-performance field programmable gate array (FPGA)
subsystems was completed.

Successful results from this research will significantly advance the state of
the art for off-load engines used in grid computing. Immediate applications
include accommodating the e-Science community's need for scalable 10-100 Gbps
off-load engines, while supporting present and future versions of GridFTP. Other
applications include the use of our ultra high-speed offload engines for grid
and cluster computing, utilizing our open source firmware. The FPGA code
resulting from this project has the potential to be used as intellectual
property that could then be marketed to off-load engine manufacturers. These IP
cores would accrue cost-effective savings for existing engine firms and would
accelerate products to the market.