* 0822914
* STTR Phase II:  Metal Oxide Nanofibers for Filter and Catalyst Support Structures
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2010
* Gary Carlson, MemPro Ceramics Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2010
* USD 500,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II project seeks to take
advantage of unique performance properties of ceramic nanofiber supported
catalysts for applications in automotive, power generation, and chemical process
industries. The efficiency of ceramic nanofiber composite materials to capture
nano-sized particulates (inorganic and soot) is of particular interest to the
automotive industry. Also, an opportunity to field test a composite catalyzed
nanofiber material in a power generation facility to remove low-levels of NOx
has been developed through commercialization activities within the power
generation industry. This is a significant opportunity that will require the
fabrication of a ceramic nanofiber/polymeric composite media and a field test
apparatus. Successful completion of this opportunity will provide the background
necessary to develop a first-generation ceramic nanofiber product.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will provide the initial
detailed examination of catalyst deactivation mechanisms using nanofiber support
structures as well as providing a critical investigation of nano-sized
particulate capture by nanofiber composite materials. This baseline information
is beneficial to define and support future investigations of ceramic nanofiber
materials. It is anticipated that catalyzed ceramic nanofiber/microfiber media
will maximize the efficient use of catalytic materials (precious metals),
enhance destruction of greenhouse gases (NOx and CO) from combustion processes,
and capture harmful particulates from various gas process streams. These
characteristics will help the power generation industry (fossil fuel burning),
the motor vehicle, and the chemical industry meet current and future emission
reduction standards while simultaneously benefiting the environment. Also as
globalization leads to added pressures on U.S. companies to produce products and
materials at a lower cost to remain competitive, reduction in the overall cost
of energy production and transportation costs will improve U.S. competitiveness.