* 0822959
* SBIR Phase II:  Permanent Attachment of Antimicrobial Peptides to Central Venous Catheters.
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Christopher Loose, Semprus Bioscience Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2012
* USD 999,923.00

This SBIR Phase II project continues SteriCoat's development of a permanent
antimicrobial coating for use on central venous catheters. Current leaching
antimicrobial technology does not possess the duration of efficacy required to
protect these devices over the lifetime of implantation, especially for
peripherally inserted central lines (PICCs). Research during this Phase II
project will focus on the integration of proprietary polymer technology with
tethered antimicrobial peptide (AmP) technology developed in Phase I to maximize
the efficacy and bioavailability of the immobilized AmPs in vivo. Work will also
be performed to ensure the manufacturability of SteriCoat's coating technology,
including prototype production. After transitioning this formulation to the
intra- and extraluminal surfaces of a polyurethane tube, efficacy and
biocompatibility will be demonstrated both in vitro and in vivo. By the end of
this Phase II project, SteriCoat will have an antimicrobial CVC model with
efficacy proven in vivo using the models designed by industry thought leaders
and will be ready for scale-up and manufacturing.

This SBIR Phase II project addresses the hospital infections afflicting 1.7
million patients and killing 99,000 in the US annually, the majority of which
are associated with medical devices. Existing slow-release antimicrobial
coatings are insufficient in addressing device infection. They have a limited
lifespan and concerns over drug resistance and toxicity because the drug gets
distributed in the bloodstream. SteriCoat is developing a permanent coating
using antimicrobial peptides (AmPs) to prevent bacterial colonization of central
venous catheters (CVCs), a $350M market. The goal of this project is to deliver
a polyurethane-based antimicrobial CVC model which incorporates a surface
functionalization with AmPs and to test the ability of this approach in
resisting bacterial colonization. By the end of this phase II project, SteriCoat
will have verified in vivo efficacy of prototype catheters and be positioned to
begin GLP studies for FDA product approval. In addition, achievement of the
technical objectives of this Phase II will open up avenues for additional
investigation in the field of bioactive ligand presentation as the developed
technology could lend to the efficacy of many biomaterial applications in
addition to antimicrobials.