* 0822008
* The roles of chemotaxis-like signal transduction systems in the differentiation and behavior of motile filaments of the cyanobacterium Nostoc punctiforme
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* John Meeks, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Amy Litt
* 08/31/2013
* USD 449,999.00

The price of motility in cyanobacteria of the genus Nostoc is the transient
differentiation of non-growing filaments called hormogonia. Hormogonia function
as active dispersal units, allowing the organisms to exploit a favorable, or
escape an inhospitable, habitat. Hormogonia of Nostoc punctiforme are
phototactic, as well as chemotactic to exudates of plant partners, with which N.
punctiforme forms a nitrogen-fixing symbiotic association. One long-term
research goal is to manipulate hormogonium differentiation and behavior in
experiments to establish new nitrogen-fixing associations with crop plants.

The genome of N. punctiforme contains five loci of genes that encode proteins of
chemotaxis-like signal transduction complexes. Among these five loci, one locus
is essential for the differentiation of hormogonia and another for phototaxis.
The involvement of a chemotaxis-like signal transduction system in regulation of
cellular differentiation has precedence, but is rare. A variety of experimental
approaches will be used to characterize the chemotaxis-like developmental
regulation locus (Che2) and the phototaxis locus (Che4), including mutational
analysis to determine the functional requirement for the gene products in each
locus, DNA microarrays to identify genes under control of the Che2 locus, and
bacterial two hybrid assays and mass spectrometric analyses to identy protein-
protein associations in assembly of the signal transduction complexes. The
results of these collective experiments will provide information on how the
signal transduction complexes are differently organized and localized in cells,
and how they may have evolved into different functional roles, especially in the
regulation of development.

The emerging database will be essential for subsequent manipulation of these
symbiotic cyanobacteria for agricultural or bioenergy applications. The project
will develop experimental tools and materials that will be immediately available
to the scientific community. A graduate student and visiting student will be
trained in functional genomics. Two to three undergraduate students will trained
each year in microbial genomics, genetics and biochemistry by their
participation in short-term, well-defined, undergraduate research projects.