* 0822587
* International Collaboration in Chemistry: Mechanism of operation of the BLUF domain: blue light sensitive biosensors
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Peter Tonge, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 08/31/2012
* USD 345,000.00

The Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program at NSF Division of Chemistry will
support the international collaborative research project of Prof. Peter Tonge of
State University of New York at Stony Brook and Prof. Stephen Meech of the
University of East Anglia. Profs. Tonge and Meech and their students will focus
on AppA, a photoreceptor from the photosynthetic bacterium Rhodobacter
sphaeroides which uses a Blue Light Using Flavin adenine dinucleotide (BLUF)
domain to respond to light. Their hypothesis is that the primary event in the
photoactivation of AppA is an alteration in the electronic structure of the
flavin isoalloxazine ring in the excited state, which causes a rearrangement in
hydrogen bonding interactions between protein and chromophore on the picosecond
time scale. Ultrafast time resolved fluorescence (UTRF) will be used to reveal
excited state dynamics, while femtosecond to millisecond time resolved
vibrational spectroscopy (TRIR) will be used to observe the influence of
photoexcitation on the host matrix structure. Data interpretation will utilize
isotopic substitution and polarization measurements, coupled with the
incorporation of unnatural amino acids. The resulting detailed structure-
dynamics relationship will yield the first complete insight into the microscopic
mechanism of photoreceptor operation. The study could lead to the development of
a new generation of protein-based biosensors. The study will provide excellent
training opportunities to US and UK students who will gain invaluable
international research experience through extended research stays in the
collaborators' laboratories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This international
collaborative research project is supported jointly by NSF and the Engineering
and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) in the United Kingdom. The study
is also supported by the Office of International Science and Engineering (OISE)
at NSF. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;