* 0822523
* International Collaboration in Chemistry: Redox Control of Chemical Bond Forming Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* David Vicic, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 08/31/2011
* USD 284,000.00

This international award by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic
Chemistry Program and the Office of International Science and Engineering (OISE)
at NSF and the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) in Germany supports
Professor David A. Vicic of the University of Hawaii for the development of new
methods of chemical bond formation using one-electron redox processes. The
researchers will rationally manipulate alkyl-alkyl cross coupling reactions so
that new, saturated carbon-carbon bonds can be formed. The
spectroelectrochemical analyses of terpyridine-based nickel complexes are being
studied under catalytically-relevant conditions and preparative-scale,
electrocatalytic cross-coupling reactions will be explored. Professor Axel Klein
of the University of Cologne in Germany will collaborate on electron
paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy measurements and
spectroelectrochemical studies. U.S. graduate students will be trained in his
laboratories. The introduction of a new EPR spectrometer (co-funded by the
University of Hawaii) will be unique in the state and will greatly enhance the
infrastructure of this geographically-remote location. The alkyl-alkyl cross
coupling reactions represent high risk / high reward chemistry that may play
crucial roles in synthesis of saturated carbon-carbon bonds, important
feedstocks for the pharmaceutical and chemical industries.