* 0822957
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Evolution &amp; Phylogeny of Titanosauria
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2008,02/28/2011
* Kristina Curry Rogers, Macalester College
* Continuing Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 02/28/2011
* USD 138,836.00

PUBLIC ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt; Gigantic, long-necked, plant-eating sauropod
dinosaurs flourished in terrestrial ecosystems for 150 million years during an
episode of dramatic continental fragmentation. Titanosauria is the most diverse
(40+ species), long-lived, and widely distributed sauropod lineage, but its
evolutionary relationships remain poorly understood. This study will survey the
global diversity of titanosaur anatomy and bone microstructure to resolve
questions of titanosaur evolution and life history, and development. Anatomical
data we collect will allow construction of the first well-supported hypothesis
of titanosaur genealogy. Bone microstructural data will allow examination of
growth rates and developmental traits across a diverse range of titanosaurs,
which include gigantic and dwarf forms. Synthesis of these data will allow
assessment of body size evolution and life history traits within Titanosauria,
which will be central to future examinations of the evolution of titanosaur
feeding specializations, locomotion, and paleobiogeography. &lt;br/&gt; The
global nature of this project compels collaboration with international
colleagues and students. Published papers and online resources will allow
international researchers to access our data and results. Training undergraduate
and graduate students is a priority, and funding will support graduate and
undergraduate students for the duration of the project. The PIs are committed to
public dissemination of research results via museum exhibits, public-friendly
websites, and lectures. &lt;br/&gt;