* 0822723
* STTR Phase II:  Magnetohydrodynamic-based Circular Liquid Chromatography
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Champak Das, SFC Fluidics, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 07/31/2011
* USD 573,136.00

This STTR Phase II research project develops a circular chemical separation
system on a small (~1 inch x 1 inch) chip. This chip and the associated
instrument will separate complex mixtures for biological, chemical, medical, and
industrial applications. Based on magnetohydrodynamic (MHD)-driven liquid flow,
liquid chromatographic (LC) separations will be accomplished in a circular,
closed-loop format. Typically, LC separations require a sample containing
multiple analytes to flow in a single direction along a fixed-length, linear
column with detection performed after the analytes elute from the column. In the
circular LC system, miniaturization is possible because samples are instead
circulated around a closed-loop chromatographic column thus, the effective
column length is not limited to small chip dimensions. Very few methods can
provide the mobile-phase pumping in a closed-loop that is required for practical
application of circular LC. The MHD-based circular LC system envisioned will be
small, portable, and designed for laboratory as well as field use. The sealed LC
chip will contain the stationary phase, mobile phase, and all in situ MHD pumps
needed to conduct the separation of complex samples. This prototype LC
instrument will be designed and fabricated with a built-in fluorescence detector
for monitoring analyte separation directly on the chromatographic
column.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this research are
highlighted by the ability of the proposed circular separation system to
miniaturize a valuable analytical tool, liquid chromatography (LC). Samples of
interest include human blood serum, saliva, and urine, with component analytes
of interest that are equally diverse (e.g. proteins, pharmaceuticals, and small
molecular biomarkers). Many analytes in these complex mixtures have similar
properties and cannot be separated and analyzed using a very short
chromatographic column, which has limited the miniaturization of this important
analytical tool. This limitation is overcome using circular LC, where the
effective column length is not limited by the small chip sizes that are
essential for portable LC instrumentation. SFC Fluidics' core technology makes
possible the miniaturized, closed-loop pumping required for implementation. This
method has broad implications for the portable LC systems for field deployment
or point-of-care applications. The market opportunity is expected to be
significant, particularly when considering that applicability extends beyond the
traditional instrumentation market into the worldwide point-of-care diagnostics
market.