* 0822296
* R & D: Nurturing Multiplicative Reasoning in Students with Learning Disabilities in a Computerized Conceptual-Modeling Environmenty (NMRSD-CCME)
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2015
* Ron Tzur, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen King
* 07/31/2015
* USD 2,969,894.00

Nurturing Multiplicative Reasoning in Students with Learning Disabilities in a
Computerized Conceptual-Modeling Environment (NMRSD-CCME) is a five-year
research and development project that will augment teaching practice by
providing the tools to analyze student conceptions and enact best-practice on an
individual, student-needs basis. The purpose of this project is to: (a) create a
research-based model of how students with learning disabilities (SLDs) develop
multiplicative reasoning via reform-oriented pedagogy, (b) convert the model
into a computer system that dynamically models every student's evolving
conceptions and recommends tasks to promote her/his advancement to higher level,
standard-based multiplicative structures and operations, and (c) study how this
computerized teaching tool impacts student outcomes, including diminishing the
gap between SLDs and their normal achieving peers (NAPs). The PIs draw upon
universal design and three research-based frameworks: machine (or statistical)
learning from computer sciences, generalization of word-problem underlying
structures (story-grammar) from special education, and a constructivist view of
learning from mathematics education. The latter consists of recognizing teaching
can promote transformation of students' available mathematical conceptions into
intended ones via tasks that orient student reflection on activity-effect
relationship and content-specific constructs informed by established research.

The development is done in three stages. The first is a teaching experiment to
determine learning trajectories for multiplicative reasoning with SLDs. The
second is the development of a computerized modeling system to support students'
construction of multiplicative reasoning (includes alpha, beta and pilot
testing). The final stage is the evaluation of the system by comparing the
learning process and outcomes of 15 SLD students with 15 non-SLD to judge the
effect of the system on closing the achievement gap. In addition, the effect of
the system on SLDs' performance will be compared to the effect of traditional
teacher-delivered instruction on SLD.

The products include software that is flexible and adaptive to the learner and
protocols for teachers. The project also tests the viability of dynamic
recommendation algorithms, which is likely to be important in other domains
beyond multiplicative reasoning and with other students who have difficulties
learning mathematics concepts.