* 0822257
* A Novel Galectin Type as a Surface Receptor for Intracellular Parasites
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Gerardo Vasta, University of Maryland Biotechnology Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Beth Saffo
* 07/31/2011
* USD 265,980.00

The oyster is endowed with efficient immune mechanisms that are successful in
fighting most infectious diseases. The protozoan parasite Perkinsus marinus,
however, causes Dermo disease in oysters and is responsible for the catastrophic
decline of oyster populations and damage to the estuarine ecosystem along the
Atlantic and Gulf coasts of North America. In invertebrate and vertebrate
species, recognition of microbial pathogens is achieved in part by carbohydrate-
binding proteins named lectins. The recent discovery of a lectin (CvGal) that
binds to pathogenic bacteria, microalgae, and the parasite P. marinus, has led
to the hypothesis that CvGal represent a mechanism for recognition of pathogens
and algal food, and that this defense and feeding mechanism is subverted by P.
marinus to gain entry into the host. This project will test this hypothesis by
characterizing CvGal and other related proteins in the oyster and investigating
the biological role(s) of CvGal within the context of immune defense, feeding,
and host-parasite interactions. By thoroughly investigating CvGal and other
galectins in the oyster, novel insight will be gained into yet undescribed
biological functions of lectins in immune and feeding functions, and a more
thorough understanding of entry mechanisms of intracellular parasites of medical
and veterinary relevance. Given the regional relevance of oyster disease, this
project may contribute to novel intervention strategies to restore natural and
farmed oyster populations. The oyster is also well suited for classroom
integration of fundamental scientific principles of immune recognition and host-
parasite biology. This project will involve the participation of undergraduates
and high school students and teachers mostly from underrepresented minorities
from the Baltimore area, both as interns at the bench and in the classroom,
through partnerships with SciTech, an affiliated educational program located at
the Center of Marine Biotechnology, and training programs such as ExPERT (NSF),
Chesapeake Teacher Research Fellowship (NOAA), Living Classrooms, Ingenuity,
Baltimore Community College, and mentorship programs from Howard and Baltimore
Counties.