* 0822770
* SBIR Phase II:  Single Crystal Silicon Flexible Display Backplane
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2010
* Etienne Menard, SEMPRIUS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 07/31/2010
* USD 475,557.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project focuses on
fabrication of flexible display backplanes using transfer printed electronics.
The display industry has been successful at fabricating amorphous silicon (a-Si)
thin film transistor (TFT) backplanes on rigid glass. However, a-Si TFT
manufacturing does not easily translate to flexible substrates due to handling
issues and the high temperature process of a-Si deposition. In transfer
printing, a novel elastomeric stamp is used to pick-up specially designed
circuits from the parent wafer and transfers the circuits to the desired target
substrate. The parent wafer is fabricated using a standard silicon IC foundry
and the single crystal silicon transistors have much better performance than the
a-Si counterparts. The SBIR Phase I project demonstrated chip transfer printing
process yields of 99.9% and chip placement accuracies better than +/- 5 ìm.
Phase II objectives include design, fabrication and characterization of flexible
backplane prototypes and further optimization of transfer printing by increasing
throughput and demonstrating rework methods. The anticipated result is a
manufacturing approach to flexible electronics that is cost competitive, low
temperature and well suited to handle flexible substrates.

The competitive advantage of the proposed approach is the fact that all the
demanding fabrication process steps necessary to fabricate high performance
electronic systems are performed on the ?mother? substrate and not on the final
plastic substrate. If successful the inherent mechanical or chemical
instabilities of the receiving plastic substrate do not limit the choice of
semiconductor manufacturing processes for fabricating devices. The ability to
manufacture flexible display backplanes to the demanding standards of the
display industry will open up a broad market of opportunity in flexible
electronics far beyond displays, including configurable X-ray sensors, RFID
tags, and wearable electronics and biosensors. In displays, backplanes using the
proposed technology will be utilized by all major display manufacturers and many
specialty manufacturers.