* 0822913
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Cholera and Quacks: The Struggle Over 19th-Century Medical Knowledge
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2010
* Owen Whooley, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Kelly A. Joyce
* 07/31/2010
* USD 5,335.00

This Science, Technology &amp; Society Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement Grant seeks to explore the scientific development of cholera and its
relationship to the professionalization of medicine in the nineteenth century
United States. During this period, orthodox medicine experienced a profound
shift in professional authority. Although alternative medical groups
successfully challenged orthodoxy in a number of institutions during the
mid-1800s, at the turn of the century, orthodox physicians redefined their
expertise under bacteriology, creating a powerful, autonomous profession. This
project seeks to answer how orthodox physicians were able to consolidate their
professional authority, which had been lost in the early 1800s, under the
bacteriological paradigm. The dissertation project examines cholera as a case
study of an "epistemic contest" where collective actors with competing paradigms
struggle for recognition in various institutions. More than knowledge on
cholera, at stake in this epistemic contest was the definition scientific
medicine (i.e. how and by whom legitimate medical knowledge should be attained).
Through a study of archival records from relevant institutions and medical
groups, the project traces shifting conceptions of cholera in order to: 1)
reconstruct the evolution of the epistemic contest, 2) elucidate the
epistemologies propagated by different medical sects, and 3) examine the
efficacy of the cultural strategies used to promote these epistemic positions.
It hypothesizes that orthodox medicine was defeated in public institutions
because the transparent epistemologies of alternative medical sects resonated
better with these public institutions. Regulars only achieved control over the
definition of cholera by insulating the debate from public scrutiny, convincing
a small group of elites (i.e. the Rockefeller and Carnegie Foundations) to
support their professional project outside of government institutions. This
research challenges traditional diffusion models of knowledge by systematically
investigating the role of extra-scientific polemics. By introducing the concept
of the epistemic contest, this research explores how scientific knowledge of
disease is obtained, verified, and legitimated within public institutions.