* 0822617
* The Neural Basis of Processing Discourse Reference
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2014
* Amit Almor, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 02/28/2014
* USD 299,236.00

The goal of this research is to understand how different referential forms are
processed in the brain. Most instances of real-life language use involve
discourses in which several sentences or utterances are coherently linked
through the use of repeated references. Repeated references can be made with
different forms. For example, a person mentioned early in discourse (the
referent) can be later referred to by a proper name (e.g., Bill), a specific
definite description (e.g., the waiter), a less specific definite description
(e.g., the man), or a pronoun (e.g., he). The form of referential expressions
has played a key role in theories of reference, but not much is known about the
underlying brain mechanisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will
test the theoretical claim that the choice and processing of referential form
reflect general memory processes that are involved in the representation of
multiple referents and that these processes are prone to interference,
especially when the referents are salient. According to this "interference
view", high semantic overlap between the referential expression and the
representation of the referent in memory results in more interference. General
referential forms such as pronouns and general definite descriptions, which
represent conditions of low semantic overlap, reduce this interference and these
expressions are preferred when referents could be easily identified. At the
neural level, the interference view predicts that semantic overlap between the
representations of the referential expression and the referent can increase
brain activation both in areas that are involved in the semantic representation
of referents (e.g., regions in the temporal lobe for many types of object
referents) and in areas that are known to support the manipulation and
integration of multiple representations (e.g., areas around the intra parietal
sulcus (IPS)). Self paced reading and matching functional MRI (fMRI) experiments
will test the predictions of this view by examining the relation between brain
activation and behavioral aspects of processing definite description references.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The application of converging behavioral and fMRI
methodologies is unique in discourse research and holds promise for bridging
functional accounts of discourse processes with their possible brain basis.
Tying referential processing to underlying brain mechanisms would represent a
major leap forward in terms of the scientific understanding of these issues.
Moreover, explaining linguistic phenomena on the basis of non language brain
mechanisms is a potentially transformative research in that it could disrupt the
well accepted theoretical perspective that reference processing is driven by
language "rules" or arbitrary conventions.