* 0822196
* Collaborative Research:  Development and Application of Proteomics-based Research in Archaeological Residue Analysis
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2008,09/30/2010
* Barney Venables, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2010
* USD 60,263.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Steve Wolverton and an
interdisciplinary team of colleagues will conduct a year of analytical chemistry
research into removing trace-level food residues from archaeological pottery.
The team brings together specialists in archaeology, protein chemistry, plant-
lipid chemistry, and environmental biology to tackle what has been a sizeable
hurdle in removing protein residues from archaeological cooking vessel
fragments. Unlike other classes of food resides (e.g., fats), proteins bind very
tightly to clay during cooking. This tight binding structure is, however, a
blessing in disguise because it likely protects protein fragments from
deterioration over time in archaeological sites. The challenge has been breaking
those tight bonds between minerals in pottery clays and residues. Protein
residues potentially provide a distinct scientific advantage to archaeologists
over study of other food residues; proteins can be identified to species and
tissue when they are preserved and removed from pottery (other residues offer
only coarse resolution). Importantly, addressing this methodological challenge
will provide a new basis for asking wide ranging questions in archaeology both
in terms of studying prehistoric subsistence (what people ate) and pottery
function (what people used their pottery for).

There are several important implications of this research. An ability to extract
protein residues from pottery potentially enables researchers to study past
subsistence and pottery function using a broader archaeological record. In areas
where faunal (animal bones) and botanical (seeds, nuts, pollen) remains are
poorly preserved?a common problem in archaeology?pottery residues might provide
a unique source of information on past diet and artifact function. The technique
can be applied to questions of agricultural origins, which is often associated
with development of pottery in many parts of the world.

This research will be incorporated into a variety of educational settings, which
includes exposure of under-represented cultural groups to this research. At the
graduate level, archaeology and biochemistry students are integral components of
this research.. The research will be disseminated to the general public through
several avenues: 1) UNT?s Elm Fork Education Center, a science education program
located on campus that reaches over 20,000 K-8 students each year; 2) Crow
Canyon Archaeological Center, a nonprofit organization in Cortez, Colorado with
archaeological education programs for the public, in particular students and
educators; and 3) invited public lectures at schools, educational events, and
local archaeological societies by members of the research team.

