* 0822922
* RUI: High-resolution sediment records of late Holocene paleohydrology from the summer and winter rainfall regions of South Africa.
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Jay Stager, Paul Smith's College of Arts and Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 08/31/2013
* USD 334,246.00

Paleoclimatic research in Africa has relied heavily upon analysis of lake
sediment cores and has provided abundant evidence of dramatic climate
fluctuations during the late Quaternary. However, much of that work has suffered
from several important limitations, including (1) coarse temporal resolution of
time series, (2) gaps due to discontinuous sedimentation or loss of soft upper
sediments during coring, (3) complications in sediment dating, (4) a scarcity of
continuous lake records from the southern hemisphere, and (5) difficulty in
teasing out the relative contributions of rainfall and temperature to inferred
environmental changes. These limitations have reduced the clarity of climate
reconstructions and hindered the development of robust regional and global-scale
models of rainfall dynamics, especially for the late Holocene.

Under this RUI grant, the PI and undergraduate students analyze diatoms (algae
with glassy shells) and geochemical records in lake sediment cores representing
the last 2000 years that were recently collected in South Africa in
collaboration with American and African students and colleagues. These cores
represent key sites in the southern summer and winter rainfall regions of the
continent and they contain clear evidence of paleohydrological fluctuations. The
central goal is to clarify the nature and causes of African rainfall variability
during the late Holocene.

Intellectual merit: The fine temporal resolution of these analyses, conducted at
annual to decadal increments and dated with 14C, 210Pb, 137Cs, and pollen
indicators is unusually high for African cores. These detailed time series help
to refine the nature and timing of key paleoclimate events in southern Africa in
relation to records from equatorial and polar latitudes. They also provide
continuous paleohydrological records leading into modern times, and help to
clarify the interpretations of pollen- and isotope-based studies in the region.
These findings are used to evaluate models of rainy season responses to past
global warmings and coolings, of African-Antarctic teleconnections, and of solar
influences on African rainfall during the last two millennia. Transfer functions
are used to convert diatom data into the longest and most detailed
reconstructions of Holocene water chemistry parameters that have ever been
obtained in South Africa. Results are compared to other records ranging from
equatorial to polar latitudes, putting the climatic history of South Africa into
a global context.

Broader impacts: Rainfall has much greater ecological and societal impacts in
Africa than temperature alone does. By clarifying the recent hydrological
history of South Africa, this study supports efforts to model and predict
rainfall dynamics, as well as the roles of Antarctic and solar influences (and,
indirectly, greenhouse warming) in relation to past and future African climate
changes. Two undergraduate students are helping to collect and analyze cores for
their senior capstone projects at Paul Smith's, a small college in an under-
served rural region of upstate New York. Collaborations with paleoecologists in
South Africa and Britain enhances PI and student access to research facilities,
professional networks, and expertise, and the data is archived at the NOAA World
Data Center. The internationally syndicated "Natural Selections" radio program
broadcasts the results of this work widely and also makes podcasts available
from the North Country Public Radio website.