* 0822680
* Youth Organizations, Voluntary Service and the Restructuring of Social Welfare in Russia
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,02/29/2012
* Julie Hemment, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 02/29/2012
* USD 143,639.00

Dr. Julie Hemment will undertake research on new, state-sponsored youth
organizations n Russia. To date, media and scholarly analyses of these
organizations have focused on their political import. In contrast, Hemment will
analyze their significance for the reconfiguration of social welfare and
citizenship in the context of macroeconomic restructuring and political
liberalization. The project centers on the following question: to what extent
are youth organizations an aspect of Soviet-style economic liberalization and
democratization? In many respects, the youth organizations bear resemblance to
Soviet-era organizations such as the Komsomol (Communist Youth League). But they
also draw on elements of the conceptual apparatus of international democracy
promotion that transformed Russian society in the nineties.

The research will take place in a provincial city that is home to a flourishing
set of organizations to promote youth voluntarism. The investigator will employ
a range of social science methodologies, including library-based research,
participant observation, interviews (with social service providers, city
officials, the directors of youth organizations and youth volunteers), and
quantitative surveying. The investigator's own data collection will be
supplemented by a novel collaborative methodology that engages the youth
themselves in the process of inquiry. She will work closely with Russian
colleagues at Tver State University to lead Russian undergraduate students in a
peer ethnography project wherein they conduct interviews with activist peers.
Preliminary testing of this methodology shows that it yields a practical, on-
the-ground view of how young people experience and negotiate these government-
sponsored projects.

This research will further understanding of the relationship between youth
voluntarism, social welfare restructuring, and issues of neoliberal governance.
In so doing, findings will provide valuable knowledge about emerging welfare
regimes and the recreation of citizenship and state power in Russia and other
post-socialist societies. Because it asks questions about the aftermath of
international development assistance, and examines Russian civil society
projects in the context of what some social scientists have called a global
backlash against democracy promotion, this research will be useful to a wide
range of social scientists and policy makers.