* 0822022
* Geometry and Topology in Mainstream Culture
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Jeffrey Weeks, Weeks                   Jeffrey        R
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 09/30/2011
* USD 147,780.00

Geometric topology was once a fringe topic, well studied in graduate schools but
almost unknown in mainstream culture. Happily, in recent years public interest
has increased. The key to effectively presenting geometric topology to a broad
audience is to keep in mind that explanations using words alone are sure to
fail. Explanations using pictures will convey a vague sense of the intended
meaning. But to deeply understand the topology of a multi-connected space, the
learner must experience the space for him or herself. One of the P.I.'s missions
in life --- and the subject of the present project --- is to provide computer
software that enables children and other non-specialists to experience
2-manifolds, 3-manifolds, and other structures directly. For example, the P.I.'s
existing Torus Games have already proved effective with students from fifth
grade on up, leading them to the mind-stretching concept of multiconnected
spaces (specifically, the flat 2-torus and the flat Klein bottle). The present
project aims to maintain this kid-friendly approach while extending the
software's mathematical scope to include spherical and hyperbolic 2-manifolds as
well as 3-manifolds.



While mathematicians' and physicists' understanding of space has made tremendous
progress, the general public's understanding still lags behind. Part of the
reason is that, while the modern concept of space is not inherently difficult to
understand, it is extremely difficult to explain in words. Explanations with
pictures work a little better, but in practice they too usually prove
inadequate. The only truly effective way for a student (or nonspecialist adult)
to fully grasp a new concept of space is for the student to experience the new
space for him or herself. The P.I.'s existing Torus Games software lets students
develop a gut-level understanding of spaces that are finite yet have no
boundaries; this software is widely used in middle and high schools and is
effective with students from fifth grade on up. The present project aims to
maintain this kid-friendly approach while extending the software's mathematical
scope to include curved spaces as well as flat ones, and 3-dimensional spaces as
well as "toy" 2-dimensional ones. Cosmologists are currently investigating the
hypothesis that the real universe might be finite, but no matter whether that
hypothesis is ultimately accepted or rejected, spaces of all sorts (flat and
curved, finite and infinite, 2-dimensional and 3-dimensional) play a pervasive
role throughout physics and mathematics, and merit a broader understanding in
our culture as a whole.