* 0822038
* R&amp;D: Developing an Empirically-Tested Learning Progression for the Transformation of Matter to Inform Curriculum, Instruction and Assessment Design
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2015
* Joseph Krajcik, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 08/31/2015
* USD 2,569,539.00

A principled framework is created for the development of learning progressions
in science that can demonstrate how their use can transform the way researchers,
educators and curriculum developers conceptualize important scientific
constructs. Using the construct of transformation of matter, which requires
understanding of both discrete learning goals and also the connections between
them, a hypothetical learning progression is constructed for grades 5-12.
Assessments are developed that link to the learning progression and require
students to use cognitively challenging activities such as construction of
models and scientific explanation to demonstrate their understanding of topics
related to transformation of matter. The resultant set of assessment items can
be used to place students along the transformation of matter learning
progression, regardless of curriculum. The learning progression is empirically
tested in grades 6-8 using mainly, but not exclusively, the chemistry units of
the IQWST curriculum in a three year longitudinal study that measures the
longitudinal progression of students and the cross-sectional development of
teachers as they gain experience with the curriculum. The framework developed
for creating the tools can inform the learning of other core ideas in science in
emergent sciences that are inherently interdisciplinary. Also investigated is
the relationship between student and teacher factors and different levels of
students' developmental learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;