* 0822092
* Dissertation Research -- Animal Experiments in 17th Century Italy
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2009
* Mary Fissell, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2009
* USD 10,970.00

Introduction: This project will investigate the relationship between the Medici
court and the rise of a specific culture of animal experimentation. The time
period will cover from 1654 (the year in which Leopoldo dei Medici founded the
Accademia del Cimento) to 1694 (the year in which Francesco Redi, the most
prominent naturalist at the Medici court, died). The seventeenth century is an
important period for physiological research. With the publication of De motu
cordis in 1628, William Harvey not only claimed the discovery of the circulation
of blood, but also established a new experimental approach.

Intellectual Merit: Questions concerning animal experimentation are and will
continue to be pervasive in the contemporary research environment. One way to
develop a deeper understanding of what's involved in these questions is to
develop a well informed history of this mode of research. What will likely
emerge from it are valuable historical lessons as to how the context of that
research has dramatically changed over time. One consequence will be an enhanced
ability to challenge the predominant twentieth century story of "lab animals" as
important machines for human exploration, which clearly depends on a simplistic
story of human/animal relationships described in terms of superiority and
domination. An alternative view will be developed in the project that provides a
deeper understanding of why we can describe animals as machines inside the
laboratory; something happened in the history of the relationship between human
and animals outside those rooms. In the project, animal experimentation is
studied as a practice strongly related to the broader history of human-nonhuman
relationships. By connecting the meaning and the role of the bodies of the
researchers and the animal when they are inside and outside of the laboratory
makes it is possible to understand the relationship between the experimental
practices and the society in which these practices are born.

Broader Impacts: The philosophical, social and religious categories used to
discuss animal experimentation all have precise historical origins and only in
recovering these roots we will be able not only to have a better understanding
of the debate, but also to harmonize all these voices finding a new way to
interact with the animals.

Funds for this project were provided by a joint venture of the BIO and SBE
directorates known as "Impacts of Biology on Society," which is administered via
the STS program.