* 0822876
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Accounting for Taste: Regulating Food Labeling During the Nutrition Transition, 1945-1995
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2010
* Deborah Fitzgerald, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Gorman
* 07/31/2010
* USD 8,000.00

Over the course of the 20th century, concerns over diet and health in the United
States have shifted from those predominantly focused on undernourishment, or
under-consumption of food, to health problems associated with the so-called
"affluent society," or over-consumption. This dissertation funded by the
Science, Technology, and Society Program examines how one institution, the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration, responded to this nutrition transition by
implementing changes in how foods could be labeled and health claims advertised.
In particular, this project looks at the FDA's reliance upon nutrition science
and food engineering professionals to rationalize the food supply. First,
following WWII, the FDA developed food "standards of identity," a set of
standard recipes with fixed common name labels (such as "peanut butter" or
"tomato soup") for all mass produced foods. Second, beginning in the 1970s, the
FDA changed to an informational style focused on disclosing health "facts" to
the consumer through new labels (e.g. Ingredients and Nutrition Information
panels). By studying this regulatory shift in package labeling, the project
explores a more general historical question about the scientization of food as
it is linked to modern notions of risk: how did food, and particularly food
excess, become seen as dangerous, and how did the government respond to this new
understanding of food risk?