* 0822405
* Pel Polysaccharide of Pseudomonas Aeruginosa
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Matthew Parsek, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 08/31/2012
* USD 495,000.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt; Pseudomonas aeruginosa is a common soil and
aquatic bacterial species that forms surface-associated communities called
biofilms. Biofilms are considered to be the predominant bacterial lifestyle in
the environment and P. aeruginosa is the paradigm species for their study in the
laboratory. Biofilm bacteria produce one or more extracellular polymeric
substances (EPS) that act as a scaffold, holding biofilm cells together and to a
surface. Key EPS components include exopolysaccharides, nucleic acids and
proteins. Despite P. aeruginosa being the paradigm species for biofilm study,
very little is known regarding the composition and regulation of this matrix.
For some time, alginate has been considered the major exopolysaccharide of the
P. aeruginosa EPS matrix. Recent work from the PI's laboratory indicates that
alginate is not a significant component of the EPS matrix of P. aeruginosa
environmental isolates. Instead, there appear to be other polysaccharide
components that are important for biofilm formation. Previous work discovered
that P. aeruginosa has the capacity to encode two alternative, secreted
polysaccharides, designated Psl and Pel, which play critical roles in cell
surface interactions and biofilm formation. The focus of this project is the Pel
polysaccharide. Very little is known regarding Pel's regulation, structure and
contribution to biofilm formation. The overall objectives are to identify the
genetic determinants that encode Pel production; to gain insight into the
structure of Pel; and to examine the regulation of Pel and its contribution to
biofilm structure and function. Since findings regarding P. aeruginosa biofilms
have been shown to be broadly applicable to other environmental biofilm forming
species, it is expected that this project will provide new insight into how
bacteria hold together in environmental biofilms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt; The project will have broader, educational impact in several
ways. In particular the project will provide research experiences for high
school students, outreach activities in K-12 schools, and curriculum development
activities at the University of Washington. A high school student from the local
area as well as a student recruited through the AgriScience Research Program at
Uniondale Public School will conduct research during the summer with the PI. The
AgriScience Research Program is an established program for gifted students at
Uniondale Public Schools which is located on the outskirts of New York City and
has a highly diverse student body. The project will provide an opportunity for
the selected high school students to initiate an independent summer research
project. Specifically the students will isolate P. aeruginosa from environmental
samples and determine the presence/absence of the Pel gene cluster. For outreach
to K-12 schools the PI will make presentations at the local elementary schools,
highlighting microbial communities (with an emphasis on biofilms). The goal of
the presentations is to introduce elementary school students to bacteria and the
role of bacteria in the ecosystem. To support curriculum development at the
University of Washington, the PI will develop a Systems Ecology Module as a
component of a graduate level class in Microbial Ecology. The module will focus
on the tools of systems biology and applications of the tools to complex
systems, using laboratory biofilms as model complex systems. The module will
encourage future scientists to apply the tools that are emerging from genomics
efforts to complex systems and promote advancements in molecular microbial
ecology.