* 0822983
* Glacier Science and Technology in the Central Andes: The Quest to Control Natural Disasters and Climate Change, 1941-2008
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Mark Carey, Washington and Lee University
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2010
* USD 175,341.00

The project focuses on the Peruvian Andes, where nearly 30,000 people have died
since 1941 from glacier disasters caused by climate change. Hundreds of
scientists and engineers in several state agencies have been working since the
1940s to closely monitor over 600 glaciers and to drain and dam dozens of
dangerous Andean glacial lakes. The proposed research will study the historical
relationships among science, engineering, technology, and society in this
context of global climate change and persistent environmental hazards. Proposed
research focuses on three areas: (1) the capacity for the increasingly-technical
scientific images used in glaciology since the 1940s to reduce local
vulnerability to natural disasters; (2) the conflicts and negotiations involved
in the historical maintenance of indigenous science and disaster mitigation
strategies; and (3) a comparative and collaborative historical study of Peruvian
and Swiss glacier control tactics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project merges the
History of Science, Engineering, and Technology with Environmental History by
analyzing how socio-cultural contexts affected the historical development of
glacier sciences and disaster engineering and technologies; how disaster
prevention science, engineering projects, and technologies affected different
social groups; and how experts historically mediated both state-society and
human-nature interactions. By analyzing distinct local, scientific, and state
agendas in the post-colonial Peruvian Andes, the research tests whether projects
that appeared to be failures for experts could simultaneously be victories for
locals. The project's working hypothesis is that the increased application of
Western science, engineering, and technology by experts in the Andes only
partially reduced local's vulnerability to glacier hazards. Part of the
explanation for this "failure" lies in the political and socio-cultural contexts
in which people engage experts and their technologies. For many Andean
residents, increased vulnerability to glacier disasters was preferable to
expanded state control over their communities and
lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will generate broader understandings of
the growing influence of scientists and engineers in modern societies,
particularly expert-local interactions through time and competing attempts to
represent and manage the natural world. Most importantly, it promises to give
historical depth to our understanding of human responses to climate change and
natural disasters, and these are subjects of enormous contemporary interest.
These broader impacts will be achieved through the wide dissemination of
research findings in the US, Peru, and Europe.