* 0822058
* Investigations of Viral RNA Replication in Living Cells.
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2008,05/31/2012
* Nihal Altan-Bonnet, Rutgers University Newark
* Continuing Grant
* Roy Welch
* 05/31/2012
* USD 476,984.00

Intellectual Merit RNA viruses often induce massive morphological changes upon
infecting their host cells, in particular by generating unconventional membrane-
bound organelles that become viral replication factories. This project studies
formation of this organelle and its relevance to viral replication in a model
system of cellular infection by Coxsackievirus (a member of the picornavirus
family that also includes polio virus). Earlier findings documented the
sensitivity of picornavirus replication to the activity of the cellular small
GTPase Arf, which is known to regulate organelle dynamics in the secretory
pathway of eukaryotic cells. Hence, it is hypothesized that picornaviruses may
selectively harness the nascent organelle building activities of the secretory
pathway machinery (including Arf GTPases and their effectors) to build
unconventional organelles that are optimal for viral replication. This study
will rely on live-cell imaging methodologies to monitor the host-pathogen
interaction. Fluorescence tagging of specific proteins will unravel the dynamics
of replication organelle formation in infected cells. A new methodology, based
on molecular beacons (i.e. nucleic acid probes that can detect viral RNA in
living cells) will be developed to probe the dynamic interplay between viral RNA
replication and the secretory pathway machinery. The combination of these two
techniques is particularly well-suited to the study of the virus-cell interface
because they can provide valuable spatio-temporal information without perturbing
the dynamic events themselves, thereby allowing investigation of virus host
events at the single-cell level. Ultimately, this project will glean information
on the formation, organization and dynamics of replication organelles in
individual cells. In particular, the roles of known components of the secretory
pathway machinery in generating the viral RNA replication organelles will be
investigated. A biological screen will be performed to identify as yet
uncharacterized components of the secretory pathway whose expression regulates
organelle formation and viral RNA replication. Determining the cellular
components of these virus-specific organelles will shed light on how specific
host activities contribute to the formation of an organelle that facilitates
viral RNA replication. Moreover, characterizing the role of cellular components
for the formation of unconventional organelles, such as those for viral
replication, may provide important information about their respective roles in
conventional organelle biogenesis taking place in eukaryotic cells. Finally the
strategies developed in the project will provide a novel framework for others to
explore the dynamics of host-pathogen interactions.

Broader Impacts Live-cell imaging is a critical component of current research in
the life sciences, providing unparalleled insights. However, the majority of
biology majors and M.S./Ph.D. candidates do not have the opportunity to see the
power of this approach much less gain experience with it. This project will
provide opportunity for students to learn and apply to a complex biological
phenomenon such as virus-host dynamics a variety of state of the art live-cell
imaging methodologies, image processing/analysis techniques and quantitative
data analysis and modeling. In addition, a live-cell imaging course has been
created to introduce undergraduate and graduate students to the power of imaging
methodologies towards tackling a wide range of cell physiology problems. The
interdisciplinary nature of the project and its focus on organelle biogenesis
and viral RNA dynamics has generated an excellent opportunity to forge
collaborations with mathematicians and chemists from neighboring institutions in
Newark, New Jersey. This project will generate new perspectives on and novel
methods of inquiry into the fundamental biological problem of host-pathogen
interactions.