* 0822738
* SBIR Phase II:  High Efficiency Low Cost Nitrogen Fertilizer Production from Fly Ash
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Jessica (Peng) Zhang, United Environment & Energy, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 07/31/2011
* USD 674,881.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to develop
innovative high efficiency, low cost nitrogen fertilizer manufacturing
technology from fly ash. Fly ash is a recycled material from coal power plants
that may contain high concentrations of mercury and carbon. Traditional nitrogen
fertilizer production uses natural gas as the primary feedstock and is very
costly. The traditional fertilizers are water-soluble compounds, resulting in
significant loss of fertilizer which in turn pollutes streams and ground water.
America's coal power plants produce more than 71.1 million tons of fly ash per
year, and most of it is disposed in landfills. The high mercury content in the
fly ash makes the disposal more difficult and costly. The Phase II project will
bring the viable fly ash nitrogen fertilizer production technology from a
laboratory scale to a pilot scale, and will determine the optimal pilot plant
operation conditions, produce fertilizer for farmland field testing, and
demonstrate its commercial viability. The pilot plant data will be used to
understand the importance of design parameters and operating conditions on plant
performance, refine the manufacturing plant design, and reduce the risk
associated with construction of manufacturing plants.

The broader impacts (commercial significance) if this project is successful will
be a high volume and highly technical application for fly ash and a value-added
high efficiency low cost nitrogen fertilizer. The production of this fertilizer
will not be affected by the availability of natural gas. Moreover, the projected
production cost of this nitrogen fertilizer is much lower than that of the
traditional nitrogen fertilizer. The use of this new nitrogen fertilizer on
farms will increase crop production profitability and prevent fertilizer loss
and water pollution. By avoiding the landfill disposal of the fly ash, the coal
power plants will save millions of dollars. If all the fly ash produced at coal
power plants in the US were used to produce nitrogen fertilizer, the amount of
nitrogen fertilizer produced could meet the entire US market demand. The success
of this new technology will bring a revolutionary change to the traditional
nitrogen fertilizer production process and will have substantial environmental,
economic, and technical benefits.