* 0822244
* International Collaboration in Chemistry:Synthetic Receptors for the Transmembrane Transport of Bicarbonate Anion
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2011
* Jeffery Davis, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2011
* USD 400,000.00

This International Collaboration research program promises to break new ground
in the preparation and application of selective membrane transporters for
bicarbonate anion (HCO3-). Bicarbonate plays a central role in life. Despite its
importance, there is surprisingly little known about the selective transmembrane
transport of HCO3- by synthetic compounds. Inspired by bicarbonate's central
role in biological and environmental processes, the first comprehensive program
aimed at understanding the molecular recognition and transmembrane transport of
HCO3- has been planned. This entails the design and synthesis of different types
of receptors that are able to selectively bind HCO3- and go on to demonstrate
the ability of these compounds to transport HCO3- across lipid membranes - these
receptors will include compounds designed to function as transmembrane carriers
and ion channels. In addition, we will develop new techniques to assay for the
transmembrane transport of bicarbonate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award,
the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research of
Professor Jeffery T. Davis of the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at
the University of Maryland. This research project is a collaborative effort with
the group of Professor Philip Gale at the University of Southampton (UK).
Professor Davis' research focuses on the synthesis and application of small
molecules that can transport negatively charged species across cell membranes.
Identification of compounds that can selectively transport bicarbonate across
these membranes may be useful tools for scientists studying models of diseases
such as cystic fibrosis. Applying these new transporters directly may lead to a
new model system for biomineralization. This international collaborative
research project is supported jointly by NSF and the Engineering and Physical
Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) in the United Kingdom. The study is also
supported by the Office of International Science and Engineering (OISE) at NSF.