* 0822111
* Myosin Function in Root Hairs
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2008,10/31/2012
* Andreas Nebenfuehr, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 10/31/2012
* USD 545,115.00

Project Summary All cells display some form of polarity which manifests itself
in an asymmetric distribution of specific molecules or organelles, yet the
mechanisms driving cell polarity remain obscure. This research project seeks to
reveal fundamental knowledge surrounding the maintenance of cell polarity, the
delivery of secretory products to specific locations within the cell, and the
dynamic maintenance of cell architecture. The central hypothesis of this project
is that plant myosin XI motor proteins play a crucial role in these critical
aspects of cell growth and development. Root hairs are an excellent experimental
system to test this hypothesis since they grow only at their tip and
simultaneously display tightly focused polarity and strong cytoplasmic
streaming. Myosin XI mutants that lead to reduced root hair elongation without
eliminating cytoplasmic streaming have been identified previously. A current
working model assumes that these myosins are responsible for the delivery of
specific organelles or molecules to the growing tip and are therefore involved
in maintenance of cell polarity. Thus, this project investigates the specific
cellular functions of myosin XI motor proteins in root hairs of the model plant
Arabidopsis thaliana. The larger project falls broadly into two Specific Aims.
(1) Identification of the targets of MYA1 and XI-K in root hair elongation by
quantitative cell biological analysis of organelle motility and root hair
architecture as well as determination of myosin localization. (2) Identification
of the mechanism of cargo attachment to MYA1 by specific modification of surface
residues of the cargo-binding domain and by a general screen for interacting
proteins. The intellectual merit of this project lies in the new insights into
fundamental cell biological processes that will be obtained as a result of the
research. In particular, this project addresses the dynamic maintenance of cell
architecture, the role of cytoskeletal motors in establishing cell polarity, and
the delivery of secretory products to regions of growth. In addition, novel
quantitative methods for the comprehensive cellular, genetic, and biochemical
analysis of myosin function in a model cell type will be developed. The broader
impact of the work rests predominantly on the training of young scientists,
primarily two graduate students and a postdoctoral associate. The training of
talented under-graduate students as well as high school students will be
continued in hopes of attracting them to a future in science. Students and
postdocs will collaborate with colleagues here at the University of Tennessee
and present their findings at national meetings. The results of this work will
be published in peer-reviewed journals and made available to a broader audience
on the lab web site (http://www.bio.utk.edu/cellbiol).