* 0822002
* Accommodating Individual Differences in Software Designed for Location-Based Survey Tasks
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Elizabeth Murphy, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 07/31/2012
* USD 238,189.00

The use of digital maps, imagery and global positioning system (GPS) receivers
to support a range of field survey activities is perceived as an area that has
potentially high payoff in terms of reduced costs and improved data quality for
national surveys. At present, however, appropriate survey methods for
effectively using these resources are lacking. The long-term goal of this
research is to develop a theoretically grounded yet practical approach for
designing computer-assisted survey instruments that rely on geospatial resources
to support location-based field tasks. The project will contribute to this goal
by developing naturalistic decision-making models for distinct location-based
survey tasks that reflect the diversity of strategies that result from
individual differences (e.g., in spatial ability), and by developing model
software interfaces that accommodate variation in strategies for using computers
and integrating environmental and digital geospatial information. The work will
begin with building naturalistic decision-making models to describe a survey
task referred to as address verification, which involves evaluating whether the
location of a housing unit on the ground is accurately depicted on a map. The
model will describe how task implementation varies in relation to individual
abilities, such as mental rotation of spatial objects, perspective taking, and
spatial memory. The approach involves outlining a high-level naturalistic
decision-making model to describe cues (information) available to and selected
by a field staff member, hypotheses (if any) that are formulated from this
information, and the action selected that leads to completion of the task. Using
this template, a series of more specific models will be created that describe
how variation in spatial ability affects the decision-making process. Expert
evaluation and field-based cognitive walk-through methods will be used to
further build and refine models. With the understanding gained from these
decision-modeling investigations, models of two user-interface views will be
developed for the address verification task. The first user-interface view will
be a basic interface that provides the required map functionality without taking
any user differences into consideration. The second user-interface view will be
designed to be an inclusive interface using what was learned in our modeling
research. Information on variation in field behaviors (e.g., preferred cues, map
use, task order) in relation to spatial ability will be used to create the set
of screens for the inclusive user-interface views. Survey field experts and
cognitive psychologists will evaluate these draft screens in relation to their
knowledge and experience with field staff behaviors. This research is an
important first step of an iterative process to develop interface design
principles for location-based survey field tasks that rely on an inclusive
software design approach to accommodate individual differences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will make several substantive contributions
to both basic and applied science. First, the project will begin developing a
theoretical approach for effectively incorporating geospatial information
resources in computer-assisted instruments for field surveys. Through this
process, naturalistic decision-making theory will be extended to include
heterogeneity in individual abilities, specifically spatial ability. In
addition, user interface design approaches will be broadened to handle the
context of geospatial data for a task involving scientific protocols. The
practical impact of the research will be felt in fielding surveys with improved
field operations efficiency and enhanced quality of data and survey estimates
for the national statistical infrastructure and other large-scale surveys. This
project will provide students in human-computer interaction, computer science,
and statistics with a substantive experience with interdisciplinary and inter-
organizational research collaboration. The research is supported by the
Methodology, Measurement, and Statistics Program and a consortium of federal
statistical agencies as part of a joint activity to support research on survey
and statistical methodology.