* 0822854
* Radiocarbon Ventilation Ages and Climate in the Northern Subtropical Atlantic
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Lloyd Keigwin, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 08/31/2013
* USD 626,659.00

This proposal seeks funds to conduct paleo-ocean and paleoclimate studies of
deep ocean sediments from high deposition rate sites in the western subtropical
North Atlantic. In the first year, research will be conducted on existing
samples from Laurentian Fan and new samples will be collected during a three
week surveying and coring cruise to locations between Newfoundland and the Mid
Atlantic Ridge (MAR). Each location will be sampled with a multicorer, a gravity
corer, and a large diameter long piston corer. The underlying theme of this
research is to link radiocarbon ventilation ages in the deep ocean, as measured
by paired 14C analysis of benthic and planktonic foraminifera, with surface
ocean conditions on different spatial and temporal scales across the last 20,000
years. The primary scientific emphasis will be on developing a time series of
ocean ventilation for the past several millennia, including the Little Ice Age,
and targeting extreme climate events of the past 20,000 years since the end of
the ice age. At present, there are insufficient published radiocarbon data to
confirm whether or not significant ocean ventilations changes were associated
with climate shifts in recent millennia. If the expected results show
continuous, systematic changes in ocean ventilation in the recent past, then
these results will provide an important boundary condition for understanding how
global change and deep ocean circulation are linked. This research will have
broad impact through taking teachers to sea and using web-based media to
communicate with them and students as the project develops.