* 0822597
* Collaborative Research: Territorializing Exploitation Space and the Fragmentation of the Amazon Forest
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2008,01/31/2012
* Robert Walker, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 01/31/2012
* USD 151,077.00

Despite considerable advances in understanding the causes and consequences of
tropical deforestation, less is known about how it manifests itself spatially
across landscapes in the Amazon. Recently the study of landscape ecology has
provided much insight into the ecological consequences of forest fragmentation
and loss. The project seeks to complement this ecological knowledge by
illuminating the human dimensions of deforestation, examining the social and
behavioral processes that generate forest fragmentation. It will do so by
addressing fragmentation in Amaz√¥nia associated with roads built by loggers.
Specifically, the project will develop theory about forest fragmentation by
examining the network formation processes of logging roads. To accomplish this,
it will develop, implement, and test spatial models that generate road networks.
The project seeks to base modeling efforts on empirical information about the
human drivers involved, and will therefore obtain survey data to specify model
assumptions, parameters values, and constraints. Project fieldwork is needed
because much remains unknown about the spatial decision-making of loggers. Of
interest to the project is the manner in which multiple loggers territorialize
their "exploitation" domains, as a function of local power relations. Prior
research suggests that this could be a key spatial factor in explaining and
potentially predicting patterns of forest fragmentation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project possesses significant societal value beyond
its contribution to basic science. Given ongoing destruction of Amazonian and
other tropical forests, calls for their conservation will increase in the
future. Land use policy for tropical regions will necessarily address the role
of logging there, so understanding the behavior of loggers is crucial. Clearly,
hardwoods represent a valuable Amazonian resource, which is all the more reason
that they be logged sustainably, and that associated environmental impacts be
kept to a minimum. To do this, policy must be based on a better understanding of
how loggers impact the forest. The project will provide new and basic
information in this regard, essential to the formulation of effective
environmental policy, and to maintaining the long-term integrity of tropical
forests.