* 0822482
* Characterizing Mass-Flux Profiles in Aeolian Saltation Systems
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2008,01/31/2012
* Douglas Sherman, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 01/31/2012
* USD 148,387.00

Windblown particles reshape many of the Earth's landscapes; these are known as
aeolian processes and certain fundamental aspects are still unknown. In fact,
predicting aeolian transport rates is a keystone in the geomorphological quest
to develop deterministic models for the modification of erodible surfaces by
wind (erosion, accretion, and development of bed forms) and for the creation and
evolution of coastal and arid dune systems. Understanding of the dynamics of
wind-blown sand systems has improved dramatically over the last three decades.
There remains, however, considerable dissatisfaction with the prediction of sand
transport rates using basic environmental information, such as wind speed and
mean sand grain size, and in relation to particular aeolian systems. In
particular, there does not exist agreement as to the characteristic distribution
of saltating grains above a sand surface for even the most basic transport
systems. This is important because the distribution of moving grains is a
fundamental control on the total rate of sand transport. This project is
designed to elucidate the singular characteristics of the vertical distribution
of wind-driven, saltating sand grains in a natural environment. In particular,
the investigators will assess the applicability of the Rouse concentration
profile model to aeolian saltation by collecting and analyzing a high-quality
field data set. The Rouse concentration profile normalizes vertical particle
distributions according to discernable characteristics of grain size and wind
shear velocity, and its utility has been demonstrated for hydrodynamic systems.
The investigators hypothesize that the vertical distribution of aeolian
saltation corresponds with the Rouse profile model; that the Rouse parameter
corrects some of the variability between mass-flux profiles obtained under
different environmental conditions; and that the characteristics of mass-flux
profiles measured in the field will be statistically distinct from those
measured in wind tunnel experiments. They approach this issue through the design
of an innovative, spatially and temporally detailed experiment that will measure
the vertical structures of the near-surface wind and saltation fields. They have
designed a new saltation impact-sensor to be used with ruggedized thermal
anemometers, specially designed for deployment within the saltation layer.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Characterizing the mass-flux profile will have
theoretical and applied implications. A physically-based characterization of the
profile should improve the predictive capacities of aeolian transport models.
Further, well-known scaling constraints associated with the derivation of
transport relationships from wind tunnel studies mandate that prototype-scaled
models should be based on prototype data. This study will provide one such
basis. As a result, the results will have the potential to resolve a
longstanding debate about the flux-profile distribution, to improve transport
models, and, ultimately to enhance the ability to plan for and against the
environmental impacts of blowing sand, including dune building or aeolian
abrasion. This benefits the communities of geomorphologists, geographers,
geologists, engineers, physicists and mathematicians, and planners concerned
with the various aspects of blowing sand. The project will also develop
international research collaborations.