* 0822493
* Residue Analysis of Alkaloids
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2011
* Sean Rafferty, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2011
* USD 122,410.00

With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Sean M. Rafferty, Stuart Swiny
and Igor Lednev of the University at Albany, and Renessalaer Polytechnic
Institute professor Mark Platt, will institute a study of prehistoric alkaloid
use.

Alkaloids include powerful drugs used widely in scientific and folk medicine.
Examples include nicotine, morphine, cocaine, or caffeine. There is
circumstantial evidence that alkaloids were used in prehistory, but this has
never been validated scientifically. This project will seek to identify alkaloid
use prehistorically in two regions using advanced residue analysis technology.

Residue analysis uses analytical chemistry techniques to identify chemical
compounds in a sample. When these samples are from an archaeological artifact,
such as a ceramic vessel or a smoking pipe, archaeologists can determine what
substances were contained in the vessel or pipe. Residue analysis has
revolutionized the determination of artifact function, which has been dependant
on inference or speculation. This technology has rarely been used for alkaloid
residues, despite their widespread significance today and presumed importance in
prehistoric economy, medicine, and spirituality.

Two techniques will be used. Raman microscopy is one of the newest techniques
had has seldom been used for archaeological residues; however, Raman can
identify residues non-destructively directly on an artifacts surface. The
technique uses frequency changes in reflected light to determine the molecular
makeup of a sample. High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) is a more
conventional residue analysis technique and identifies chemicals dissolved in an
organic solvent. HPLC will be used to corroborate the results obtained using
Raman microscopy.

These residue analysis techniques will be applied to artifacts from two regions
and time periods: the Early Woodland Period (ca. 1,000 BC-1 AD) of Eastern North
America, and the Early Bronze Age (ca. 3,300-2000 BC) of Cyprus. The Eastern
North American sample will be tested for the presence of nicotine, indicating
the use of tobacco; the Cypriot sample will focus on the identification of
morphine and/or codeine, indicative of opium. Both of these periods were times
of significant expansions of populations, growth of regional trade, and
development of religious expressions in their respective regions. Tobacco and
Opium are known to have played significant roles in regional trade, early
agriculture, medicine and religion in later time periods in each region, but the
early development of the use of these two key substances is poorly understood.
This project will remedy that lack of information with the analysis of a large
sample of artifacts from each region.

The project will provide much needed theoretical and methodological information.
Alkaloids are believed to be significant in areas of human activities, such as
medicine or religion, which are poorly understood by archaeologists. The
intellectual merit of the research will be to use this seldom studied type of
data to address research questions of archaeological significance.

The broader impacts of the project include the evaluation of advanced residue
analysis techniques for archaeological projects, and the application of these
techniques to the understanding early plant use, traditional medicine and
religion, and the growth of trade and exchange networks in two key periods of
human history.