* 0822811
* Biochemical Mechanism of Regulation of Phytochrome Interacting Factor 1 by Light
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Enamul Huq, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Amy Litt
* 07/31/2012
* USD 441,001.00

PI: Enamul Huq&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal #
0822811&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Biochemical Mechanism of Regulation of
Phytochrome Interacting Factor 1 by Light&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Growth
and development are highly regulated by environmental light signals at all
phases of a plant's life cycle. Plants have evolved several light receptors
including the phytochrome (phy) family of photoreceptors to monitor the red and
far-red light, the cryptochromes, the phototropins and the ZTL/FKF1 family of
F-box proteins to monitor the UV-A and blue light, and an unidentified receptor
to monitor the UV-B light. Although much has been learned on these
photoreceptors, the primary biochemical mechanism by which they regulate plant
growth and development is still unknown. In recent years, degradation of
transcription factors both in the dark and light has been shown to play central
roles in the light signaling pathways. In general, one class of light signaling
factors are degraded in the dark. They include HY5, LAF1 and HFR1, most of which
are positive regulators of photomorphogenesis. The second class factors are
degraded in light. This class includes Phytochrome Interacting Factors(PIFs),
most of which negatively regulate photomorphogenesis. Although, the mechanisms
of dark-induced degradation are well investigated, the light-induced degradation
of PIFs is less well understood. This project is focused on investigating the
early events in the light-induced degradation of the bHLH transcription factor,
PIF1, using biochemical, molecular and genetic approaches. PIF1 is rapidly
degraded under both red and far-red light conditions. Light-induced proteolytic
removal of PIF1 relieves the negative regulation by PIF1 and promote seed
germination, chlorophyll biosynthesis and hypocotyl growth inhibition. Since
PIF1 is a primary phytochrome-signaling partner, whose stability is regulated by
phytochromes through direct physical interaction, the results from this project
will provide fundamental information on the mechanism of phytochrome regulated
developmental pathways. This study will have broad implications in several ways.
First, understanding the biochemical mechanism of regulation of PIF1 in plants
will provide fundamental knowledge and molecular tools applicable in
agricultural biotechnology for enhanced crop and biomass production. Second, the
results and the research tools will be distributed to the community through
publications, conference presentations, and website postings directly from our
laboratories. Third, this project will contribute to training the next
generation scientists in modern functional genomics and molecular genetics,
including undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral students. This training will
provide them with the unique opportunity to make significant contributions to
the field of plant biology and biotechnology and will prepare them for future
careers as independent researchers.