* 0822626
* The Consequences of Sperm Availability to the Evolution of Gamete Recognition Proteins
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2008,09/30/2014
* Don Levitan, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 09/30/2014
* USD 700,000.00

The proteins on the surface of eggs and sperm determine which males can
reproduce with which females, and often define whether one species is distinct
from another. Little is known about why these proteins evolve quickly in some
species, but not in others. The PIs propose to 1) document the variation in
these proteins in eggs and sperm of one sea urchin species with rapidly evolving
sperm proteins and one species with slowly evolving sperm proteins, 2) determine
how each protein variant performs in the laboratory and under natural conditions
in the sea, and 3) investigate the relationship between changes in egg proteins
with changes in sperm proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to uncovering
what makes fertilization possible among some individuals but not others, this
work combines two disciplines to explore when and how ecological processes that
determine when novel proteins will be more successful can drive evolution. The
computational methods developed will allow analysis of how changes in one part
of the genome can influence changes in another part, and will be of general use
for deciphering the flood of incoming genomic data. Undergraduate and graduate
students, particularly those from underrepresented groups, will be trained in
molecular biology, field ecology and computational science. Software developed
here will be made publicly available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;