* 0822489
* Collaborative Research: Improving Small Area Population Estimation with High-Resolution Remote Sensing
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2008,01/31/2013
* Peter Rogerson, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 01/31/2013
* USD 154,641.00

Small-area population estimates are essential for understanding and responding
to many social, political, economic, and environmental problems. The size and
distribution of the population often are key determinants for resource
allocation for state and local governments. In the United States, detailed
population data are only available for one date per decade through the national
census. This frequency often does not meet the needs of rapid growth areas like
Austin, Texas where noteworthy local inter-censal population changes occur. The
overall objective of this project is to develop a cost-effective method to
generate detailed (census block level), timely (inter-census) and accurate
population estimates. This will be accomplished by development of an improved
estimation of housing units in an automatic fashion from emerging high-spatial
resolution remote sensing technologies, such as high spatial resolution
satellite imagery and Light Detection And Ranging (LiDAR). A conventional
Housing Unit (HU) method will then be employed to calculate population counts at
census block level. Two separate validations: including a household special
census, and comparisons to 2010 Census, will be performed to evaluate the
accuracy of population estimates derived from the developed remote sensing
methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is intended to synergize previous
efforts that separately existed in two fields: remote sensing and population
geography, in order to seek solutions for providing timely population estimates
at census block level. The research will make significant contributions to the
technical advancement of the two fields as well as demonstrate a viable scheme
for linking the two fields in addressing population estimation. The proposed
method will provide a more cost-effective solution for population projections
since the method is mainly driven by remote sensing data as compared to the
laboriously collected decennial and survey data of the Census Bureau. In
addition, the results of the project will be discussed extensively with city
planners and officials from Austin and nearby rapidly growing
localities.&lt;br/&gt;