* 0822761
* Scholar's Award---Contested Fields: Place-Bound Conflicts over Transgenic Crops
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2008,07/31/2010
* Christopher Henke, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Gorman
* 07/31/2010
* USD 82,302.00

Transgenic crops have been in commercial production for more than a decade now
and have captured a significant share of global production in several major
crops. Yet, these technologies remain a source of intense debate. While
promoters of transgenic crops claim that they will feed a hungry world and
reduce the environmental impacts of farming, critics claim the opposite -- that
transgenics pose unanticipated health and environmental
risks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project funded through the Biology and Society
initiative shared by the Science, Technology, and Society Program and the
Biology Directorate explains the ongoing conflicts over transgenic crops as
literally rooted in the specific places where crops are developed, tested, and
grown, and the practices that researchers, growers, regulators, and activists
use to either promote or protest this technology. By focusing on this connection
between practice and place, a complex set of interests are highlighted:
researchers' goals for testing transgenics, growers' attempts to produce them
for profit, corporate interests in creating new markets through transgenics, and
activists' desire to restrict their use. Though agricultural places and
practices may seem quite mundane, they actually form the basis for considerable
economic, political, and symbolic capital. The connection between place,
practice, and power provides a valuable window for analysis of the struggles
over transgenic crops. This conceptual focus blends approaches in science and
technology studies that emphasize either local culture and practices or
institutional networks and power structures; the result is a theoretical
approach capable of bridging several levels of
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research focuses on two case studies. The
first involves an episode termed here, "the monarch butterfly controversy,"
where widespread public debate about the environmental safety of transgenic corn
followed from reports that pollen from transgenic corn harmed the larvae of the
monarch butterfly. The second case involves recurring and widespread instances
of vandalism and destruction of field trials meant to test the efficacy of
transgenic crops. These examples highlight the complex politics of place and
practice that surround debates over transgenic crops. Data are collected through
a multi-method qualitative approach, using interviews, participant observation,
and content analysis of media content related to the debates over transgenic
crops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has broader relevance because
transgenics are the subject of international trade disputes, social movement
protest, and widespread debates over the appropriate balance of commercial
interest, state regulatory authority, and environmental and human health. The
key advantage of the approach used in this project is that it focuses on the
actual research practices and places used to develop and test transgenic crops,
and demonstrates how the "nuts-and-bolts" of agricultural research provide a
social and material context for ongoing conflicts. Therefore, the findings are
particularly useful to the policy makers, growers, and activists who must decide
just if and how transgenic crops ought to be tested and used. The PI also
teaches several courses at Colgate University, where the topic of this project
is incorporated into course materials and student projects.