* 0822542
* SBIR Phase II:   Clock-on-Demand: High Performance, Ultra Low Power
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2008,12/31/2012
* Farokh Eskafi, TagArray Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2012
* USD 1,000,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II research project is to develop
a prototype and proof of concept for the tag and reader that uses an innovative
low power Clock-on-Demand (CoD) and baseband/ media access controller (MAC)
calibration algorithm to be used with ultra wideband communication systems. The
new CoD and algorithm are motivated by application of ultra wideband to the RFID
(Radio Frequency Identification) market. In this prototype, the CoD and the
baseband/MAC layer algorithm are implemented in standard CMOS for tag and the
UWB receiver and narrowband receiver with discrete components for reader. The
low power requirement is achieved by the CoD and by dividing the time into
epochs and epochs into slots. The CoD only runs until the tag transmits its
impulse in the relevant slot, and the reader decodes the ID representations of
all tags by the slot number. Therefore, if an epoch is divided into 210 slots,
an impulse by tag represents 10 bits of the information. The robustness is
achieved by having an UWB impulse transmitter in the tag and by repeating the
impulse in different epochs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RFID is an exponentially
growing market. However, the technology that supports its expansion is not able
to provide robust communication and signaling between a tag and a reader.
Furthermore, today?s technology only supports a low tag density (10s of
tags/sec), while the applications that will fuel the exponential expansion of
the RFID market, like point-of-sale, inventory management, shelf management,
etc., require 100s and 1000s of tags/sec.&lt;br/&gt;