* 0822020
* SBIR Phase II:    A Value-based Approach for Quantifying Problem Solving Strategies
* TIP,TI
* 11/15/2008,10/31/2011
* Ronald Stevens, The Learning Chameleon, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 10/31/2011
* USD 664,136.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II research project will
investigate methodologies required to scale and disseminate an online
performance-based assessment system for quantifying the scientific problem
solving skills of middle school students. This Phase II research will be based
on the Phase I results which identified the technical, logistical and
professional development challenges that influence the rapid calculation,
aggregation and real-time, online, reporting of problem solving assessment data
to diverse educational stakeholders. The research will first design and
implement an Online Analytical Processing (OLAP) model for data analysis and
reporting and incorporate these designs into a system scale-up plan to flexibly
accommodate the 10-20 fold increase in users indicated by our commercialization
plan. A central component of this development will be a data warehouse that will
be instrumented allowing the analysis of how teachers access the performance
data, which will be linked to a digital dashboard which will provide teachers
with an easy, and highly visual access to multi-dimensional assessments of their
students and comparison classrooms. Additionally, this information will be used
to develop new forms of professional development to support teachers in the
better use of the data available. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of this
extensible formative, summative and programmatic assessment system of learning
will have broad relevance for helping teachers to teach, students to learn, and
administrators to make informed data-driven decisions through the continual, and
real-time formative evaluation of a student's problem solving progress, a
dimension not frequently or rigorously assessed in today's classrooms, yet a
critical component of 21st century skills. The outcomes of this project should
have widespread utility at all levels of science education and should allow
cumulative comparisons of problem solving across science domains, classrooms,
teachers and school systems thus helping to re-think the ways scientific problem
solving is systemically assessed and how the impact of teaching these skills
becomes quantified.