* 0822880
* Prelude to Plant Domestication in Eastern North America
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Timothy Messner, Center For American Archeology
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2012
* USD 322,475.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Jane Buikstra will lead an
interdisciplinary team of researchers from Arizona State University and the
Center for American Archeology in exploring the origins of agriculture in
Eastern North America, one of ten regions worldwide known to have witnessed the
independent domestication of plants. Agriculture is one of the most significant
developments in human history, but mystery still surrounds exactly how, when and
why certain groups of people first began to grow crops. Prelude to Plant
Domestication in Eastern North America will address this question through
intensive investigation of well-preserved artifacts and plant remains from
several archaeological sites dating immediately before and during the transition
from a purely hunting and gathering way of life to a prehistoric economy based
largely on agriculture. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will be accomplished
by exploring multiple lines of evidence from the archaeological record of the
Lower Illinois Valley where exists the earliest evidence for the domestication
of seed plants. Research will focus on the Archaic time period (approximately
8,000 - 1,000 B.C.), with the rich and well-preserved horizons of the Koster
site serving as the study's centerpiece. Grinding stones and other tools from
several Archaic period sites will be examined microscopically for the presence
of plant microfossils, such as starch granules, which allow certain plants to be
identified that are not otherwise preserved in the archaeological record. Stone
tools will also be studied microscopically for patterns of wear and polish that
indicate different types of plant processing activities. Soil samples will be
analyzed for the presence of plant phytoliths and organic remains which provide
insight into alterations in vegetation associated with climate change and human
manipulation as well as the species of plants cultivated and eaten. A GIS
(geographic information system) generated three-dimensional model of these
horizons will be developed to assist in sample selection and
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves senior researchers with
expertise in archaeology, botany, stone tool, and computer spatial analysis
working towards a unified goal of understanding changes in food procurement,
food processing, and their relationship to the development of agriculture.
Cutting-edge methods employed in this research, including starch grain analysis
and computer site modeling, have never been combined to address these questions
in eastern North America. This project offers researchers the ability to provide
the most accurate understanding of the full range of plant resources used by
prehistoric populations as well as how, when, and perhaps why people began the
intensive interaction that led to the domestication of only a few select species
of plants. This information promises to contribute new insight and theoretical
understanding of the agricultural origins on a global comparative
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will also further the educational and
outreach efforts of the institutions involved. Archaeological investigations can
serve as compelling vehicles for public education about the human past, the
natural environment, climate change, and the nature of scientific research. An
important outcome of this project will be an educational, public-oriented
website that explores the Archaic-period archaeology of the region and the
origins of agriculture in general.