* 0822648
* PFC: Joint Institute for Nuclear Astrophysics, JINA
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2015
* James Truran, University of Notre Dame
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jean Allen
* 08/31/2015
* USD 13,090,000.00

The Joint Institute for Nuclear Astrophysics (JINA) addresses critical questions
in nuclear astrophysics associated with stellar and explosive nucleosynthesis
processes. The initial five years of funding for JINA catalyzed the development
of new avenues for communication and collaboration between different science
communities at the interface of nuclear physics, astrophysics, and astronomy,
thus enhancing the discovery potential in nuclear physics as the engine of
astrophysical and cosmo-chemical phenomena.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Within this
second funding period JINA seeks to address unsolved or new questions in nuclear
astrophysics within its unique interdisciplinary environment. The scientific
focus has shifted, reflecting past achievements and rapid developments in the
field, covering nucleosynthesis and galactic chemical evolution, novae and type
Ia supernovae, and the physics of neutron stars. JINA will coordinate the
efforts through attracting experts and expertise to (1) move beyond the
traditional approach of studying separately singular nucleosynthesis reactions
and processes by considering them in the whole concept of Galactic chemical
evolution, (2) consider accreting binary white dwarf systems over the entire
range of accretion rates from slow (type Ia) to fast accretion (novae), and (3)
follow the fate of matter on accreting neutron stars through the entire process,
translating the results into observable signatures for the astronomer. As a
center, JINA will be able to take advantage of new synergies in technical and
computational developments by sharing expertise and manpower for developing or
using new equipment or techniques. Through its involvement in Sloan Digital Sky
Survey program SDSS-II and other observational programs JINA is in a key
position to participate and influence future major observational programs of
relevance for the field. In addition, JINA will draw on a range of theory and
modeling expertise to address the specific problems of relevance for all three
major research activities, thus enhancing connections between nuclear physics
and astrophysical observations.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;JINA has created a unique
educational environment for students, postdocs, and young faculty, and generated
new ways and opportunities for outreach to K-12 students and to the general
public and will build upon this past success. The physics and the concept of
JINA have attracted a large number of new graduate students at all participating
institutions. JINA has invested considerable effort in developing a broad
outreach program that triggers scientific interests in students from elementary
school to college level. This includes "From Art to Science", a program which
seeks to inspire interest in science in elementary school children. The PAN and
PIXE-PAN programs are very successful in exposing high school students and
teachers to nuclear astrophysics research and will be further developed. JINA
also has emerged as a forum for the entire nuclear astrophysics community
worldwide and will continue to play an important role in setting goals,
facilitating the discussion of priorities and information exchange across field
boundaries, and forming interdisciplinary collaborations to address the
multitude of scientific questions.