* 0822558
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Children's Planning and Production of Filler-gap Constructions
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2015
* Dana McDaniel, University of Southern Maine
* Standard Grant
* Laura Namy
* 08/31/2015
* USD 200,996.00

This grant supports collaborative research on the language production system,
especially how it develops in children. Five studies examine fluency and points
of sentence planning difficulty by manipulating properties of certain sentence
structures. The sentences emphasize relative clauses, exemplified by "who the
boy was calling" in the sentence "The girl found the teacher who the boy was
calling." Such structures challenge the sentence planning mechanism because the
relative clause involves relationships among different elements (teacher and who
relate to calling in the example here). This research compares nonfluencies like
pauses and restarts across both structural variations and ages of speakers. The
comparison across structures evaluates planning units, such as clauses, and what
might stress sentence planning, such as distance between related elements. The
comparison across speakers evaluates developmental changes in the system that
handles such stresses. The experiments use two methods for studying language
production. One is an imitation task, where people listen to a story and then
imitate a sentence they hear about the story; the other is an elicitation task,
where people produce their own sentence to designate a certain character in the
story. The combination of methodology and structural emphasis here has the
potential to produce outcomes that are transformative for both developmental and
mature language production modeling.

Shedding light on the developing production system helps distinguish the effects
of this dynamic system (the real-time act of producing language) from the
effects of more static knowledge systems (the internal linguistic principles).
This matters across domains of cognitive development, where research often
relies on children's speech. Children's speech is also central in domains other
than language and developmental sciences (e.g., in the court system and in the
diagnosis and treatment of various impairments). Better understanding of the
multiple and interacting influences on normally developing children's speech
must eventually apply to such domains. The project also provides research
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students in Maine and Arizona,
relying heavily on apprenticeship and independent study experiences. This grant
includes annual support for student involvement in dissemination activities like
professional conference presentations. Finally, support for the collaboration
directly addresses the infrastructure for research and education in a particular
partnership and strengthens the networks associated with this partnership,
including students in all such activities.