* 0822402
* Effective Science Teaching for English Language Learners (ESTELL): A Pre-Service Teacher Professional Development Research Project Across Three Universities in California
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* Marco Bravo, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Reed
* 08/31/2014
* USD 3,100,000.00

The Discovery Research K-12 (DR-K12) proposal Effective Science Teaching for
English Language Learners (ESTELL): A Pre-Service Teacher Professional
Development Research Project Across Three Universities in California is
submitted for consideration for a full research and development project in the
Frontier Challenge Strand a ? assuring all students the opportunity to learn
STEM content. Project investigators will conduct an experimental design study on
the impact of an ESTELL elementary teacher education designed to prepare novice
teachers to teach science to English Language Learner (ELL) and a qualitative
study on program implementation. The ESTELL project builds on prior research in
two areas: the integration of inquiry science, language and literacy practices;
and the CREDE Five Standards for Effective Pedagogy which have identified a
common set of teaching practices associated with increased achievement of ELL.
This project will adapt this approach to pre-service teacher preparation. The
ESTELL model of pre-service teacher education will be integrated into every
stage of teacher preparation and induction from the science teaching methods
courses in the post-baccalaureate credential programs, to the clinical setting
of student teaching and the first two years of teaching. Researchers will focus
on three research questions: (1) What is the impact of the ESTELL teacher
education program on novice teachers beliefs and practice? (2) What is the
relationship between the use of ESTELL by program graduates and the science
achievement of 4th-5th grade students? and (3) What is the impact of the ESTELL
program on the beliefs and practice of the participating science methods
faculty, teacher supervisors and cooperating teachers?