* 0822968
* SGER:  Aluminum Nitride Piezoelectric NanoElectroMechanical Resonators: Feasibility Study for 10GHz RF Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2008,03/31/2009
* Gianluca Piazza, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 03/31/2009
* USD 75,679.00

&lt;br/&gt;Gianluca Piazza &lt;br/&gt;The objective of this SGER proposal is to
demonstrate for the first time NanoElectroMechanical (NEM) resonators based on
nanoscale (100-500nm) piezoelectric aluminum nitride films operating at a
frequency range (10GHz) in which no high Q mechanical element has ever been
demonstrated before. Research will focus on optimizing the sputtering deposition
process for AlN by controlling power, pressure and temperature. Electronic and
mechanical properties of metal films will be studied at the nanoscale in order
to yield highly oriented, pin-hole free and low resistivity nanoelectrodes.
COMSOL finite element software will be employed for the design of nanoscale
resonators and identify the fundamental geometrical parameters available to
fabricate spurious free and low impedance
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;By promoting
scientific research in nanopiezoelectrics and focusing on NEM system
reliability, this work will stimulate the use of NEM piezoelectric devices for a
very broad range of applications. The outcome of this research will provide
significant performance improvements in RF wireless communications, chemical
sensing, imaging, force sensing, and computing. The research will tackle a
fundamental problem in nanotechnology related to the need of transducers capable
of providing a direct and on-chip link between the nano and the macro world.
Also, the introduction of nanoscale piezoelectric resonators will have a direct
impact in several areas such as microwave communications, computing and sensing.
The high frequency of operation will increase the sensitivity of any resonant
sensor by more than 3 orders of magnitude. At the same time lower actuation
voltages (5-10x) and power consumption (10-100x) will be achieved as smaller
electric fields are required to excite the piezoelectric effect at the
nanoscale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;The PI plans to
include the results of this research in his lectures of ESE/MEAM 529: ?RF
MEMS/NEMS?. This course is taught in three different engineering departments.
The PI will engage with high school students, undergraduates, high school
teachers and the general public during the NanoDay at Penn and by offering
lectures on nanotechnologies at a local high school (Mariana Bracetti Academy).
The PI also plans to involve 1 undergraduate student in this project during the
summer months. The mechanisms for this involvement will leverage the UPenn?s
SUNFEST program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;