* 0822941
* Collaborative Research:  Estimating Compensated Discount Functions
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2008,11/30/2011
* Attila Ambrus, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 11/30/2011
* USD 130,513.00

This research uses economic experiments to empirically test fundamental theories
about how people make economic decisions in dynamic situations. Existing
experiments on intertemporal choice do not provide conclusive evidence for or
against these theories, because they do not control for the fact that subjects
might expect changes in their future financial situation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators conduct a series of experiments designed
to address this problem. In their experiments, they ask subjects to decide
between dated prizes that are contingent on the subject's real income. The
prizes are either a money payment to the subject or a contribution to a charity
chosen by the subject. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experiments are conducted in
Iceland in collaboration with researchers from the Internal Revenue Services of
Iceland and the University of Reykjavik. Iceland is unique because under
Icelandic law personal income tax returns are public information, so the
investigators will be able to determine each subjects actual earned income in
future years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will resolve a debate in
economics that is directly relevant for public policy. Researchers have been
concerned that many people do not make consistent choices in dynamic situations.
If this is the case, then society may be better off with public policies that
constrain individual choices about retirement savings, unhealthy behaviors, and
other goods where an individual may choose pleasure today despite large costs in
the future. The results will tell us if inconsistent choices are truly a
widespread phenomenon.