* 0822202
* Scaling Limits of Programmable Fluidic Self-Assembly Forming Electrical Interconnects
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2013
* Heiko Jacobs, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 07/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

Objective&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to develop a process to
integrate functional semiconducting devices across length scales and material
boundaries in a parallel manner. The first objective is to enable chip level
self-assembly (currently performed with mm-sized components) at the 100 nm ¡V 50
?Ým length scale. The second objective is to develop a process to assemble
components, micro/nanochips with single angular orientation to enable ¡§Nano-
Flip-Chip-Assembly¡¨ with contact pad registration. The approach utilizes
surface tension to direct the self-assembly process. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;The components are orders of magnitude smaller than current
state of the art considering serial robotic pick and place. In a broader sense,
the ability to localize arbitrary materials and devices on arbitrary substrates
allows the merging of technologies based on otherwise incompatible materials.
Applications include flexible high performance electronics, solar cells, and
sensor systems to gather optical, acoustic, chemical, and/or radiological data
that would improve many areas of our daily lives including healthcare, the
environment, energy, food safety, manufacturing, and national security.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;The proposed effort will lead to the
development of seminars for undergraduate students. Undergraduate students will
also be involved in the research through an honors thesis project, and through
REU and UROP opportunities. The PI is also engaged with the Science Museum in
Minnesota.&lt;br/&gt;