* 0822879
* STTR Phase II:   Modulation-Assisted Deep Hole Drilling of Micro/Meso-Scale Biomedical Components
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* James Mann, M4 Sciences, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2012
* USD 1,029,660.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II project aims to develop
a Modulation-Assisted Machining (MAM) system with novel capabilities for
micro/meso-scale deep-hole drilling of biomedical components. The system is
structured around a new device; an accessory developed for computer numerically
controlled (CNC) machine tools. This new device superimposes a low-frequency
sinusoidal modulation onto machining processes enabling controlled chip
formation and easy disposal, enhanced lubrication of tool-chip contact, reduces
energy consumption, and, potentially, a reduction in tool wear. When implemented
in the appropriate system framework, unprecedented increases in productivity and
efficiency of deep-hole drilling processes are envisaged.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this project
will be commercialize MAM technology in manufacturing of biomedical components
and related applications in automotive and aerospace fluid systems
manufacturing. Complemented by a strong education and training program. By
driving the development of a class of clean machining processes with reduced
effluent streams and energy consumption, and improved efficiency, this project
will impact sustainable manufacturing for the discrete products sector, with
broad societal benefits.