* 0822965
* STTR Phase II:  High Resolution, High Brightness Display for Virtual Reality
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Michael Bass, bdDisplays, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 08/31/2011
* USD 492,628.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II research project focuses
on new GaAs-based, low voltage technology for high definition head mounted
displays (HMDs), suitable for advanced applications in immersive virtual reality
and 3-D imaging. Applications for this technology include battery powered
augmented reality HMDs, full color, high resolution HMDs with 3-D imaging
potential, and low cost, low voltage indicators and backlights for battery
powered electronics. Displays derived from this GaAs technology have superior
color gamut, high brightness, resolution and efficiency compared to other
approaches. The results obtained from the STTR Phase I project indicate that low
cost HMD-based optical systems can be designed using these high resolution
microdisplay chips at supply voltages as low as 1.5 volts. Compared to display
systems based on GaN LED and OLED technology which require voltages of up to 4
volts, this technology presents a path for continued advancement to 3-D imaging
systems that could reach the resolution of the human eye.

This technology should impact low cost HMDs displaying low-information content
data such as maps, text or line graphics that require long battery life for
markets that include first responders, factory and inventory workers, and
consumer appliances. The technology can be advanced to much higher resolution
microdisplays and improved optics for the high-information content marketplace
such as immersive virtual reality for education, medical imaging and surgery,
games and videos. Commercial emphasis will be placed on the low voltage
operation for battery compatibility, a key advantage for augmented reality HMDs;
and one which may lead to fundamental changes in battery powered electronics
having indicator lights and/or displays.