* 0822600
* International Collaboration in Chemistry: A Combined Experimetal and Theoretical Study of Redox-Active Fe4O4-Cubanes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Raphael Raptis, University of Puerto Rico
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 08/31/2012
* USD 390,000.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program
supports research by Professor Raphael G. Raptis at the University of Puerto
Rico to investigate an octanuclear iron cluster, which contains an Fe4O4 cubane
core surrounded by four peripheral FeIII centers and would extend studies to the
1-, 2-, 3- and 4-electron reduced analogues. The goal is to characterize each of
the mixed-valent states spanning the Fe(III)8 and Fe(III) 4Fe(II)4 limits
observed in the electrochemical experiment. The focus at the University of
Puerto Rico will be on the synthesis of new clusters capable of supporting the
more highly reduced oxidation levels and their characterization using a wide
range of physicochemical techniques. Voltammetry, diffraction, in situ UV-Vis-
NIR spectroelectrochemistry and XPS will be conducted in-house, while
magnetochemical properties, EPR and Mossbauer spectra will be measured in the
laboratories of established collaborators who are leaders in their fields. The
research team at the University of Glasgow will explore the electronic structure
of these compounds using broken-symmetry density functional theory. The aim is
to maximize the information content of the physicochemical measurements by
establishing a direct correspondence between observation and the underlying
electronic structure&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Fe8 clusters described in this
proposal offer a unique opportunity to study mixed valence in a discrete
molecular species across an unprecedented range of oxidation states. This
project will link established research programms at the University of Puerto
Rico and the University of Glasgow, both of which focus on the structure of
paramagnetic metal clusters. The opportunity for young researchers to exchange
complementary ideas and expertise through extended stays in international
laboratories is a key element of the research programs, and will help to
establish long-lasting links between the two groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
International Collaborative Chemistry research project is supported jointly by
NSF and the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) in the
United Kingdom. The study is also supported by the Office of International
Science and Engineering (OISE) at NSF.