* 0822810
* SBIR Phase II:   A High-Throughput Scanning Probe Microscope Using Micromachined Ultracompliant Probe Arrays with Embedded Sensors for Simultaneous Topography and Thermal Imag
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2008,01/31/2011
* Angelo Gaitas, Kytaro Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 01/31/2011
* USD 514,694.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to produce
a commercial prototype of a state-of-the-art high throughput scanning probe
microscope (HT-SPM), which can be used for measuring topography and thermal
parameters in nanotechnology, bio, and semiconductor applications. The scanning
probe microscope has been a very successful tool, but emphasis has not been put
on rapid data acquisition. The HT-SPM is an enabling technology that consists of
a transformative and patented method for extracting topography which allows for
higher throughput. The project leverages experience in atomic force microscope
(AFM) probe micro-fabrication and industry. An immediate outcome of this SBIR
project will be a fully functional and market ready HT-SPM.

The broader impact/commercial potential of measurements in nanometer scale
devices and structures have both scientific and industrial importance. Although
the Atomic Force Microscope (AFM) is one of the most important tools for
nanotechnology, there has not been any fundamental innovation in the way it
operates for more than a decade. This project provides faster measurement as a
result of a fundamentally different way of imaging. Faster characterization
permits manufacturers to expedite problem isolation, leading to higher
productivity and higher return-on-investment (ROI). The HT-SPM also benefits
R&D, failure analysis and off-line engineering. The HT-SPM offers critical
capabilities that will allow users too quickly and clearly measure
topography/friction/temperature at the nanoscale and view critical
characteristics. The HT-SPM fills a critical need in integrated circuits,
nanotechnology, life sciences and other markets that rely on sub-micron
microscopy, as it will provide users with a superior and inexpensive measurement
system to aid in studying new properties.