* 0822388
* R&amp;D: Cumulative Learning using Embedded Assessment Results (CLEAR)
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2014
* Marcia Linn, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 08/31/2014
* USD 3,599,772.00

Cumulative Learning using Embedded Assessment Results (CLEAR) focuses on the
challenge of using assessment of relevant STEM content to improve K-12 teaching
and learning. CLEAR takes advantage of new technologies and research findings to
investigate ways that science assessments can both capture and contribute to
cumulative, integrated learning of standards-based concepts in middle school
courses. The project will research new forms of assessment that document
students' accumulation of knowledge and also serve as learning events. CLEAR
will use cohort and randomized classroom comparisons to determine what
combinations of instruction and assessment enable middle school students to gain
cumulative understanding of energy concepts in science. CLEAR will study whether
the project's approach when used in one course impacts progress in the next. The
project will put design principles from across the field to the test by
determining which instruction and assessment strategies encourage cumulative
understanding and help learners develop integrated ideas about
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. There is an urgent need to
develop accurate student assessments that measure cumulative knowledge while
eliminating the disruptions caused by tests. By measuring students' developing
understanding and ongoing efforts to make sense of new materials, the project
will be able to foster coherent understanding. The project will do this by
making assessment an integral part of computer-based
curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. By aligning assessment and
instruction around the goal of promoting understanding, the project will
demonstrate how to improve learning outcomes for any STEM course. The project
will also make courses more effective and efficient by converting assessment
from a time-wasting, curriculum-limiting chore into an integral part of learning
that fosters the accumulation of concepts across topics and grades. The results
of the proposed research will have an important bearing on the design of
effective electronic media on promoting student learnig.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is designed to have a major impact by
undertaking the kind of careful, statistically valid research design that leads
to reproducible results that can support policy. The project will be able to
tailor instruction to specific learners, increasing the impact on students at
risk for failure. The partners will continue their practice of widely dissemi-
nating findings, materials, and open source software through reviewed papers,
popular articles, talks, workshops, a website, and newsletters.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is led by Marcia C. Linn, Robert Tinker, Kathy
Benemann, Hee Sun Lee, Ou Lydia Liu, &amp; James Slotta