* 0822525
* STTR Phase II:   Condensing Ejector for Second-Step Compression in Reversed Rankine Cycle
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Mark Bergander, Magnetic Development, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2011
* USD 579,873.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II project seeks to
continue the research and analysis of condensing ejectors for second stage
compression in a refrigeration cycle. A condensing ejector is a two-phase jet
device that produces outlet pressure higher than either of inlet pressures. The
project combines theoretical and experimental models in order to design the
condensing ejector for use in more efficient refrigeration systems. The results
thus far show that the new design is capable of improving the efficiency of
vapor compression refrigeration cycle by approximately one-third with R22
refrigerant. The goal is to draw closer to this ideal value with environmentally
friendly refrigerants like R410A. The application of critical two-phase flow
devices will lead to development of more efficient thermodynamic cycles for
refrigeration and A/C and in the future possibly for propulsion and power
generation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential from
this project will bring considerable economic and societal benefits by reducing
our nation's dependence on foreign oil, improving safety of nuclear reactors and
natural gas pipelines, and better understanding of phenomena of two-phase flow.
Applications of the condensing ejector theory in heat pumps might promote use of
renewable geothermal energy sources in the remote communities with limited
energy choices. This project leads to enabling technologies by providing the
technology platform for a new approach to evaluating two-phase flows. The
capability to handle rapid phase change simulations has generated interest from
the automotive industry to simulate flash boiling in automotive fuel injection.
This project also provides the basis for establishing fundamentally new
engineering and designing methods for equipment operating on two-phase flow.