* 0822858
* Subtropical Anticyclone Forcing of the Antarctic Stratosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2008,12/31/2011
* Matthew Hitchman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 12/31/2011
* USD 434,039.00

A new hypothesis regarding the forcing of the stratosphere is that subtropical
monsoon anticyclones affect the winter long-wave pattern, and that this explains
the Southern Hemisphere (SH) "ozone croissant" as well as SH stratospheric
variability related to the El Nino/Southern Oscillation (ENSO). The studies
build on earlier work by the Principal Investigator's group, which showed that
the Southeast Asian monsoon outflow creates the wave 1 asymmetry in SH
midlatitude ozone known as the "ozone croissant." During austral winter and
spring, Southeast Asian convection maintains two anticyclones in the upper
troposphere/lower stratosphere: the Tibetan High and the Australian High.
Outflow around the Australian High into the Southern Indian Ocean forms the
entrance to the Australian subtropical westerly jet. This baroclinic zone is a
preferred band of longitudes for ozone transport and is a fundamental cause of
the ozone croissant. Intensification of tropical convection strengthens the
Australian High, which interacts with a traveling extratropical stratospheric
ridge that is rich in ozone. As the Australian High amplifies, the ridge stalls
and merges with it; this is a second dynamical cause of the croissant.
Variability of the Australian High explains approximately 40% of variability of
the strength of the ozone croissant. New results also indicate a distinct ENSO
signal in polar stratospheric clouds and in the ozone croissant.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are to understand better the SH
stratosphere, in regard to its mean dynamical structures, the pathways for ozone
transport, the relevant wave-mean flow dynamics, and its variability related to
ENSO. A hierarchy of simulations with assimilated ozone data sets, conserved
tracers, and trajectories will be carried out. Global analyses will be
dynamically filtered and applied as initial conditions in the University of
Wisconsin -Madison non-hydrostatic modeling system (UWNMS), in a domain covering
the Southern Hemisphere. Baroclinic life cycle experiments will be performed
with zonally symmetric initial conditions and with a wave 1 Australian jet. The
interactions of synoptic and planetary waves in the midlatitude surf zone will
be studied and the resulting wave behavior compared to linear theory. Pathways
for ozone transport from the subtropical stratosphere into the ozone croissant
will be determined. The effects of forcing a subtropical anticyclone on the jet
and on traveling planetary waves will be investigated. Further statistical
analyses will be performed to establish the mean structure of the austral flow
and the relationship between ENSO and the stratosphere, allowing the hypothesis
that interannual variability of the Antarctic stratosphere is linked to tropical
convection to be explored. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this work
are in enhancing our understanding of the climate dynamics underlying the
distribution of radiatively important trace constituents, interannual
predictability, and global teleconnections. A postdoctoral scholar and a
graduate student will be trained, and an undergraduate will participate in the
research.