* 0822410
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: What are our AIMs? Race, Genetics, and the Practice of Ancestry Informative Markers
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2009
* Stephanie Malia Fullerton, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kelly A. Joyce
* 07/31/2009
* USD 8,000.00

This doctoral dissertaton research improvement grant, supported by NSF's program
in Science, Technology and Society, investigates genetic ancestry testing, an
emerging research practice of great social and scientific salience. Direct-to-
Consumer ancestry tests have recently gained widespread public attention.
Ancestry Informative Markers (AIMs) and related genetic research methods have
the potential to affect biomedical and societal understandings of human health
as potently as commercial ancestry tests have affected personal and collective
identity. Situated in the context of governmental and public mandates to
eliminate racial health disparities, ancestry technologies may be instrumental
to the production of state-sponsored biomedical knowledge that is expected to
shape how racial and ethnically ascribed populations manage disease risk. Thus,
ancestry-based practices may contribute "biological citizenship:" the ways in
which individuals and groups come to know themselves as biological beings and
with this knowledge, manage their risk as responsible citizens of the state.
Through key informant interviews with genetic epidemiologists engaged in
ancestry-based research and participant-observation of ancestry-based practices,
this study examines the transition from race-based to ancestry-based
stratification in genetic epidemiology. The research investigates how current
scientific practices inform, and are informed by, the notions of risk and
responsibility central to emerging forms of biological citizenship. This study
extends the small but rich body of ethnographic research on genetics, ancestry,
and race by exploring disciplinary scientific practices in a range of
professional and institutional contexts and across research sites, and will be
of interest to both scholars of biological citizenship and scholars of race and
genetics. The project may also help genetic epidemiologists better identify the
meaning and significance of ancestry-based research practices from a socially
oriented view of the science.