* 0822119
* R&amp;D: The Role of Educative Curriculum Materials in Supporting Science Teaching Practices with English Language Learners
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* Marco Bravo, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Julio Lopez-Ferrao
* 08/31/2014
* USD 3,190,230.00

The Role of Educative Curriculum Materials&lt;br/&gt;in Supporting Science
Teaching Practices with English Language Learners&lt;br/&gt;Submitted to NSF?s
Discovery Research K-12&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Jacqueline Barber,
Lawrence Hall of Science&lt;br/&gt;Co-Principal Investigator: Marco Antonio
Bravo, San Francisco State University&lt;br/&gt;Co-Principal Investigator: Jonna
Kulikowich, Penn State University&lt;br/&gt;Curriculum developers and
researchers from the University of California, Berkeley?s Lawrence Hall of
Science, in collaboration with English language development researchers from San
Francisco State University and quantitative researchers from Penn State
University, propose a 4-year, full research and development project, focused on
Frontier Challenge A: How can all students be assured the opportunity to learn
significant STEM content?&lt;br/&gt;The proposed DRK12 project aims to: (1)
determine whether curriculum materials that are designed to support teacher
learning, as well as student learning (known as educative curriculum materials)
have positive impacts on teacher knowledge, attitudes, and instructional
practices, and if so, which educative elements teachers value and use most; (2)
determine to what degree educative curriculum materials help teachers who have
more and less experience teaching English language learners and how level of
teaching experience relates to teacher knowledge, attitudes, and instructional
practices; (3) determine the effects of the educative curriculum elements in
high implementation settings on ELL students? knowledge and attitudes in
science, and developing English proficiency; and (4) create and disseminate a
technical report that characterizes the profile of educative features that were
demonstrated to be most powerful in assisting teachers in meeting the needs of
English language learners.&lt;br/&gt;The instantiation of educative curriculum
materials used will be a fifth grade curriculum unit from the NSF-funded Seeds
of Science/Roots of Reading program for Grades 2-5, jointly developed by the
University of California, Berkeley?s Lawrence Hall of Science and Graduate
School of Education. Built into the Seeds of Science/Roots of Reading teacher?s
guides are just-in-time educative features, designed to support teacher
learning.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study will proceed in two phases. The goal of
Phase One is to provide an opportunity to strengthen student measures, to give
60 teachers an opportunity to gain experience in implementing the unit and using
the educative curriculum elements, and to allow program researchers to identify
the highest implementation settings for a more focused study. In Phase Two, we
will focus the study on 20 teachers who were high implementers of the educative
curriculum elements in order to answer our questions about whether and how
educative curriculum materials can support teachers in meeting the instructional
needs of English language learners. Data will be analyzed using quantitative and
qualitative approaches, including growth curve analysis and grounded
theory.&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed study will be to
advance knowledge and understanding of: (1) the potential of well-designed
educative curriculum materials to serve as an important part of the teacher
professional learning picture; and (2) ways to enhance teachers? capabilities
for working with a diverse student population.&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of
the proposed study will be to: (1) make deeper STEM content accessible to
English language learners; (2) gather evidence to help set a new standard for
curriculum materials so they routinely provide the assistance teachers require
to meet the needs of an increasingly linguistically-diverse populace; and (3)
contribute a teacher knowledge measure to the field.