* 0822688
* Scholars Award: A History of Innovation and Ownership in Living Matter
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Daniel Kevles, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2010
* USD 138,510.00

The PI requests funding to complete a book tentatively titled Vital Properties:
A History of Innovation and Ownership in Living Matter. The book is a history of
innovations in living organisms and their parts (e.g., plants, animals,
microorganisms, and human genes), and of efforts to protect the intellectual
property that they embody; it spans from the late eighteenth century to the
present. The innovations include breeding practices and the acquisition and
introduction into the market of new types of animals and plants from imports as
well as, in the case of fruit trees and vines, chance finds in the fields. It
also includes new plant varieties devised in agricultural experiment stations
and of genetically modified organisms and human genes that have arisen in
academic laboratories and have been licensed to biotechnology
companies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vital Properties will be the first book to deal
comprehensively with its subject and the first to treat innovation in living
organisms in relation not only to the patent protection that has come to cover
them but also to the arrangements for intellectual property protection that were
devised outside that system in the United States from the early nineteenth
century through the mid-twentieth century. It will constitute a significant
contribution to the growing body of scholarly work that seeks to historicize
intellectual property for a broad range of technologies and contextualize its
development in the evolving political and legal economy from the early modern
period to the present. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The book will be written for both
general and scholarly audiences and will likely be of interest to historians,
policymakers, IP lawyers, and analysts of entrepreneurship, agriculture,
biomedicine, and globalization. It will be published by a prominent trade
publisher, and will thus reach out to a larger public. It will have substantial
potential to affect understanding of, and perhaps even policy debates on, the
relation of intellectual property to innovation and entrepreneurship in a
competitive national and globalizing economy. It will also throw into historical
perspective thereby help clarify or at least contextualize contemporary debates
over the control of intellectual property in the food and biomedical sectors
with regard to equity between countries in the developed North and the
developing South; it will also do so with regards to IP-related issues
concerning access to the products of high-technology biomedical research such as
pharmaceuticals and the tools of genetic diagnosis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funds
for this project were provided by a joint venture of the BIO and SBE
directorates known as "Impacts of Biology on Society," which is administered via
the STS program.