* 0822513
* The Growth of Tense and Agreement
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Pamela Hadley, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Namy
* 08/31/2013
* USD 509,013.00

Children produce first word combinations and sentences around 18 and 21 months,
respectively. By 24 months, grammatical forms begin to appear that mark
sentences for tense and agreement (e.g., "There's a car." "This goes here.").
Throughout the third year, children vary in their production of sentences.
Sometimes they produce sentences without a tense morpheme like "Daddy _
working", and at other times, they produce the adult-like version "Daddy is
working." With development, children fully integrate these tense and agreement
morphemes into a generative mental system. In this sense, generativity refers to
children's ability to produce new sentences never heard before with the expected
tense and agreement morphemes. This project measures developmental change in
this generative system and tests the hypothesis that grammatical growth is
characterized by a predictable developmental trajectory with individual
variation surrounding this trajectory. A productivity approach is used to
measure grammatical development to minimize the likelihood that early sentences
are produced as part of automatic phrases. Automatic phrases can be produced
without using underlying grammatical knowledge in much the same way that a
second language user learns to produce a few stock phrases like "si se puede."
Inclusion of automatic phrases or "direct activations" has obscured accuracy
measures of tense/agreement morpheme use as well as efforts to characterize
patterns of developmental change under the age of 3. This project has three
specific objectives: (a) to reveal the measurement error introduced by direct
activations at the onset of grammatical development, (b) to characterize general
patterns and individual variation in the growth of tense and agreement; and (c)
to test the stability of grammatical growth during this early period. Language
samples from 50 children obtained at 21, 24, 27, 30, 33 and 36 months will
provide the primary data for modeling the growth of tense and agreement. Study 1
will compare growth models using productivity versus accuracy measures. Study 2
will use data from these models to predict 36-month tense/agreement accuracy on
standardized probes. Study 3 will compare the extent to which early productivity
and accuracy growth trajectories (21 to 27 months) predict later accuracy growth
trajectories (27 to 36 months). Finally, Study 4 will determine the extent to
which the frequency, informativeness, and diversity of tense/agreement morpheme
use in parental language input at 21 months explains the variation in growth
rates. The results are expected to reveal both the gradual nature of grammatical
growth and the existence of robust individual variation. In addition, the
findings will address the contribution of language input to growth and
variation.

Theories of grammatical development must explain the variable use and gradual
acquisition of tense and agreement. Current theoretical debate has focused
primarily upon why variable use occurs. The current project will refocus the
debate upon why some children resolve this period of variable use more rapidly
than others. Differences in developmental rate require explanation and are
likely to be affected by a complex combination of biological, environmental, and
developmental factors. However, improved measurement precision and documentation
of underlying growth trajectories are critically needed as a foundation for
these future investigations. In addition, documentation of the typical range of
variation for children under the age of 3 will provide developmental
expectations that can be used to improve the early identification of children at
risk for persistent language impairments.