* 0822404
* AGMUS Institute of Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2015
* Teresa Lipsett, Universidad Metropolitana
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 08/31/2015
* USD 2,159,999.00

The Ana G. Mendez University System (AGMUS), a non-profit organization serving
36,000 underrepresented, economically disadvantaged students in Puerto Rico at
three main educational campuses, Universidad Metropolitana (UMET), Universidad
del Turabo (UT) and Universidad del Este (UNE) in partnership with the
Department of Education of the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and research
institutions and mentors in the US mainland has designed the NSF/AGMUS Institute
of Mathematics. The Institute will continue the successful best practices of the
Model Institutions for Excellence (MIE) program developed very successful best
practices to motivate economically disadvantaged pre-college and undergraduate
students to select science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
fields as their professional careers at college and at graduate school. The
intellectual merit of the NSF/AGMUS Institute of Mathematics is to offer
exceptional research opportunities to talented youngsters from Puerto Rico to
become the next generation of mathematicians and leaders. The implementation of
the research activities of the Institute at the pre-college and undergraduate
levels will enhance the intellectual capability and motivate science and
mathematics majors to pursue careers at the graduate level (Master's and Ph.Ds)
in mathematics. This program together with a scholarship program for math
majors, the creation of a BS degree program in biomathematics, a summer research
experience at institutions in Puerto Rico, the US mainland and abroad, and a
bridge to graduate school for math majors are the major components of the
activities of the NSF/AGMUS Institute of Mathematics. The goal of this proposal
is the creation of a Center to foster the study of mathematics among the youth
of Puerto Rico. The objectives of this proposal are to: (1) develop a pre-
college program in mathematics for 625 middle and high school students and for
60 science and math teachers from Puerto Rico; (2) develop a math scholarship
program for 20 undergraduates/year from the Ana G. MÃ©ndez University System; (3)
develop a biomathematics curriculum at the BS level offering 136 credit hours;
(4) develop a summer research experience program in mathematics for 25 middle
and high school students, 50 undergraduates and 60 math teachers in research
institutions, national laboratories, universities, and industry in Puerto Rico,
the US mainland and abroad; (5) develop a Bridge to Graduate School initiative
to enhance transfer to graduate studies in mathematics for undergraduates from
Puerto Rican colleges and universities; (6) disseminate the outcomes of the
project locally, nationally and internationally. The greater impact of the
NSF/AGMUS Project lies on the large number of educational opportunities offered
to 625 pre-college students, 50 undergraduates and 60 math teachers for the
period of the grant. This proposal will have a significant impact on the life of
economically disadvantaged students, mentors and administrators by creating a
researchoriented community of scholars willing work for success and excellence
in mathematics. The results of the project and research outcomes of the scholars
will be disseminated through conferences and publications by the PI, Co-PI and
participants to the communities at the universities, nationally and worldwide by
internet through the AGMUS webpage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will be
managed by Dr. Juan F. Arratia, a senior scientist and administrator, and
supported by an External Advisory Committee formed by distinguished scientists
and scholars from the United States of America.