* 0822862
* SBIR Phase II:  Innovative control of ectoparasites: key to expansion of open ocean fish farming
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2011
* Jennica Lowell, OCEAN ERA, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 07/31/2011
* USD 505,398.00

This SBIR Phase II research targets innovative means for controlling
ectoparasite pests in open ocean aquaculture. Offshore fish farming offers
tremendous growth opportunities. Adaptive fish health management offshore
remains a challenge for environmentally sound expansion of this potentially
lucrative industry. PEDICURe (Passive Ectoparasite Device In Counter-current
Underwater Reservoir) prototypes showed great efficacy in treating ectoparasite
pests in marine fish in tank trials. Phase II research will refine therapeutic
treatments, PEDICURe designs and protocols for use. Commercial-scale prototypes
will be deployed and tested in offshore cages. PEDICURes could be sold or
licensed to fish farms worldwide. PEDICURes could also provide compelling
competitive advantages to drive expanded production in Hawaii, U.S. waters, or
globally.

The broader impacts of this research are in increasing the environmentally sound
means for optimizing fish health in open ocean aquaculture, and thereby aiding
the growth in this innovative, exciting and potentially lucrative industry.
Offshore farms can produce high-value marine fish without significant impacts on
water quality, benthic habitats or other ocean user groups. Cost savings to a $1
billion U.S. offshore farming industry could be $115 million p.a. There are
potential applications worldwide.