* 0822373
* S: Identifying Critical Characteristics of Effective Feedback Practices in Science and Mathematics Education
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2009,03/31/2012
* Maria Araceli Ruiz-Primo, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 03/31/2012
* USD 271,327.00

Although there is substantial evidence about the positive effects of feedback, a
major lack is systematic knowledge about what kinds of feedback are needed by
different students, in what forms, and for which types of learning tasks. This
project will define and synthesize effective feedback strategies that can be
linked to specific features of daily classroom assessment practices.
&lt;br/&gt;Instead of providing general evidence about effectiveness, the
project will summarize, integrate, and interpret a range of feedback studies
that are conceptually comparable based on particular mediators and moderators
involved in feedback practices. These mediators and moderators would include,
for example, difficulty of instructional tasks, cognitive demands tapped by
tasks (e.g., declarative, procedural, schematic, or strategic knowledge), or
student characteristics (e.g., low or high achievers, low or high
motivation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be guided by three research
questions: (1) What constitutes the range of feedback strategies that have been
studied in science and mathematics education?; (2) what constitutes the critical
mediators and moderators of feedback practices (e.g., learning goals and student
characteristics)in which such feedback strategies have been implemented?; and
(3) what are the critical characteristics of feedback strategies that
empirically have proved to have a positive impact on student learning?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop a framework, including a
conceptual strand that will conceptualize feedback practice considering
intrinsic and contextual dimensions and a methodological strand that will be
used to describe and evaluate the feedback studies and findings to be
synthesized. The proposed framework will provide a language that can be shared
within and across multiple forms of research in various disciplines to portray
feedback practices. The framework and research questions will also lead to
criteria for inclusion and exclusion to be used to identify eligible articles
and reports for the synthesis. Based on the framework, we will develop and apply
a two-level coding system to specify and evaluate the findings from each
eligible study. Finally, the coded information will be summarized to identify
patterns and trends across the studies, which in turn will be used for a
narrative review and a quantitative summary in the form of a meta-
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The project will result in a
substantially more complete and detailed theoretical framework than what
currently exists for characterizing effective feedback strategies in science
education. This understanding will allow for (1) refinement of a theoretical
framework that explains the feedback process and its quality, and (2) concrete,
easy-to-apply recommendations for science teachers to effectively and
formatively use assessments in their daily work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The study will help professional developers and teachers understand
what is required to effectively implement feedback practices that have a
positive impact on student learning. The research will also produce clearer
criteria for improving, evaluating, and monitoring teachers' feedback practices
in daily teaching as well as for designing professional development for pre- and
in-service teachers of science and mathematics. Results from the project will
also fill in the research gap, contribute to the literature on formative
assessment, and help define research and development agendas. The project will
create a toolkit for practitioners as well as articles for publication.