* 0822695
* STTR Phase II:  3D Lithography of Thick Photopolymers for Imaging and Photonic Crystal Waveguides
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2008,01/31/2013
* Jacob Kuykendall, Zenwa Inc
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 01/31/2013
* USD 845,873.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II project will culminate
in a new form of 3D lithography capable of fabricating imaging arrays and
photonic-crystal waveguides that are cheaper, higher performance, lighter, more
flexible and have capabilities not currently possible with current ?stack and
draw? manufacturing. For example, by directly fabricating these parts at the
micron scale, perturbations such as global scaling (to implement magnifying
arrays), global rotation (to implement image inverters) or local scaling (to
implement modal tapers or integrated lenslets) can be created in a single
process step. Unlike current methods which must draw out a minimum of km from a
preform, here single parts can be cm in length. The imaging arrays have
significant commercial potential as replacements for current endoscopes, fiber
face plates and image inverters. They also enable new markets including
inexpensive eye monitoring for clinical and public safety applications, wearable
gaze-tracking for human-computer interface for paralysis victims, and ultra
lightweight heads-up displays for military and consumer entertainment. The team
will develop both the lithography and materials to create these all-polymer
imaging cables. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The transport and manipulation of optical
images is ubiquitous but nearly uniformly implemented with delicate, rigid lens
trains. Discrete imaging devices such as fiber bundles are sufficient for modern
digital displays and cameras and are naturally robust, but currently limited by
cost and capability. By enabling flexible, lightweight transport of discrete
images, the results will impact ? Education, Medical and Biological Research and
Macular Degeneration. The Phase I including supplementary funding has partially
funded 7graduate, 1 post-doc and two undergraduate students. An exchange of
graduate students with Dublin Ireland extended this impact. The lithography
system has been used in multiple undergraduate class projects and for multiple
cross-disciplinary graduate research programs. Disposable endoscopes with high
resolution, small diameter and large field of view exceed current capabilities
at much lower costs. Zenwa has signed a collaborative agreement with the Smith-
Kettlewell Eye Research Institute to develop a lightweight customized image
delivery system to restore sight to the severely vision impaired. &lt;br/&gt;