* 0822703
* Summer Science Camp for Native American Youth:  Finding Common Ground Between Scientific Ecology
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2008,08/31/2013
* Robin Kimmerer, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 08/31/2013
* USD 118,329.00

Summer Science Camp for Native American Youth&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center
for Native Peoples and the Environment (CNPE) at the State University of New
York (SUNY) College of Environmental Science and Forestry (ESF) will develop and
coordinate an ecological science education program in collaboration with Native
American communities of the northeastern United States. Integral to this effort
is a ten-day summer field experience which will combine ecological science and
traditional ecological knowledge. The program would serve 20 Native American
students annually, for a sequence of three years. Students will be recruited
from the 15 tribes in the northeastern United States, through existing
collaborative networks. SUNY ESF Cranberry Lake Biological Station (CLBS) in the
western Adirondacks and the Thompson Island Youth Camp (TIYC) operated by the
Mohawk Council of Akwesasne, on the St. Lawrence River will be utilized. The two
sites represent centers of scientific ecological knowledge and traditional
ecological knowledge, respectively and both are well equipped and staffed to
provide programs in that arena. This program will nurture motivation and
preparation for higher education in environmental sciences among Native American
youth, through this summer science experience which combines scientific and
traditional ecological knowledge. It will foster collaborative scientific and
educational initiatives between Native American Nations and SUNY ESF Center for
Native Peoples and the Environment, which can serve as a model for university-
tribal partnerships. For additional information, contact Robin Kimmerer, PI at:
rkimmer@esf.edu and visit http://www.esf.edu/efb/faculty/kimmerer.htm
.&lt;br/&gt;