* 0822892
* Protest Psychosis: Race, Science, and the Stigma of Schizophrenia
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2009,05/31/2011
* Jonathan Metzl, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Kelly A. Joyce
* 05/31/2011
* USD 164,797.00

This research, supported by the Science, Technology &amp; Society Program at
NSF, is a historical study that connects issues of scientific diagnosis and
civil rights. Over the past decade, neuroscience has made significant progress
toward understanding the neurobiological basis of schizophrenia. Yet, popular
attitudes about schizophrenia remain largely unaffected by scientific advances.
Surveys of popular opinion consistently link schizophrenia, not to brain
biology, but to a host of social misperceptions. Chief among these is the
association between schizophrenia and violence. For instance, the percentage of
the population who view persons with schizophrenia as being "dangerous or
unpredictable" more than doubled over the latter half of the twentieth century,
even though research shows that, far from posing a threat to others, people
diagnosed with schizophrenia have victimization rates 65 to 130 percent higher
than those of the general public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores
the historical disconnect between science and society regarding beliefs about
schizophrenia. It studies the surprising and often inadvertent ways in which
American beliefs about the criminality of schizophrenia emerged in the 1960s-
and 1970s in context of a larger set of conversations about race. Over this
vital twenty-year time period, research about aberrations in brain biology
unintentionally combined with growing cultural anxieties about civil rights.
Meanwhile, reports about new "psychochemical" technologies of symptom control
merged with concerns about the "uncontrolled" nature of urban unrest (unrest
which was often stereotypically associated with African American communities).
As these historical contingencies evolved, the American public, and at times
members of the scientific community, increasingly described schizophrenia as a
violent social disease, even as biomedicine argued that schizophrenia was a
disorder of biological brain function. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three-part
project highlights the complex relationships between science, medicine, and
American popular culture. Part one systematically analyzes popular beliefs about
the biology of schizophrenia from the 1960s to the present. Part two tracks
changing scientific understandings about the biology and race of schizophrenia.
Finally, part three explores how popular, scientific, and medical notions of
schizophrenia collided within the walls of a particular institution, the Ionia
Hospital for the Criminally Insane in Ionia, Michigan. The project's larger goal
is to argue that stigmatizations of psychiatric disorders need be historically
understood if these disorders are to be effectively treated in the present day.