* 0822536
* International Collaboration In Chemistry: Combined Experimental And Computational Investigations of a Nucleophilic Displacement Reaction With A Hydride Leaving Group
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2008,12/31/2011
* Willem van der Donk, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 12/31/2011
* USD 460,000.00

Phosphite dehydrogenase catalyzes a chemically unique reaction that so far has
eluded a detailed understanding. The enzyme oxidizes phosphite to phosphate in a
reaction that has no precedent in chemistry or biology. Although it is not
understood in detail how the enzyme achieves catalysis, it is used industrially
as an essential helper enzyme (a so-called cofactor regeneration enzyme) for
enzymatic production of chemicals that are important for human use. Therefore, a
better understanding of the mechanism utilized by the enzyme may help in
improving the performance of the protein. In addition, such understanding will
provide new insights into how an enzyme can catalyze a chemical reaction that
looks improbable and apparently does not take place in the absence of the
enzyme.

This proposal describes the use of multidisciplinary expertise in the van der
Donk laboratory at the University of Illinois and the Mulholland laboratory at
the University of Bristol, UK to investigate this highly unusual reaction using
both computational and experimental methods. Given the nature of the questions
to be addressed and the challenges this system poses, the program requires the
development of new methodologies. The development of practically useful
computational techniques, and their successful application to complex systems
such as enzymes will benefit enormously from a combined experimental and
computational approach.

In the process of these investigations, new methods will be developed that will
be widely applicable for investigations of other biochemical processes. The
theoretical developments in the Mulholland group will be driven by the needs of
experimental biochemistry, and will be carried out in an integrated,
collaborative program. This will include the transfer and development of
expertise in the project to other scientists. Experimental testing of
predictions in the van der Donk group will challenge and validate the
computation techniques (e.g., the effects of enzyme mutations). Furthermore, the
collaboration will afford training of computational chemists in the relevant
experimental techniques and experimental chemists in state-of-the-art
computational methods through continuous exchange of ideas, data, models,
methods and personnel between the laboratories. Thus, it is anticipated that
this program will produce a cadre of internationally aware young scientists who
can communicate effectively across disciplines, and apply and understand the
range of techniques that will be at the heart of biochemistry in the future.
Undergraduate students from underrepresented minorities will be included in this
program and will accompany Dr. van der Donk to the annual SACNAS (Society for
the Advancement of Chicanos and Native Americans in Science) meeting to
encourage these students to pursue graduate school. Dr. van der Donk is the
faculty advisor of a recently established SACNAS chapter at UIUC.This
international collaborative research project is supported jointly by NSF and the
Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) in the United
Kingdom. The study is also supported by the Office of International Science and
Engineering (OISE) at NSF.