* 0822890
* Race and Place Identities: Defining America's Historic Black Towns in the 21st Century
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2008,01/31/2012
* Karla Slocum, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 01/31/2012
* USD 87,530.00

Dr. Karla Slocum will undertake ethnographic, statistical, and archival research
on Oklahoma's "all-Black towns." During the late 19th and early 20th centuries,
self-identified Black Americans settled 30 planned, rural towns known as "all-
Black towns." The settlers were descendants of slaves, some held by Native
Americans in the west and some from the plantation south. Influenced both by the
exclusion and discrimination they had experienced and by the teachings of the
educator, Booker T. Washington, the settlers advocated an ideology of racial
solidarity and self-reliance. Today, 13 of these communities
remain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the researcher will investigate
how the founding ideology has been affected by a century of change, and the
principles, histories, and identities that the townspeople claim today. The 13
remaining towns still are predominantly Black, but residents now intersect
increasingly with non-Black communities, institutions, and ideologies. Earlier
ideologies of racial separation have been confronted by more recent national and
global ideologies of racial integration, multiculturalism, and the importance of
racial or ethnic heritage. What role do history, national ideas about race and
globalization currently play in defining the towns? What is the racial
composition of the social, economic and political networks in which Black town
residents engage and how do such networks shape how the towns are defined
today?&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To answer these questions, the PI will draw on
archival data, conduct interviews with town residents and affiliates, and
observe and record dimensions of town events and everyday town social life. The
project will provide critical insights into the changing role of race as a
possible motivator of community organizing and definition. Moreover, it will
inform us about two under-researched areas: Black community identities in rural
contexts, and the role of globalization in African American communities.