* 0822204
* Collaborative Research: R&amp;D: Cyber-Enabled Design Research to Enhance Teachers' Critical Thinking Using a Major Video Collection on Children's Mathematical Reasoning
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2008,04/30/2015
* Carolyn Maher, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca A. Kruse
* 04/30/2015
* USD 2,370,353.00

The four-year research and development project, among Rutgers Robert B. Davis
Institute for Learning (RBDIL), Rutgers University Libraries, and the University
of Wisconsin (Madison), is addressing the frontier challenge of supporting STEM
teachers' practice and development using cutting-edge cyber-enabled technology.
It is leveraging the Video Mosaic Collaboratory (VMC), an interactive digital
environment supporting video-based teacher professional development and related
research, being offered through the Rutgers University Libraries cyber
infrastructure, currently under development with NSF support. The VMC contains
indexed video cases from the video collection from RBDIL with accompanying data
on students' mathematical reasoning, an extensive collection based on NSF-
supported research spanning two decades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A systematic
design research study is being conducted utilizing RBDIL's video collection to
support designing and sharing adaptable mathematics teacher professional
development interventions and to generate testable hypotheses about factors
influencing intervention success. Diverse school and university sites in New
Jersey and Wisconsin are developing video-based instruction appropriate to local
contexts. A multi-site experimental design containing within-site comparison
groups is testing the hypothesis that well-designed interventions based on
teachers studying videos of children's thinking can increase their performance
on measures of expertise that include knowledge of mathematics, children's
mathematical reasoning, and related beliefs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
is demonstrating the use of cyber-enabled technologies to build and share
adaptable interventions for pre and in-service teacher growth that effectively
make use of major video collections and have high promise of success at multiple
sites. The cyber infrastructure being provided by the VMC and significantly
extended through this project is supporting development and documentation of
additional interventions for teacher professional development using this video
collection, as well as other videos that might be added in the future by teacher
educators or researchers, including those working in other STEM domains.