* 0822972
* SBIR Phase II:  Electronic Orientation and Navigation System for People with  Visual Impairments
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2010
* Michael Manning, ManningRF, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2010
* USD 500,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II research project will design,
build and test a new type of orientation and navigation (O&amp;N) system for
people with visual impairments. While GPS-based solutions show promise in
outdoor environments, there are currently no widespread O&amp;N devices that are
designed for use in indoor environments. This makes it difficult for people with
visual impairments to navigate through indoor public spaces. The purpose of this
research will be to complete development of a new type of radio frequency
identification (RFID) system, in which intelligent, variable-range active RFID
beacons are programmed with information about their locations and placed through
indoor environments like schools, shopping malls and museums. This information
will be accessible to people with visual impairments via a small RFID receiver
worn on the user?s belt. Information will be conveyed to the user via a text-to-
speech interface. Results from field testing have demonstrated that the device
helps people with visual impairments to navigate through an unfamiliar
environment. Phase II research will complete development of the communications
protocols and interface techniques that give the system its unique capabilities
for delivering speech-based information to people with visual
impairments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are 10.4 million people with visual
impairments in the U.S., and this research will lead to an inexpensive
commercial product that will greatly enhance their ability to navigate in
unfamiliar surroundings. The market for this technology includes those who will
purchase the RFID receivers and the RFID beacons. This includes people with
visual impairments, as well as the owners and tenants of public spaces, such as
office buildings, schools, malls, museums and government facilities. Also,
because of the simplicity of the interface, the system will be useful to
Orientation and Mobility educators working with young children to develop
spatial concepts.&lt;br/&gt;