* 0822739
* STTR Phase II:   A Multi-Axis Planning System (MAPS) for Direct Fabrication Processes
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Jianzhong Ruan, Product Innovation and Engineering, L.L.C.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 07/31/2012
* USD 734,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II research project focuses
on the development of an innovative Multi-Axis Planning System (MAPS), for
layered manufacturing processes. By enabling current direct metal deposition
systems to fully control and utilize multi-axis capability to make complex
parts, MAPS will enable fully-automated process planning for multi-axis layered
manufacturing processes to directly control metal deposition machines used in
automated fabrication. The building of complicated shapes without support
structures is a major challenge for current direct metal deposition processes.
This proposed Phase II research will continue to research and develop the
'centroidal axis' algorithm in multi-axis slicing, with an emphasis on
completeness and robustness for complicated shapes such as geometry with
multiple loops and internal structures. This algorithm will allow manufacturing
systems to handle parts with multiple loop features. Additional features to be
developed under this Phase II project include a deposition visibility map for
efficient computation on the collision-free slicing/deposition sequence in a
multi-axis scenario, and a '3-D layer' toolpath generation which will provide an
alternative turning algorithm for the deposition process.

The proposed project will impact the manufacturing industry by incorporating
fully-automated multi-axis control capability into the rapid manufacturing
industry to produce fully functional metal parts with complicated shapes. This
capability will lead to dramatic reductions in lead time and manufacturing costs
for high-value, low-volume components with high performance material. Assuming
the outcomes are successful, the project will several segments such as
aerospace, military, motor sports, automotive, industrial machinery, medicine,
dentistry, and consumer products.