* 0822200
* R&amp;D: Developing Science Problem-Solving Skills and Engagement Through Intelligent Game-Based Learning Environments
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2008,12/31/2012
* James Lester, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Haury
* 12/31/2012
* USD 2,523,297.00

The project builds on the earlier developed Crystal Island and draws upon
intelligent tutoring and narrative-centered learning technologies to produce a
suite of intelligent game-based learning environments for upper elementary
school science students. The games explicitly model student knowledge and
problem solving and dynamically customize feedback, advice, and explanation as
appropriate. Unlike its predecessor, the platform is multi-user so it can
support collaboration; offer dynamically generated feedback, advice, and
explanation; and provide a pedagogical dashboard that generates student progress
reports.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students navigate rich storyworlds setup by
engaging narratives, interact with a large cast of characters in the game, and
manipulate artifacts in the environment in the course of solving problems. They
are entering an intelligent, game-based learning environment that is a
laboratory where researchers can investigating various approaches through which
complex problem-solving skills can be most effectively acquired. Because such
environments include multiplayer interaction and voice communication, research
can study complex communication in the context of collaborative problem solving.
With multiple students coordinating their efforts to solve problems, intelligent
game-based learning environments create situations that require effective
collaboration skills. Through these, engagement is also studied, which includes
motivation, situational interest, presence, flow, goal-orientation, and self-
efficacy.