* 0822213
* R&D:  Evolution Readiness: A Modeling Approach
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Paul Horwitz, Concord Consortium
* Standard Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 08/31/2012
* USD 1,990,459.00

This project will use computer-based models of interacting organisms and their
environments to support a learning progression leading to an appreciation of the
theory of evolution and evidence that supports it. The proposal team will build
hypermodels: curricular activities and formative assessments that link
manipulable models to text and multimedia materials. The target population is
public school students in grades 3 through 5. Students are not expected to come
to a full understanding of every facet of this most encompassing of theories.
However, it is anticipated that they will come to appreciate evolution as an
emergent behavior; the remarkable outcome of a series of elementary processes
that they have learned about through observation of natural phenomena as well as
the direct manipulation of computational models. Evolution is perhaps the most
challenging subject in the K-12 life science curriculum. This project will
create a research-based curriculum, starting at very early grades and centered
on progressively complex models that exhibit emergent behavior. Taking advantage
of technology created in prior NSF-funded research, students' actions will be
tracked as they interact with computer-based models, collecting extremely fine-
grained performance data. Previous research indicates such data is a robust
predictor of subsequent learning gains as measured by conventional question-and-
answer assessments, even on items that do not relate directly to the experiments
performed. By continuing this line of research, the project will help to improve
the teaching of complex scientific topic areas and provide a reliable means of
directly assessing students' conceptual understanding and inquiry skills, as
opposed to their recall of science facts. Evolution is a particularly daunting
subject to understand, as the evidence for it is often indirect and the theory
rests largely on phenomena that cannot be directly observed. By combining
advances in educational technology with improved understanding of young
children's cognitive development, this project will produce an empirically
validated learning progression for teaching evolution. It is anticipated that
students who follow this progression in elementary and middle school will better
understand both the implications of the model and the evidentiary and
theoretical basis for it.