* 0822596
* Conference - GALANA UConn
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Diane Lillo-Martin, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 08/31/2011
* USD 25,514.00

The 2008 GALANA conference (Generative Approaches to Language Acquisition -
North America) will bring together researchers, ranging from graduate students
to senior scientists, who are asking biological questions about language
acquisition: What exactly are the contributions of human biology to the process
by which a child acquires her native language? Or to the process by which an
adult acquires a foreign language? In the case of the child, the extremely high
rate of success suggests that biology provides considerable guidance. Yet,
languages still differ from one another in important ways. What are the choices
that the child has to make?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The special theme of the 2008
meeting will be 'Language Acquisition and Cross-linguistic Variation'. The field
of language acquisition is now well positioned to address a foundational
question in linguistic theory: Are the points of cross-linguistic variation a
"deep" domain of scientific inquiry, one where we can expect to discover richly
explanatory generalizations? Language acquisition provides a valuable (and
underutilized) testing ground for theories of cross-linguistic variation,
because theories of grammatical variation across the worlds' languages are
simultaneously theories of the "hypothesis space" for a child acquiring her
native language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact of GALANA 2008 will be felt
in at least four areas. First, the conference will make a major contribution to
doctoral training in linguistics and language acquisition, by providing a forum
for doctoral students to present their research projects (either as papers or as
posters), to receive feedback from major international scholars, and to network
with one another. Second, the provision of high-quality ASL interpreting will
ensure that the conference includes the contributions of Deaf students and
faculty. Third, the GALANA 2008 proceedings volume is an important venue for
scholarly communication about the latest research findings, and will reach a
broader audience than the conference itself. Fourth, and perhaps most
interestingly, the special session on Language Acquisition and Cross-linguistic
Variation aims to have a significant impact on the way research, both
theoretical and acquisitional, is practiced in the years to come.