* 0822779
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grant: A History of Animal Exchanges and Displays in Yellowstone National Park and the Nation's Leading Zoos
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2010
* Mary Murphy, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2010
* USD 8,000.00

Introduction: This proposes to conduct research in archives at Yellowstone
National Park, the National Archives, the Bronx Zoo, and the National Park
Service Archives in Harpers Ferry. The purpose of doing so is to help document
the history of animal exchanges conducted by Yellowstone National Park and
leading zoos to determine how Yellowstone fit within a national network of
animal exchanges and to analyze how, why, and when the Park established these
exchanges. The resulting dissertation, "Animals and Artifacts: A History of
Animal Exchanges and Displays in Yellowstone National Park and the Nation's
Leading Zoos, 1872-1929," will provide a new perspective on the history of
wildlife management and conservation within Yellowstone, particularly as it
relates to the nation's leading zoos. By situating these practices within the
history of conservation and captive breeding programs, it may shed new light on
the origins of conservation biology during the Progressive era, as well as
contribute to a more complete history of American zoos and natural history
museums.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: While historians have focused
on wildlife conservation and Yellowstone National Park, one wildlife management
and conservation strategy, which led to "a special relationship" between
Yellowstone, the National Zoo, and other leading zoos around the country, has
not been investigated. This practice led to informal understandings and
mechanisms of exchange for shipping animals to zoos, museums, and wildlife
preserves and, in some instances, for receiving animals in return for breeding
and display. A better understanding of these exchanges between the nation's
first park and the nation's leading zoological parks could lead to a new and
more complete history of Yellowstone's function as an early center of wildlife
conservation, captive breeding, and public education. In addition, the research
will contribute to a more complete understanding of how public displays of
wildlife transitioned from skins and skeletons to life; i.e., from taxidermied
displays to living animal displays (and sometimes back again) for education and
research.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: National park historians and
wildlife managers alike benefit from having a better understanding of past
management practices, in the historical, social and cultural context in which
they occurred. If research reveals that Yellowstone was viewed as a kind of Eden
for the nation and for the nation's leading zoos, that could help scientists and
historians better understand the conservation policies that followed. If
Yellowstone operated much like a zoo during this period, but resisted pressures
to become a zoo in the long term, it may also help managers make more informed
decisions and respond to increasing pressure on Park wildlife in the future. It
may also help zoos reconsider their own histories (and possible futures) as they
better understand the relationships zoos and national parks have forged in the
past. As James Pritchard has written, we "cannot understand the management of
our parks or hope for enlightened park management if we fail to see our parks in
a historical context."