* 0822033
* Genome-wide Exploration of miRNA-mediated Network Motifs
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Uwe Ohler, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2012
* USD 680,000.00

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are extremely small (21-23 nucleotide) RNAs that do not
encode proteins but serve as important post-transcriptional regulators.
Specifically, miRNAs target messenger RNAs to which they are perfectly
complementary for degradation, and those to which they can base pair with
internal mismatches for translational repression. It is widely believed that
miRNAs are embedded in an extensive array of gene regulatory circuits, thereby
playing essential roles in establishing and maintaining cellular functions
during development and differentiation. However, direct evidence in support of
this proposal is lacking. Given the importance of miRNAs in gene regulation, one
key question is how miRNA biogenesis itself is regulated at the levels of
transcription and processing. To date, little has been learned about
transcriptional regulation of miRNA genes, mainly due to the lack of information
about the precise location of miRNA promoters. Mapping the transcriptional
regulatory elements that comprise miRNA promoters is critical for determining
the sequence motifs present and the factors with which they interact to turn on
and off miRNA synthesis. The goal of this research project is to (1) use high
throughput methods to globally determine the transcription start sites of miRNA
genes in human cells; and (2) to use computational strategies to identify the
sequence elements and regulatory factors involved in miRNA transcriptional
control. Therefore, this study will serve as an initial yet critical step
towards dissecting the molecular mechanism underlying regulated miRNA
expression, bringing us one step closer to fully understanding miRNA-mediated
gene regulation at the network/system level. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
proposed project provides unique training opportunities for undergraduate,
graduate and postdoctoral fellows in genome science, including but not limited
to genome technology development and computational biology. In addition, the
research program will promote curriculum development for graduate and
undergraduate courses with an emphasis on genome biology. By taking advantage of
the existing infrastructure and outreach programs at Duke University, in
particular at the Institute for Genome Sciences &amp; Policy and its associated
NIGMS National Center for Systems Biology, the project will reach out to
scientists of diverse backgrounds as well as educate the general public.