* 0822926
* SABERTOOTHS: WHAT, WHEN, HOW, AND WHY- A WORKSHOP APPROACH TO THE ENIGMA, May 12-14, 2008 on the campus of Idaho State University, Pocatello, Idaho
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2008,03/31/2009
* William Akersten, Idaho State University
* Standard Grant
* Judith Skog
* 03/31/2009
* USD 12,000.00

SABER-TOOTHS: WHAT, WHEN, HOW, AND WHY: A WORKSHOP&lt;br/&gt;APPROACH TO THE
ENIGMA&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;William Akersten&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the
past 50 million years, at least five lineages of carnivorous mammals, from
marsupials through the primitive placental creodonts to the derived placental
carnivores have evolved saber-tooth characteristics only to become extinct -
none exist today. Paleontologists and the general public have long been
fascinated by the extreme, even bizarre, adaptations of saber-toothed mammals.
This interest often led to equally bizarre hypotheses as to the use of the
saber-like upper canine teeth including melon slicing, walrus-like mollusk
grubbing, blood sucking, and tree climbing aids analogous to linesmen spurs. In
both the scientific and popular literature, saber-toothed carnivores have often
been lumped as a single phenomenon or ecomorph. While certain major basic
morphologic patterns are common to saber-toothed carnivores, recognition and
interpretation of differences in detail among the various kinds have gained
prominence during the past several decades. At the same time that it is becoming
more obvious that saber-tooths can serve as exemplars of adaptation and
evolution, it is at least equally obvious that the scientific literature yields
only partial and sporadic insights into these unique creatures. But what
questions can potentially be answered, or at least attacked, through a better
understanding of saber-toothed carnivores? What is the meaning of the variations
on the basic saber-tooth morphology and do they constitute meaningful patterns?
Why and how did the saber-tooth morphology evolve so&lt;br/&gt;many times in
different groups of carnivorous mammals living at different times on different
continents only to become extinct each time while apparently suitable prey
survived? What effect did their extinction have on other highly carnivorous
mammals and on the herbivores which survived them and can their extinctions shed
some light on the potential effects of the reduction and possible ultimate loss
of many modern large carnivores? Not only do saber-toothed carnivorous mammals
pose intriguing and important research questions, the public fascination with
the oversized upper canines of saber-tooths provides an unusual opportunity to
use these extinct mammals to illustrate major biologic concepts including
evolution, paleogeography, homology, and functional morphology. Much has been
written regarding certain aspects of the functional morphology and convergent
evolution of saber-toothed carnivores, but their potential has barely been
touched. Saber-tooths frequently been treated in the paleontologic literature as
bearers of morphologic features, rather than as integrated organisms. A major
reason for this lack of cohesiveness is that the various researchers working on
saber-tooths are scattered on several continents as are the remains of the
objects of their researches. Another reason is that there has never been one
occasion during which a significant number of saber-tooth students have been
able to interact to develop a vision for future work, especially collaborative
efforts, combining the newest methodologies with standard approaches, and
viewing sabertoothed carnivores from a ?holistic? perspective. This three day
international workshop, May 12-14, 2008 on the campus of Idaho State University,
Pocatello, Idaho will increase our knowledge of saber-toothed mammals through
improved communications, better sharing of information among researchers,
facilitating cooperative and multidisciplinary studies and advancing our ability
to view saber-tooths as dynamic, integrated organisms. Public education goals
include methods of utilizing saber-tooths as models for public education in
evolutionary processes, extinction, homology and analogy, paleoecology, and
geologic time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;