* 0822226
* U.S.-Switzerland Planning Visit:    Seeking a Better Understanding of Canopy-Snowpack Interactions in Relation to the Avalanche Hazard
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2008,10/31/2009
* Delphis Levia, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 10/31/2009
* USD 15,588.00

This award permits Professor Delphis Levia and two graduate students from the
University of Delaware to meet with two Swiss colleagues, Drs. Martin Schneebeli
and Peter Bebi, of the Swiss Federal Snow and Avalanche Institute in Davos,
Switzerland. The planning visit is absolutely critical as the research team will
identify specific forest sites, characterize the forest stands, scout potential
sites for the microclimatological instrumentation, and integrate in situ
preliminary data into a new collaborative research proposal to be submitted to
the National Science Foundation to investigate snow-canopy interactions in
relation to the avalanche hazard. Dr. Levia is an expert in forest hydrology and
snow-canopy interactions. Dr. Martin Schneebeli is co-inventor of the
SnowMicroPen, a key instrument in the proposed work, and a world renowned snow
scientist. Dr. Peter Bebi is an expert in forest-avalanche interactions. Our
research team is ideally suited to investigate the effects of throughfall and
snow microstructure in stands with variable tree spacing as we have
complementary expertise in forest hydrology, snow hydrology and physics, and
forest ecology as well as the avalanche hazard. The proposal stemming from this
international planning visit is especially important because, while many
avalanches are initiated in sparse forests, no studies have yet employed a snow
micropenetrometer (i.e., SnowMicroPen) to examine the microstructural properties
of subcanopy snowpacks. Thus, knowledge from this study would greatly advance
relevant theory in snow science and ultimately lead to improved avalanche
forecasts. &lt;br/&gt;