* 0822181
* Making Sense of Global Warming and Climate Change: Model of Student Learning via Collaborative Research
* EHR,DRL
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2014
* Andrew Hirsch, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Julia Clark
* 07/31/2014
* USD 1,661,414.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal focuses on teaching and learning concerning
an important issue: global warming and climate change. The project seeks to
develop a model of how middle school students learn about these complex issues,
and a model of ?teaching learning of student learning.? The project has four
facets: (a) Collection of baseline data on student understanding of global
warming and related concepts in Grades 7 and 8; use of this data to construct an
initial model of student learning and an initial model of teacher understanding
of student learning. (b) Collection of data on classroom instruction and
assessment of student learning relative to collaborative action research plans.
Emphasis will be placed on what and how the science teachers are learning with
regard to establishing coherence among the topics that ground student
understanding of global warming. Formative assessment by both internal and
external evaluators twice during each instructional cycle will be used to inform
the subsequent data collection process. (c) Analysis of student and teacher data
collected during the school year during Years 1-4 and development of a model of
student learning will be conducted. Analysis of collaborative action research
projects and development of the goals for the subsequent cycles will also be
conducted at this time. (d) Explore resources, particularly the ones developed
by NSF-funded curriculum projects to support and enhance teacher knowledge and
classroom instruction will be conducted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;