* 0822337
* Structure and Function Studies of Azoreductase
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Gilbert John, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/2013
* USD 220,710.00

Azo dyes are widely used in hair dyes, tattoo, and foods as well as in
industrial processing. Azoreductases are enzymes found in intestinal and soil
bacteria, and these enzymes are capable of metabolizing azo dyes. Studies
regarding the importance of these enzymes are lacking. Therefore, this research
project will demonstrate the importance of azoreductases in intestinal bacteria
in terms of how the enzyme has evolved or adapted to metabolizing man-made
(xenobiotic) azo dyes as well their effects on the physiology of bacteria and
human cells. To determine the enzyme's importance, a fundamental understanding
of the structure and function of the azoreductase enzyme is needed. To this end,
two newly identified azoreductases from intestinal bacteria have been identified
and will be used in the study. The study will test different azo dyes that
include methyl red (laboratory pH indicator), tartrazine (color additive for
soft drinks), and Direct Blue (industrial dye). The specific results of the
study will improve ones understanding of how bacteria are able to adapt to azo
dye metabolism and determine how the enzyme is able to degrade azo dyes
(metabolic products) that can positively or negatively influence the surrounding
bacterial population. More generally, the study will further ones understanding
of how the enzyme may affect human physiology (i.e. liver metabolism), as the
process of azoreduction may be involved in disease development. In addition, the
study will improve ones understanding of how these enzymes can be used in the
bioremediation process in order to eliminate contaminated soil and water
sources. Finally, the study will enable the development of a future bacterial
model system that can be used to better understand the mechanisms associated
with the interrelationship between intestinal bacteria and the human
body.&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the research project will provide both
educational and outreach opportunities for under-represented minorities in the
state of Oklahoma. Native Americans are the largest minority group in Oklahoma
but they have the lowest number of individuals in science careers. Therefore,
this group will be targeted for training opportunities. The project will be
conducted in the Department of Microbiology &amp; Molecular Genetics in which
both minority and non minority undergraduate and graduates students will have an
opportunity to participate in the research. An existing program called Native
Americans in Biological Science will provide a pool of students who will engage
in training activities related to the field of azoreductase. Students will have
an opportunity to present their research at local, regional, and national
meetings that include the Society for the Advancement of Chicanos and Native
Americans and the American Society for Microbiology. In addition, students will
have an opportunity to visit local K-12 schools to talk about science as a
career as well as their own educational experiences. Overall, the research
project will enhance the current educational and outreach opportunities that
exist at Oklahoma State University.