* 0822694
* International Collaboration in Chemistry: Single-molecule and single-nanoparticle interfacial electron transfer studied by Raman spectroscopic imaging
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* H. Peter Lu, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 08/31/2012
* USD 373,000.00

The Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program at NSF Division of Chemistry will
support the international collaborative research project of Prof. Peter Lu of
Bowling Green State University and Prof. Alfred Meixner of Eberhar-Karls
University of Tubingen, Germany. Profs. Lu and Meixner, and their students will
focus their study on characterizing the processes of dye-TiO2 surface chemical
bonding, vibronic coupling, and interfacial electron transfer (IET) associated
with vibrational relaxation energy barriers. The project will adavance
fundamental understanding of the spatially heterogenous energetics that
regulates IET processes. The collaborative study will result in a new and
improved spectroscopic method with the capability to interrogate in real time
the dynamic relationship between the interface structure and energy when IET
occurs. The advanced knowledge and technology developed in this project will
significantly impact the thinking of condensed-phase physical and chemical
dynamics and ultimately enhance research on new energy sciences. The
international collaboration between the US and German research groups will
provide excellent training opportunities and invaluable international experience
to students participating in this research project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
international collaborative research project is supported jointly by NSF and the
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) of Germany. The study is also supported by
the Office of International Science and Engineering (OISE) at NSF.