* 0822430
* Support of an AGU Chapman Conference: Fifth International Orogenic Lherzolite Conference: Shallow Mantle Composition and Dynamics, September 22-26, 2008, Mount Shasta Resort, CA
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2009
* Henry Dick, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* William P. Leeman
* 07/31/2009
* USD 23,095.00

Intellectual merit. This proposal requests support for travel and meeting costs
for an American Geophysical Union Chapman Conference on Shallow Mantle
Composition and Dynamics to be held September 22 to 26, 2008, at the Mount
Shasta Resort, Mount Shasta, California
(http://www.agu.org/meetings/chapman/2008/ccall/). This will be the fifth
International Orogenic Lherzolite Conference, with previous conferences held
near the peridotite massifs of Lanzo (N Italy, 1990), Ronda (Spain, 1995),
Finero (N Italy, 1999), and Horoman (Japan, 2002). The year 2008 marks the 31st
anniversary of the 1977 Chapman Conference on Partial Melting in the Earth?s
Upper Mantle held in the Josephine peridotite, one of two field trip locales for
the current meeting. This venue was selected as a result of unanimous request of
the participants at the previous Conference in this
series.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. The overall objective of these
meetings is to assemble specialists in studies of peridotite massifs and upper
mantle processes for a field conference, where recent results and key outcrops
can be discussed in a group setting. This conference will incorporate a broader
range of topics than previously, and includes influential scientists in rock
mechanics and low-temperature alteration processes in the organizing committee
to ensure that this is a success. Topics to be covered will include melting
processes, melt transport, metasomatism, localized and regional deformation,
formation and nature of plate boundaries, mechanisms of intermediate depth
earthquakes, and both geochemistry and physical processes of low temperature
alteration. An attendance of between 80 and 120 international scientists is
anticipated, including ~20% graduate students and post doctoral researchers.