* 0822284
* Generation and Analysis of a Reference Sequence for the West African Cultivated Rice - Oryza Glaberrima (CG14)
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2009,02/29/2012
* Yeisoo Yu, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 02/29/2012
* USD 1,477,785.00

PI: Rod A. Wing (University of Arizona)&lt;br/&gt;CoPIs: Steven D. Rounsley and
Yeisoo Yu (University of Arizona)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
project is to generate and analyze a reference genome sequence of the West
African cultivated rice Oryza glaberrima (CG14). The reference sequence will be
generated using a minimum tiling path of bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC)
clones selected from an existing NSF-funded O. glaberrima physical map, which
encompasses the entire genome. DNA from these clones will be purified, pooled
and sequenced using 454/Roche GSFLX Titanium and paired-end pyrosequencing
technologies. A standardized annotation process will be applied across the whole
genome taking advantage of the well-curated annotation for the Asian cultivated
rice species - Oryza sativa. In addition, customized analyses targeted at
specific biological questions will be performed. The genome sequence and its
annotation will be accessible via public databases, such as GenBank and Gramene
(www.gramene.org). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project are
two-fold. First, since the world's rice-dependent population is expected to
double in the next 25 years, rice breeders are faced with the challenge of
doubling rice yields with less land and water, and with poorer soils. Obtaining
the genome of the African cultivated rice, O. glaberrima, is the first step
towards understanding the differences between the two cultivated species, how
each has adapted to their particular environments, and how each may benefit the
other to be grown in more diverse and often harsh environments. The genome
sequence produced by this research project will be a resource utilized by
biologists and rice breeders as a component in efforts towards improving
worldwide rice production. This project also offers several research training
opportunities for postdoctoral scientists and students at all levels. First,
students and postdoctoral researchers will be trained to perform research using
cutting edge genomics research technologies such as next generation sequencing,
physical mapping, de novo assembly of large plant genomes, genome annotation and
comparative evolutionary genomics. Their research results will be disseminated
through peer review publications and at local and international meetings.
Project personnel will serve as mentors for all training activities and will
meet regularly with each student and postdoc to ensure they are on track and
getting the most out of their research experience. In addition, the project has
partnered with Biotechnology, Agronomy and Plant Science programs at Pima
Community College (Tucson AZ), and the Life Science Undergraduate Biology
Research Program at University of Arizona to provide undergraduate students with
summer research internships. These students will also have an opportunity to
apply for the BRAVO program (http://www.ubrp.arizona.edu/) which allows them to
perform research abroad for a minimum of 10 weeks. The project has research
partnerships in Benin (West Africa), China, Colombia, France, Japan, the
Philippines, and Taiwan, all suitable locations for a 10 week international
research experience.&lt;br/&gt;Finally, the project will participate in the
University of Arizona's KEYS program (K-12 Engaging Youth in Science;
http://www.bio5.org/training/trainingHigh.php) which provides six week summer
research internships for advanced high school students.