* 0822777
* SBIR Phase II:  Scalable Location Data Management
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2010
* Karthikeyan Ramasamy, Locomatix, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 07/31/2010
* USD 500,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project aims to design,
implement, and test scalable methods for providing location-based services, with
a special emphasis on mobile cell phone applications. Examples of such
applications include continuous monitoring of static and dynamic geo-fences,
building dynamic mobile social networks, and mobile e-commerce. The Phase II
effort will develop methods to push the efficiency of the location-based
computation techniques, and develop methods for more sophisticated features such
as privacy management and mobile power management, which will be crucial for the
wider adoption of location-based applications. Location data is currently
generated by continually moving physical objects equipped with location-based
sensors, such as GPS and Wi-Fi based tags. Data management methods for these
datasets require dealing with high update rates, large volumes of historical
location data, and location-based triggers that raise an alert when the location
of a moving object meets certain criteria (for example, if an object is beyond a
well-defined boundary). Existing methods for supporting applications that have
these requirements are not scalable.

The broader merits of this project include the development of a technology that
has a potentially large commercial value and addresses an emerging market need.
For example, for the cell phone market, these location-based services are
projected to grow from $464M in 2007 to over $11B by 2011. If successful, the
potential impact in both consumer and enterprise markets for location-based
services could be substantial.