* 0822362
* Design and Use of Illustrations in Test Items as a Form of Accommodation for English Language Learners in Science and Mathemcatics Assessment
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Guillermo Solano-Flores, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 08/31/2012
* USD 434,906.00

This project addresses the need for effective approaches for assessing science
knowledge among English language learners (ELLs) who are tested in English. The
project will investigate the effectiveness of vignette illustrations in test
items as a form of testing accommodation for ELLs. In a vignette-illustrated
item, the illustration is not necessary to understand the text of the item and
the text of the item makes no explicit reference to the illustration. Since they
can be added to the text of existing items, vignette illustrations are less
likely than other forms of testing accommodation to alter the construct that
items are intended to measure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate
how vignette illustrations minimize the impact of limited English proficiency on
student performance in science tests. Also, it will attempt to identify basic
principles for designing illustrated test items. ELL and non-ELL middle-school
students will be given items of three types (vignette-illustrated items whose
illustrations are designed systematically, vignette-illustrated items whose
illustrations are created arbitrarily, and items without illustrations) at two
levels of distance to the enacted curriculum (close and distal). Diverse forms
of analysis (including statistical analyses and verbal protocols) will
determine: (1) whether and how ELL and non-ELL students differ significantly on
the ways in which they use vignettes to make sense of items, (2) whether the use
of vignettes reduces test score differences due to language factors between ELL
and non-ELL students, and (3) whether the level of distance of the items
moderates the effectiveness of vignette-illustrated
items.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While illustrations are frequently used in test
items, there is limited guidance in the assessment development literature on how
to approach illustrations. Furthermore, the value of illustrations as a resource
for ensuring that ELL students understand what a given item is about and what
the item asks them to do has not been systematically investigated. Semiotics,
cognitive psychology, linguistics, and social cultural theory are brought
together to develop systematic procedures for developing illustrations as visual
supports in tests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will contribute to enhanced
practice in both classroom and large-scale assessment primarily of ELL students.
Vignette illustrations have the potential to become a low-cost, easy-to-
implement form of testing accommodation for ELLs. The set of principles for the
proper design and use of vignette illustrations as a form of testing
accommodation for ELLs could be used by states, teachers and the testing
industry.