* 0822495
* Mutant-assisted exploration of natural variation underlying R gene-mediated immunity in maize
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2014
* Clifford Weil, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Wayne Parrott
* 08/31/2014
* USD 3,963,897.00

PI: Gurmukh (Guri) S. Johal, Purdue University&lt;br/&gt;Co-PI: Clifford F.
Weil, Purdue University&lt;br/&gt;Co-PI: James. W. Moyer, North Carolina State
University&lt;br/&gt;Co-PI: Peter J. Balint-Kurti, North Carolina State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant disease resistance (R) genes encode
proteins that respond to pathogen invasion by triggering a rapid, localized
"hypersensitive reaction" (HR), in which host tissue immediately adjacent to the
site of infection undergoes programmed cell death. Although, HR is a fundamental
part of the immune response in plants, very little is known about the genes that
trigger, signal, execute, and then contain it. Exhaustive mutagenesis screens
have been conducted in Arabidopsis, but have turned up only a few genes linked
to HR, possibly because of genetic redundancy or lethality of HR mutants. An
alternate and potentially huge resource of HR variation is available in natural
germplasm. If effectively tapped and delineated, this resource has the potential
to advance considerably our understanding of HR . By taking advantage of a
constitutive-active allele of the Rp1 gene, which confers resistance to the
common rust disease of maize, we have demonstrated that the maize germplasm
contains vast amounts of variation capable of impacting HR.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will test the broad use of an innovative
approach, which looks for naturally occurring alleles that suppress mutant
phenotypes to rapidly detect and explore natural variation underlying HR. Using
this approach, one HR-modulating locus (Hrml1) has already been identified and
mapped in a preliminary test using the IBM population of maize; this QTL will be
cloned. In addition, many more QTL will be identified and characterized by
broadening the screen to the 5000-line Nested Association Mapping (NAM)
population currently available to the maize community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of the project are many-fold. First, the approach of discovering
and harnessing genetic diversity is likely to be broadly applicable to a large
number of important traits in most plant species. Second, an outreach component
will bring the uses of biodiversity to middle school curricula (Grades 6-8) and
the topics of DNA sequence analysis and quantitative trait analysis to high
school curricula, with the development and test of teaching materials that can
be widely distributed. Third, these teaching modules will be developed for and
with students from a wide range of cultural, racial and educational backgrounds,
and their teachers. This approach will allow development of several versions of
these modules, using different examples, different assessments and different
forms of presentation so that they can be applied effectively in a variety of
settings. The goal is to overturn the stereotype that these subjects are too
complex for middle and high school students to grasp, and to prime student to
investigate plant diversity and genetics in greater detail later in their
education so that they are better able to understand the issues. These topics
are not generally covered in most science curricula at these levels, despite
their increasing importance scientifically and socially.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes and biological resources generated by this
project will be available through the project website:
http://www.Rp1-MAGIC.purdue.edu.