* 0822613
* PFC: Center for the Physics of Living Cells
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2015
* Klaus Schulten, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jean Allen
* 08/31/2015
* USD 9,000,000.00

In the Center for the Physics of Living Cells (CPLC) experimentalists,
computational physicists, and theorists will jointly attack the extreme
technical challenges posed by quantifying processes in living cells with the
sensitivity needed to explore how life organizes itself, weaving molecular
systems into the fabric of living matter. Specifically, the Center will: (1)
push in vitro single molecule techniques to a 10- to 100-fold increase in
sensitivity, spatio-temporal resolution, and throughput for concurrent detection
of multiple observables; (2) use synthetic nanostructures to manipulate single
molecules, enabling measurements of both forces and molecular conformation with
sub-microsecond resolution; (3) observe individual events within single cells,
enabling time- and space-resolved studies of gene expression and other key
cellular processes; and (4) extend computation to biologically relevant
timescales, and theory to greater biological realism, enabling the detailed
interpretation of the dynamics of biological systems from the molecular to the
cellular level. The interaction between theory, computation, in vitro and in
vivo experiments will be at the core of the Center's mission. A concrete example
combining these four approaches will be to build a truly quantitative and
dynamic physical picture of transcription and translation machinery, used by the
cell to copy DNA into RNA and then into proteins. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Center will provide exciting educational opportunities on and off campus. For
Ph.D. students, the Center will build a community around special seminars,
symposia, tailored courses, and joint mentoring, and help generate a new
generation of scientists who are fluent in both physics and biology. This new
science will be brought to the undergraduate level in the form of courses,
online computing and visualization environments, and a single-molecule
laboratory course where they can acquire hands-on experience. The Center will
recruit minority students into the REU programs and summer workshops through
partnership with primarily minority institutions and participation in two annual
scientific meetings for under-represented minorities. At the high school level,
the Center will expand an existing program in which Ph.D. students can act as
mentors for teachers on and off campus, introducing visualization tools and
modern molecular biology concepts into the classroom. To address young students
directly, the Center will establish a pilot program at a girls middle school.
This program will provide contact with students as they begin their formal
science education, exposing them to modern biophysical concepts and tools. To
the scientific community, the Center will provide visualization and simulation
tools to enable the study of macromolecular assemblies and cells. Likewise, the
state-of-the-art instrumentation developed by the Center will lead to mainstream
applications in biological sciences and is expected to have major commercial
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is jointly funded by the Directorate for
Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS) and the Directorate for Biological
Sciences (BIO) as part of a partnership to foster research and education at the
mathematical and physical sciences - life sciences interface. Participating
programs in MPS include the Physics Frontiers Centers program, the Experimental
Physical Chemistry program, and the Analytical and Surface Chemistry program.
Participating program in BIO include the Biomolecular Systems cluster, the Genes
and Genomes cluster, and the Neural Systems cluster.