* 0822102
* New Filtration Theory via Incorporation of Pore Scale Mechanisms Operating in the Presence of an Energy Barrier
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2013
* William Johnson, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 07/31/2013
* USD 428,594.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CBET- 0822102&lt;br/&gt;Johnson, William
P.&lt;br/&gt;University of Utah&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New filtration theory via
incorporation of pore scale mechanisms operating in the presence of an energy
barrier&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal objective of this proposal
is to develop mechanistic models which accurately predict the retention of
colloids in granular aquifer media under environmental conditions, where energy
barrier (repulsion) exists between colloids and surfaces. The proposed research
activities are to build on the platform previously developed for mechanistic
description of colloid retention in the absence of an energy barrier (colloid
filtration theory - CFT). The primary research hypothesis is that simulated
values of colloid retention will match trends and values from experiments by
using an innovative pore domain that incorporates the correct retention
mechanisms operating in the presence of an energy barrier. This hypothesis will
be tested using an adaptive strategy that prioritizes the work according to
findings. The success of the approaches will be measured by comparison to trends
and values quantifying colloid retention observed in pore- to continuum-scale
experiments. The flow field will be solved in the pore domains using
computational fluid dynamics (CFD) approaches. Simulated and experimental trends
and magnitudes of colloid retention parameters will be compared across a range
of colloid-collector size ratios, fluid velocities, and colloid-collector
interaction energies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientists, practitioners,
regulators, and the general public will benefit from an accurate method of
prediction of collector efficiencies under conditions where repulsion exists.
Two Ph.D. candidacies will be initiated with this project, and the career
prospects of a Research Associate who also happens to be a single mom will be
furthered by this project. Outreach to elementary school children will occur in
the form of boat trips on the Great Salt Lake to provide hands-on inquiry-based
exploration in partnership with scientists to explore the roles of particulates
of all kinds in the stratified waters of the lake, e.g. from photosynthesis to
contaminant scavenging and sedimentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;