* 0822646
* International Collaboration in Chemistry: Control of Ultrafast EUV-induced Chemical Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Charles Cocke, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 07/31/2012
* USD 397,901.00

In this award, Professors Itzhak Ben-Itzhak and Charles L. Cocke of Kansas State
University, together with their graduate and undergraduate student researchers,
will collaborate with the group of Matthias F. Kling of the Max-Planck Institute
of Quantum Optics (Garching, Germany), in a study of the dynamics of molecular
dications produced with attosecond light pulses. Specific systems to be studied
include acetylene dication and nitric oxide dication. In the case of acetylene,
they will search for evidence of acetylene-vinylidene isomerization. The
experiments combine the COLTRIMS technique developed at Kansas State with
advanced extreme ultraviolet/attosecond pulse generation methods developed at
the MPQ. This international collaborative research project is supported jointly
by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division and the
Office of International Science and Engineering of NSF as well as by the
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electrons are the
glue which bind the atomic constituents of molecules together. Their motion is
on the attosecond timescale. Scientists like Ben-Itzhak, Cocke and Kling are
using attosecond light pulses as a stroboscopic means of taking snapshots of the
electron dynamics in molecules. The ultimate aim of research like this is to
develop a nuanced picture of the ways in which chemical reactions take place.
Besides the broad scientific impact of this work, the student researchers from
Kansas State University working on this project will conduct a significant
portion of their work at a premier laboratory in Germany -- thus helping to
develop the next generation of globally-engaged young scientists.