* 0822891
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Bethlehem Steelworkers: Working Class Families in a Post-Fordist City
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Jill A. Schennum, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2010
* USD 14,000.00

Graduate student Jill A. Schenuum, with the guidance of Dr. David Harvey, will
undertake research on former industrial workers and their families in Bethlehem,
Pennsylvania. These workers were displaced from their industry jobs as Bethlehem
transitioned from being an industrial steel town to a town situated within a
more flexible political economy. Although there is a robust social science
literature on the deindustrialization of the 1980s, there are few follow-up
studies of displaced industrial workers. This research addresses that
gap.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher will focus particularly on how the
economic changes altered the social landscape of everyday life in communities,
families, and workplaces. She wishes to determine how these alterations at the
micro-scale may have produced larger changes in class identity and
relationships. She will collect qualitative data through interviews with former
steel workers, participant observation in public events, and analysis of media.
She will seek to determine how families make sense of the transition; how family
forms, household structures, and gender roles influence and have been affected
by the changes; and how working class morality and political action are shaped
by and possibly shape, community organizations and urban social relations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will contribute to social science with a
carefully carried out case study of the long-term social effects of
deinudstrialization at the local level. It also will help to develop social
policy to support workers in transition. In addition, the award supports the
education of a social scientist.