* 0822469
* International Collaboration in Chemistry: The Plasma-Analyte Interaction Problem: Toward a Fundamental Advancement in Plasma-Assisted Microanalysis and Materials Characterization
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Benjamin Smith, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 08/31/2012
* USD 430,000.00

The Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program in the Division of Chemistry
supports work of Prof. Nicolo Omenetto and collaborators David Hahn and Benjamin
Smith at the University of Florida for an International Collaboration in
Chemistry involving Prof. Kay Niemax and Dr. Carmen Cecilia Garcia at the
University of Dortmund Institute for Analytical Sciences, Dr. Igor Gornushkin at
the BAM Federal Institute for Materials Research and Testing, and Prof. Ulrich
Panne at the Humboldt Universit√§t zu Berlin, to investigate the complex plasma-
analyte interactions directly related to the ultimate analyte response and to
the quality of the results provided by laser-ablation inductively-coupled plasma
mass spectrometry, inductively-coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy, and
laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy. The research seeks to transform these
analytical methods by solving problems associated with the plasma-analyte
interface, thereby providing an essential step forward to support, for example,
efforts in microanalysis, the nanosciences, novel materials development, and the
biosciences. The research involves a combination of theoretical modeling and
innovative experimental methods. This international collaborative research
project is supported jointly by NSF and the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
(DFG). The study is also supported by the Office of International Science and
Engineering (OISE) at NSF.

In addition to the scientific program, the project also functions to educate and
train science and engineering students in the important technology areas of
plasma science and advanced analytical schemes. The overall program directly
impacts undergraduate and graduate students by increasing their involvement in
an international learning environment strongly coupled to research activities,
and to emerging technologies and real-world analytical applications. Through
direct participation in the research, including summer research projects,
independent study for undergraduate students, and teaching modules for the
NSF/Howard Hughes Medical Institute Science for Life core laboratory, students
will gain a broad education.