* 0822422
* International Collaboration in Chemistry:   Microphase Photo-Electrochemistry:   Light-Driven Liquid-Liquid Ion Transfer Processes and Two-Phase Micro-Photovoltaic Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Gary Blanchard, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 07/31/2012
* USD 225,000.00

In this research supported by the NSF Chemistry Division, Analytical and Surface
Chemistry Program and Office of International Science and Engineering, Blanchard
(Michigan State University) and Marken (University of Bath, UK) research groups
focus on studying photo-electrochemical processes at microphase liquid:liquid
interfaces and at triple phase boundaries. Such structures offer a unique
environment where excited molecules and reaction intermediates are in close
proximity to both electrode surfaces and liquid:liquid interfaces. The goal in
studying such systems lies in the critical role that these types of structure
play in processes such as photosynthetic light harvesting. The project is
divided into four main, interconnected parts: (A) the study of electrochemically
or photo-electrochemically driven ion transfer processes using fluorescent probe
anions, (B) the study and screening of simultaneous electron and ion transfer at
liquid:liquid interfaces and triple phase boundaries, (C) the investigation of
two-phase processes involving electron and ion transfer at selected interfaces,
and (D) characterizing the local environment at liquid:liquid interfaces using
fluorescent probe molecules for the purpose of understanding how the potential
of the interface and flux of ions across the interface affects the local
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The larger purpose of this research program,
beyond understanding photo-electrochemical dynamics at complex interphase
systems, is to educate students at the cutting edge of multidisciplinary
science. It is imperative that the United States train a diverse population of
students to be globally competitive for careers in science. This research serves
as an important vehicle in that effort. By fostering a synergistic relationship
between the Blanchard (Michigan State University) and Marken (University of Bath
UK) research groups, a multinational cohort of globally competitive scientists
will be educated, directly benefiting both the United States and the United
Kingdom. This project will facilitate the creation of a bilateral think tank and
will foster the free exchange of ideas in a field of research and development
that has direct impact on science at the interface between biosystems and energy
conversion. The ideas and experiments developed in this collaborative study can
help screen and identify new light harvesting processes, possibly mimicking
natural processes, and therefore contribute to new energy
harvesting/storage/management systems.