* 0822474
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Identifying Continuity & Change through Archaeological Soil Chemistry and Site Stratigraphy at Neolithic Settlements in Southeast Hunga
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Roderick Salisbury, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2009
* USD 14,875.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Ezra B.W. Zubrow, Roderick Salisbury will collect
and analyze geochemical and stratigraphic data from small late Neolithic and
Early Copper Age settlements in southeastern Hungary. The goal of this research
is to identify how settlements were internally organized during the transition
from the Late Neolithic to Early Copper Age, circa 4800-4500 BC. This period in
southeast Europe is known for substantial change in settlement patterns,
exchange networks and mortuary practices. The focus of most research to date has
been on large settlement mounds. The function and characteristics of small Late
Neolithic sites, and how they relate to the Late Neolithic regional settlement
pattern, is not known. Salisbury's analysis will focus on this issue, providing
data needed to resolve the missing intra-site characterization of small Late
Neolithic flat sites.

This project attempts to understand the way that intra-site settlement
organization reflects social and economic changes during the transition towards
settlement dispersal. Site structure and the identification of task areas and
features will be determined through multi-element geochemistry and stratigraphic
columns. A practice theory approach provides a theoretical basis for linking
variability in these activities with changes in social organization, because
everyday practices will leave distinct material remains, and at the same time
inform about the larger social structure. This is important if we are to
understand how social and political changes like integration and resistance are
reflected in settlement structure for small agro-pastoralist societies.
Identifying patterns in the location of activities will lead to a better
understanding of the ways in which people at small settlements, and not just for
those living on prominent settlement mounds, lived during a period of social
transformation. Results of this project will also raise new questions about the
nature of archaeological deposits and how they relate to the way societies use
and manipulate space.

The research will assess the viability of a practice model of society for intra-
site analysis, and contribute both to greater understanding of regional culture
history and to broader anthropological questions relating to settlement
integration and dispersal. More broadly, the methods used in this project are
relatively non-intrusive. Multi-element characterization of site sediments
leaves sites intact and available for future research, and complements existing
intensive surface survey and excavation data. Dissemination of this work in the
form of a monograph, presentations, and journal submissions will increase
understanding of the methods and concepts employed. A strong collaborative
research infrastructure will foster increased awareness of methods,
interpretations and opportunities between Hungarian and American archaeologists.
Finally, public outreach in the form of newspaper interviews and school visits
will enhance the level of public understanding of archaeology in Hungary.

