* 0822709
* Neural Mechanisms Underlying Oviposition Choice in Manduca Sexta Moths: from Chemical Signals to Neurons
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Carolina Reisenman, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 07/31/2012
* USD 268,041.00

Olfactory cues play important roles in the lives of insects, providing
information about biologically relevant resources such as food, mates, and
oviposition sites. Moths are among the most economically significant
agricultural pests, but an understanding of the sensory cues controlling
oviposition choice in adult moths is lacking. This study utilizes an
experimentally favorable moth (the giant moth Manduca sexta) to advance the
understanding of the behavioral control of oviposition and the olfactory cues
that may lead to progress in pest control. This project will investigate the
neural mechanisms that allow this specialist insect to evaluate appropriate
plants for oviposition. Using a mutualistic system between the hostplant, Datura
wrightii, and its primary pollinator and larval host, Manduca sexta, will allow
inference about adaptive behavior and function of olfactory systems in general.
This project encompasses three levels of analysis: behavioral,
neurophysiological, and chemical. First, the host plant odors mediating
attraction and repellence for oviposition will be analyzed. Second, neural
responses of olfactory neurons in the brain of moths to stimulation with the
hostplant odors and the chemical constituents within the odors will be studied.
This will reveal specific odor compounds that activate neural pathways
controlling oviposition behavior. As a final step, these bio-active volatile
compounds will be tested in behavioral oviposition experiments. To strengthen
the societal relevance of our research and broaden its impact, we will: (1)
involve undergraduate students in multidisciplinary basic research; (2) increase
participation of minority students and women in biological science and
enrollment in baccalaureate degree programs; (3) foster faculty and student
interaction between a Community College and a Ph.D.-granting university; (4)
provide educational outreach in science for students at several levels of K-16
education; (5) commit to translational research in a broader sense, owing to the
impacts of insects on human health and welfare.