* 0822371
* Workshop for Advancing Numerical Modeling of Mantle Convection and Lithospheric Dynamics at U.C. Davis on July 9-11, 2008
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Magali Billen, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2009
* USD 30,000.00

We are proposing to hold a workshop on Numerical Modeling of Mantle and
Lithospheric Dynamics to build on the success of the 2005 Boulder workshop on
Mantle Convection. This workshop will be broader in terms of audience than the
Boulder workshop in that we will bring together both the mantle convection and
lithospheric dynamics communities. We wish to discuss scientific advances and,
importantly, technical and scientific issues related to the quantitative
&lt;br/&gt;modeling of the origin and evolution of the mantle-lithosphere
system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent developments in cluster computing, tera-
scale resources, and software support and code-sharing efforts of the CIG have
brought about major opportunities for scientific progress, such as the prospect
of truly combining lithospheric-scale deformation models with mantle convection
computations. However, several current science issues remain unresolved and
understanding the dynamics of these in a predictive, quantitative sense, is
intimately connected to computational issues, for example:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How can we efficiently model thermo-chemical convection
numerically, in spherical geometries, with adequate treatment of entrainment?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How can we incorporate faulted and moving plate boundaries
in spherical geometry, and study regionally realistic subduction system
evolution? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How can we accurately incorporate strain
localization and large viscosity variations, and what are the appropriate
macroscopic descriptions for sub-scale processes? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
workshop will be held over three days on July 9-11, 2008 at U.C. Davis. The
workshop conveners have worked together to propose a diverse and stimulating
group of speakers and topics. The conference format includes a range of keynote
and workshop style presentations, with ample room for poster viewing and
structured, as well as unstructured, discussion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
workshop will have several broader impacts beyond advancing numerical modeling
methods in the mantle and lithospheric dynamics communities. First, it will
serve to train graduate students and researchers in fundamental methods used in
numerical modeling. One special session each afternoon is reserved for the
specific purpose of teaching the fundamentals of some of the most important
numerical methods already in use or anticipated to hold great
&lt;br/&gt;potential for the mantle convection and lithospheric dynamics
communities. Second, the workshop will serve to strengthen the new and growing
community of lithospheric-dynamics modelers in the US. Finally, the workshop
will facilitate starting collaborations between mantle dynamics and lithospheric
dynamics modelers.