* 0822975
* SBIR Phase II:  OpenBio Workbench for Sharing of Mathematical Models in Drug Discovery
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Taeshin Park, RES Group, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 06/30/2011
* USD 740,757.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will develop an
innovative software platform called OpenBio Workbench that will enable
researchers in drug discovery to easily access and share mathematical models and
model results. Modeling is becoming increasing important, motivated by the FDA's
drive to modernize the drug discovery process and the advent of emerging fields
such as Systems Biology. A broad adoption of modeling has been limited, however,
because the current practice requires programming and computational skills not
typically possessed by experimental researchers in biological sciences. In the
Phase II project, the tool's capabilities will be augmented by allowing users to
calibrate models by including experimental data, adding innovative advanced
modeling tools such as model building.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential
commercial value of this workbench is high as the pharmaceutical industry is
investing significantly in mathematical modeling and Systems Biology aiming to
overcome both the high costs of drug development and the stagnation in the
discovery of new drugs since the 1990's. Further, aging populations in developed
countries are going to cause sharp increases in health care costs, while at the
same time there are serious budgetary pressures (both from government and
private insurers) to keep health care costs under control. Thus, methods that
speed up the research cycle and reduce development costs for new drugs and
treatments are going to become increasingly important.