* 0822945
* DDIG: Privatizing the Commons? Mexico's Forestry Ejidos 15 Years After Agrarian Counter Reform
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Marianne Schmink, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1,800.00

Graduate student Maria L. DiGiano, under the guidance of Dr. Marianne Schmink,
will undertake research on the relationship between land tenure change and
deforestation. The goal is to examine closely the multi-scalar relationships
between national policy change, local institutional responses, individual
attitudes towards privatization and forest resources, and impacts on the
physical landscape. The impact of changing property regimes on natural resource
management warrants attention as governments devolve authority of natural
resource management to local communities and as policy makers and donor agencies
support the privatization of common property. These land tenure changes could
potentially threaten forest conservation because an estimated 25 percent of the
world's forest resources currently belong to or are managed on a communal basis.

The researcher will conduct her research in Mexico, where 80 percent of forest
resources are held collectively. In 1992, legal changes in Mexico's 1910 common
property laws permitted privatization of common lands (ejidos) for the first
time in over half a century. The study will employ land cover change analyses,
statistical analyses, and ethnography to link broad-scale changes in land tenure
regimes and forest cover with fine-scale variations in attitudes and perceptions
regarding rights and resources. The research objectives are to examine: 1) the
range of land tenure outcomes following the 1992 reforms; 2) the drivers of land
tenure change; 3) the correlation between land tenure change and changes in
forest cover; and 4) attitudes and perceptions of property rights and forest
resources among residents of 56 ejidos in southeastern Mexico.

The research will help to develop social science theory that is able to connect
relationships between humans and the natural environment across multiple scales.
By examining in ethnographic detail the effects on ownership systems and forests
of Mexico's 1992 agrarian counter-reform, this study also will help elucidate
the consequences of devolution of natural resource management worldwide. The
research also supports the education of a graduate student.