* 0822838
* CRIF: Facilities:  Research Facilities at ChemMatCARS:  A Synchrotron Resource for Chemistry and Materials Science at the Advanced Photon Source
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2009,02/28/2015
* Susan Mini, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 02/28/2015
* USD 6,961,902.00

The Division of Chemistry and the Division of Materials Research at the National
Science Foundation, and the Office of Basic Energy Sciences at the Department of
Energy provide continuing support to ChemMatCARS at the Argonne Advanced Photon
Source under the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities Program
(CRIF). The award provides maintenance, operation and selected upgrades of this
unique resource as a national user facility for the chemical and materials
science communities. The major techniques supported by the facility include
chemical crystallography, surface science, small-angle X-ray scattering and
wide-angle X-ray scattering. The instrumentation can be adapted to accept a wide
variety of user chambers for specialized sample environments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This user facility provides a unique high brilliance X-ray
resource for the study of surface, interfacial and bulk properties of liquids
and solids on length scales ranging from the atomic to the mesoscopic. The
facility deals with a wide variety of scientific problems ranging from crystal
structure determination to formation of porous membranes to lithium batteries.
The research activities enabled by the ChemMatCARS user facility set the pace in
adapting synchrotron techniques to best serve the chemistry community;
contribute to the development of improved materials, notably plastics, membranes
and nano-composites. The facility serves as a training ground for researchers at
all levels.