* 0822079
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant Proposal:  Evaluating Inka Administrative Intensity at Santa Rita B, an Administrative Center in the Chao Valley, Peru
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2009
* Amanda Aland, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2009
* USD 14,974.00

Under the direction of Dr. R. Alan Covey, Amanda Aland will investigate the Inka
incorporation and administration of the Chao Valley on the north coast of Peru,
focusing on the site of Santa Rita B. The Chao Valley, located in the heart of
the Chimú state, was later conquered when the Inkas incorporated the coast into
the empire reportedly around A.D.1470. The Inkas employed a variety of
strategies for controlling the core and provincial areas of their vast empire,
but very little is currently understood about Inka administration of the north
coast of Peru. Santa Rita B is a strategically located mid-valley site bearing
occupations spanning approximately 2500 years, including both Chimú and Inka.
Research at the site, a possible Inka administrative center, will address the
research question of whether the Inkas governed the valley through existing
Chimú institutions or replaced them with their own.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ms.
Aland's research will include systematic excavation and dating of the structures
at Santa Rita B, as well as in-depth laboratory analyses to examine how the
Inkas changed existing political and economic institutions and how such policies
affected local people. Excavations will target administrative, economic, and
domestic contexts. Investigations into administrative contexts at Santa Rita B
will be critical in addressing how the Inkas governed the preceding Chimú at the
site. Associated with economic and political aspects of governance, the
excavation of the corrals should provide information on the origins of the
camelids housed in the structures, and if and how the Inkas made use of herding
and caravanning practices to benefit the state. Domestic contexts will provide
insight into who occupied the area and how they were affected by the Inka state
on a daily basis. In addition to excavations, AMS radiocarbon dates will aid in
the establishment of a chronology of site and structure use, allowing for the
Inka occupation represented at the site to be placed in space and
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project lies in the
contribution to the understanding of the variable Inka strategies for
incorporation and control of the Peruvian north coast as a provincial area of
the state. It will also address the larger issue of ancient empires, by
contributing to the understanding of ancient imperial strategies of expansion,
conquest, and administration of other territories a concept that can be applied
to the field of anthropology. This project will have a broader impact by
providing opportunities to the local community to learn from and participate in
the research being conducted at Santa Rita B. The research will be a
collaborative effort between Ms. Aland, students from the U.S, local Peruvian
archaeologists, and workers, all of whom will receive training in both field and
laboratory methods. It has the potential to greatly impact the members of the
local community by involving them in the project and providing opportunities for
education about the history of the north coast of Peru, better site management,
and overall cultural heritage management.