* 0822556
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Spirit Possession, Disease Classification, and Emergent Infectious Disease in Benin, West Africa
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* James Kennell, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2009
* USD 15,000.00

Graduate student James L Kennell, supervised by Dr. Carolyn F. Sargent, will
undertake research on how disease classification systems operate within local
biomedical, global health, and religious domains, and how they shape therapeutic
behaviors and choices. This research will focus on variations in knowledge and
therapy-seeking behavior concerning a particular set of infectious diseases that
manifest on the skin. The goal is to illuminate the ways in which individual
illness experience articulates with broader social processes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be conducted among the Aja people of
southwest Benin. The researcher will use a mixed-methods approach, including:
participant observation, free listing and pile sorts, focus groups, direct
observation, semi-structured interviews, text and content analysis, illness
narratives and life histories, and informal interviews. Particular attention
will be given to the Vodoun deity Sakpata, who is linked to the disease category
of interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study focuses on interlocking systems of
religious and medical knowledge and how individuals and communities attempt to
make sense of change regarding health, suffering, and the world in which they
live. The study will seek to understand how this particular population utilizes
local religious and health care practices, such as medico-ritual healing and
spirit possession, to create new meanings concerning infectious disease, and to
formulate innovative responses to illness with respect to local political and
biomedical dynamics and global health initiatives. Global health initiatives
include vaccination and health education programs, the state organization of
religious healers, the institutionalization of vodoun religion by the
government, and external religious influences such as missionization and the
international connections of vodoun religion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
is important because it will contribute to medical anthropological theory
regarding medical knowledge production and change. It also will support the
education of a social scientist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;