* 0822545
* Probability, Objectivity and Correlations
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2008,01/31/2009
* Allen Stairs, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 01/31/2009
* USD 24,593.00

Introduction: This project takes on a long-standing problem of interpreting
probabilities in quantum mechanics by focusing on debates about whether
probabilities are "objective" or "subjective." In a recent collaborative work by
CFS (Caves, Fuchs, and Schack) it is claimed that we can understand such
probabilities as degrees of belief (i.e., subjectively), and that work has
stimulated productive responses as well as criticisms. CFS use the PI's previous
work in making their case. The PI intends to show that that CFS's application of
his work is flawed and does thus not warrant their conclusions concerning the
subjective nature of probabilities equal to one. The PI also plans to pursue to
clarify broader issues concerning probability in quantum physics that arise from
the discussion of CFS's approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: It
will be of great interest to have CFS's case scrutinized by the PI whose work is
at issue especially since the PI has an excellent track record as a researcher
in philosophy and foundations of quantum mechanics. The CFC thesis has met with
considerable criticism from the ranks of physicists who consider quantum
probabilities as representing objective features of the physical world, and
indicates that an unambiguous decision on the nature of quantum probabilities
will be immensely important not only for a philosophical understanding of the
nature of physical reality but also for physicists' understanding of the nature
and significance of one of their most fundamental theories.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The project's primary importance will be
within a relatively narrow philosophical community, those with serious interest
in the foundations of quantum physics. However, it will also be of interest and
importance to all Bayesians interested in the viability of applications of the
Bayesian framework in science. In addition, the PI is in a position to
facilitate a broader impact of his research through public lectures due to his
connections at the Smithsonian and elsewhere. The PI intends to use the results
of his research to teach potential future teachers, which seems to be an
appropriate method of dissemination of the insights to be gained from the work.
It also has a potential for providing a very valuable contribution to society at
large by enhancing a wider understanding and appreciation of the nature of
probability and probabilistic reasoning.&lt;br/&gt;