* 0822752
* Land Use on Privatized Pastoral Land in Kenya: The Impact of Household Strategies on Livelihoods and the Environment
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Michael Coughenour, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2012
* USD 226,575.00

Dr. Carolyn Lesorogol (Washington University St. Louis) along with Dr. Randall
B. Boone and Dr. Michael B. Coughenour (Colorado State University) will
undertake research on the relationship between individual and communal decision-
making and the changing dynamics of land management in fragile ecosystems. The
research will be carried out among Samburu pastoralists in
Kenya.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;African livestock herders depend on natural
resources for their survival in difficult, semi-arid environments. Management of
land historically was shared among community members but in the 1980s, some
communities privatized their land, transferring decision-making from councils of
elders to individual land owners. In the community studied here, new rules
recently have emerged that restore a degree of communal control over individual
land use decisions. Such a reassertion of community authority following
privatization is unusual and provides an opportunity to investigate processes of
institutional change and their impact on household decisions regarding land use
as well as their broader environmental impact. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three
questions will be addressed in the study: (1) How and why have new rules
regarding individual land use decisions emerged at this time in the community?
(2)To what extent and in which ways do the new rules influence household
decision-making regarding land use? (3) How do household decisions on land use
and livestock production aggregate and impact the overall environment and
livelihood possibilities for pastoralists in this region? The study combines
anthropological field research methods with computer simulation modeling of the
natural environment and human decision-making. Ethnographic interviews,
observations, and surveys will be used to investigate the processes of
institutional innovation leading to the new grazing rules and the impact of the
rules on household land use and grazing practices. These data as well as
ecological information will be used to build simulation models of the Samburu
ecosystem and households. The models simulate the aggregate effects of household
decisions on the environment and the feedback from the environment to household
welfare. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The importance of this research lies in the new
insight it will provide into the social process through which institutions
emerge and become established, with particular implication for understanding
institutions for managing natural resources. The modeling component of the
project will contribute to making the results more generalizable beyond this
particular research context and perfecting new resarch tools that can be
employed by other social scientists. The results have policy implications for
governments designing land tenure and management strategies for semi-arid
rangelands in Africa and elsewhere.