* 0822009
* Stratosphere-Troposphere Coupling Studies
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2008,10/31/2011
* Mark Baldwin, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 10/31/2011
* USD 599,266.00

Over the past several decades, the composition and circulation of the
stratosphere have changed, as the ozone layer has thinned and concentrations of
greenhouse gases have increased. In the coming decades, the ozone layer is
expected to recover against a background of continued increases in greenhouse
gas concentrations. These stratospheric changes are important, because they can
affect tropospheric weather and climate, especially at high latitudes. Our poor
understanding, however, of the role of the stratosphere introduces uncertainty
in climate projections, especially because we do not understand what is required
of climate models to simulate realistic effects of stratospheric changes on
surface climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A wide variety of model results, together
with observations, will be used to improve understanding of stratosphere-
troposphere coupling and of how weather and climate are affected by
stratospheric variability. A specific goal of this project is to gain an
understanding of what is required in climate models to obtain realistic
simulations of the effects of stratospheric changes, as well as effects of the
quasi-biennial oscillation (QBO), on surface climate and weather. The QBO is
fairly regular, and is generally predictable many months in advance, so
relationships with the troposphere have the potential to improve long-range
weather and climate forecasts. This work will contribute to our understanding of
how stratospheric change will affect tropospheric climate, and through
involvement in international efforts, contribute to scientific assessments of
climate change and changes in atmospheric
composition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Activities with broader impacts include:
teaching middle school classes on climate change; supporting and training a
postdoc; making data publicly available for download (e.g., annular mode
indices); involving undergraduate students in the research project; organizing
international conferences; and preparing a review of stratosphere-troposphere
coupling, to be published in Reviews of Geophysics. This project will contribute
to the World Climate Research Programme's Stratospheric Processes and their Role
in Climate (SPARC) project.