* 0822743
* SBIR Phase II:  (IT-B5) Feasibility to run novel voice interface on a low-power microcontroller
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2010
* Seth Cameron, CameronSound, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 07/31/2010
* USD 500,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II research project will
implement a miniature information management system that is suitable to the
access requirements for visually impaired users. Current information
technologies for the visually impaired are slow and difficult to operate while
holding a white cane or guide dog. Visually impaired people will benefit greatly
from a hands-free/eyes-free information system that is much faster to operate
and easier to access. The project will develop a voice-operated personal digital
assistant (PDA), called Vivian, which performs 10 times faster than Braille
PDAs. The outcome of the Phase I study demonstrated the feasibility of real-time
speech processing algorithms on integrated microcontrollers without hardware
floating-point arithmetic. The outcome of this Phase II project is anticipated
to result in a wearable device similar to a state of the art media player with
10X faster processing and 10X smaller in size.

With more than 160 million visually impaired people worldwide, 10 million in the
US alone, the proposed research is a critical step towards a device that will
address their mobile information management needs significantly better than
current alternatives. Moreover, this device should impact mobile information
management for sighted people. The results of usability trials with sighted
users speaking multiple languages conducted during the Phase I project, indicate
that the outcomes of a powerful and fast alternative human computer interface to
graphical user interfaces for sighted and visually impaired users. Additionally,
this voice technology is suitable for integration into mobile appliances such as
mobile phones for which over 300 million were sold in 2007.