* 0822640
* Good Computing: A Pedagogically Focused Theory of Professional Computer Ethics
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Charles Huff, Saint Olaf College
* Standard Grant
* Kelly A. Joyce
* 08/31/2010
* USD 95,056.00

This Scholar's Award by the NSF program in Science, Technology &amp; Society
supports research that examines ethics and values issues in computing. Work in
computing ethics over the last 30 years has borne much fruit. Yet we still know
very little about how computer professionals manage to be ethical in their
everyday lives. This research investigates the skills and strategies computer
professionals use to navigate normal and unusual stresses, conflicting demands,
and multiple possibilities and difficulties of their careers. This inquiry
follows the life stories of computer scientists who are known for their ethical
commitment, and builds on previous work that documents the life stories of moral
exemplars in computing in the United Kingdom and Scandinavia. Moral exemplars
are people who are successfully integrating ethical concern into their practice
of computing. This work will contribute to a multifaceted picture of how moral
exemplars in computing structure their lives, make choices, and implement plans.
Initial results suggest that there are at least two types of exemplars in
computing: craftspersons who design software to help users (e.g., persons with
disabilities) and reformers who attempt to change society (e.g., by changing
laws and regulations on privacy). The research in this project will use advanced
statistical techniques to tease apart the relationships between technical and
social skill in the success or failure of the projects described by the
exemplars in interviews. Detailed biographical data will also be collected on a
subset of the exemplars to investigate how they have charted their moral careers
in the midst of sometimes helpful and sometimes hindering social environments.
The proposed statistical and qualitative investigation will be rooted in a model
of ethical action in computing across a variety of environmental circumstances.
One outcome of the project will be a new direction in education that will
promote ethical commitment as well as development of skills and knowledge for
computer professionals.