* 0822985
* SBIR Phase II:  Photochemical Treatment of Dioxin-Furan Compound Emissions  from Industrial Processes
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2010
* John Richards, Air Control Techniques, P.C.
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Walters
* 07/31/2010
* USD 490,912.00

This SBIR Phase II research will advance the use of photochemistry for the
control of toxic air pollutants emitted from industrial sources such as
furnaces, boilers, and kilns. The types of ultraviolet lamp sources now used
successfully for wastewater treatment, water purification, and air stream
disinfection will be adapted for use in the more challenging environment of
industrial process effluent gas streams. This research program concerns a
photochemical system designed to destroy highly toxic compounds called dioxin-
furans, which are unintended byproducts of some industrial processes. During an
extended test program at an industrial facility, the researchers will evaluate:
(1) long-term ultraviolet lamp energy efficiency in hot, dust-laden gas streams,
(2) dioxin-furan destruction efficiencies during routine variations in source
conditions, (3) reaction product characteristics, and (4) reductions in
pollutants in addition to the targeted dioxin-furans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of this research will include an improved understanding of the
chemical reactions of dioxin-furan compounds at the gas temperatures and
pollutant concentrations typical of industrial gas streams. The results will
help assess the applicability of photochemical systems to provide high
efficiency air pollution control while reducing emissions of greenhouse gases
produced by existing control techniques. Photochemical systems that destroy
toxic air pollutants will provide an attractive alternative to systems that
retain the toxic compounds on adsorbents disposed in landfills. The development
of ultraviolet light technology will result in reduced air emissions of
persistent toxic pollutants that bio-accumulates in the food chain and cause
adverse human health effects. &lt;br/&gt;