* 0822393
* Arabidopsis 2010:  Functional Genomics of NBS-LRR Mediated Resistance
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2009,12/31/2013
* Richard Michelmore, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 12/31/2013
* USD 2,498,405.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal number IOS-0822393&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project fuses genetic, evolutionary, and functional approaches to understand the
co-evolution of plants and pathogens at the molecular level. Protein-protein
interactions will be analyzed in yeast and in plants to build an interaction
network of receptor (NBS-LRR) proteins, plant signaling components, and
virulence effector proteins from bacterial and oomycete pathogens. The
functional significance of these interactions to disease will be studied by a
variety of cell biology and disease assays. The project will reveal whether
targets of effectors represent a limited number of points of weakness in the
plant that are exploited by multiple effectors and pathogens and whether protein
complexes that determine the infection phenotype co-evolve. Libraries of genes
encoding NBS-LRR proteins and their domains as well as signaling proteins that
are candidate plant targets of effectors studied will be distributed through the
Arabidopsis Biological Resource Center.&lt;br/&gt;The global approach will
generate large amounts of data that will impact many labs focused on
understanding the molecular basis of disease resistance in plants as well as
contribute to the functional characterization of numerous genes in Arabidopsis.
Data from the project will be broadly disseminated through the project web site
(http://niblrrs.ucdavis.edu ) and through The Arabidopsis Information Resource.
Deciphering the molecular determinants of resistance has practical importance as
well as fundamental interest. A greater understanding of the mechanisms of
perception and responses will provide new possibilities for developing disease
resistant plants. Consequently, this project will expand the options available
to plant breeders to achieve more durable resistance. Researchers involved in
the project will benefit from inter-disciplinary training that includes the
molecular genetics and cell biology of the defense response components and
protein-protein interactions involved in pathogen-host interactions. Outreach
efforts will include dissemination of genomics approaches to high schools
through curriculum development, workshops and internships. &lt;br/&gt;