* 0822951
* Collaborative Research: The Violence of "Small Wars," Poverty, and Health in Three Pastoralist Communities in Northern Kenya
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Ivy Pike, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2012
* USD 168,982.00

Led by Dr. Bilinda S. Straight (Western Michigan University) and Dr. Ivy L. Pike
(University of Arizona), an international team of anthropologists will
investigate the social and health-related dimensions of violence among Pokot,
Samburu, and Turkana pastoralist communities in Kenya. The researchers will seek
to determine how chronic, low-intensity violence creates a special class of
vulnerable and impoverished persons, making violence-created inequality distinct
from other forms of poverty and inequality. The study's regional scope
additionally places the current circumstances of violence into a larger context
of marginalization, which permits a nuanced account of the social and political
factors that shape the different experiences of intercommunity violence.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To create an ethnographically driven epidemiological study
of violence and health, the researchers will use a mixed-methods approach. The
team will sample 180 households (approximately 900-2700 individuals) in two
communities (one at the borders of the violence, one removed from the borders of
violent conflict) in each of three adjacent ethnic communities in chronic
conflict with one another. The data to be collected include: 1) Anthropometric
measures to assess nutritional condition; 2) Assessments of violence related
morbidity/mortality and major injury through individual interviews; 3)
Qualitative interviews on the project's key themes; 4) Oral histories of violent
events for each community; 6) Wealth assessments; 7) Collection of data from
health clinics in each region to evaluate patterns of use and mortality trends.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is important because it will allow social
scientists to better understand the relationship between chronic, low-intensity
violence, health, and inequality. The research will produce one of the first
data sets that directly link increased, low-level armed conflict and shifts in
health experiences. The research also has practical implications. Health
research is an emerging tool for social advocacy and a politically neutral tool
for international diplomacy. The research also builds international
collaborations between American, German, Kenyan, and Norwegian researchers, and
supports the field training of a graduate student.