* 0822128
* NanoTeach: Professional Development in Nanoscale Science
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2014
* Anne Tweed, Mid-Continent Research for Education and Learning
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 08/31/2014
* USD 3,297,733.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;DRL-0822128&lt;br/&gt;PI: John Ristvey&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Mid-Continent Research for Education and Learning (McREL)&lt;br/&gt;Title:
NanoTeach: Professional Development in Nanoscale
Science&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is exploring the introduction of
nanoscience curriculum into high schools. It is creating and studying a
professional development model based on two products, the NanoTeach Teacher's
Guide and the NanoTeach Facilitator's Guide. The NanoTeach Teacher's guide is
being designed for self study by teachers (low treatment group) and for use in a
facilitated development model (high treatment group). The NanoTeach
Facilitator's Guide outlines the professional development experiences and
provides guidance for facilitators. The professional development model combines
(1) a design framework (Designing Effective Science Lessons based on the C-U-E
model: content, understanding, and environment); (2) nanoscale science content
from NSF-funded curriculum projects; and (3) multiple delivery methods. Twenty
teachers are being recruited to carry out the pilot testing of the professional
development materials. 75 teachers in the high treatment group are experiencing
a 2-week summer workshop, asynchronous sessions while they implement their first
lesson, Versatile Classroom (a synchronous, online video technology),
implementation of a second lesson, and a final 2-week summer workshop. 75
teachers in the low treatment group experience a brief orientation to
nanoscience resources, have access to the NT Teacher's Guide, implement two
lessons, and debrief. The NanoTeach partnership includes Aspen Associates, the
Stanford Nanofabrication Facility, and the National Nanotechnology
Infrastructure Network. The research study is being carried out by Aspen
Associates, and project evaluation is conducted by Dr. Doug Huffman of the
University of Kansas.