* 0822547
* The Expression and Impact of Parent-offspring Conflict in Natural Populations of Least Killifish
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Joseph Travis, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 08/31/2012
* USD 350,489.00

When mothers provide nutrition for offspring throughout gestation, offspring and
mother have conflicting interests. Mothers ought to distribute nutrition evenly
to all offspring, but each offspring ought to coerce as much nutrition as
possible for itself. This project will examine whether different levels of
conflict, produced by different levels of relatedness within a mother?s brood,
can account for the vastly different levels of maternal investment in offspring
seen in nature and for different patterns of gene expression during gestation in
different populations. The project will also examine whether this conflict can
be ameliorated by enhancing the nutrition available to mothers, and whether this
conflict accounts for the high number of inviable embryos observed in crosses
between individuals from different populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
conflicting interests of mothers and offspring are postulated to be responsible
for features such as the mammalian placenta, genetic imprinting, and the rapid
diversification of live-bearing animals. This project will address several of
these postulated connections in the same system and thereby illuminate whether
one process can offer a unifying explanation for many seemingly disparate
features in nature. It will also provide training opportunities for high
schoolers, teachers, undergraduates, and a postdoctoral fellow, including groups
under-represented in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;