* 0822480
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The Bravo Medical Program: Radiation Standards, Scientific Uncertainty, and the Legacy of the Cold War, 1954 - the Present
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2008,12/31/2010
* Naomi Oreskes, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 12/31/2010
* USD 7,999.00

Introduction: Much of what is known about the biological effects of high-dose
radiation comes from the "Bravo Medical Program," established in 1954 to track
the effects of the fallout exposure of citizens of the Marshall Islands from the
Bravo thermonuclear test. Although there are many accounts of the Bravo event,
and some scholarly discussions of its aftermath, there is no full-fledged
historical study of the Bravo Medical Program. Yet, this program was unique
within the boundaries of American science in its effort to understand the long-
term effects of radioactive fallout exposure from a nuclear test. The proposed
project addresses this important historical episode, analyzing how the citizens
of the Marshall Islands were studied as a major source of information about
human radiation exposure for more than 50 years. The Program provided medical
care for the exposed as well as produced data that were meant to establish the
biological effects of radiation exposure, and which might be applied to
radiation safety programs internationally. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merits: The central goal of this project is to tell the story of the Bravo
Medical Program, and to analyze how the knowledge produced was used in the
development of national and international radiation safety standards and
policies, as well as in later debates over dose reconstruction and compensation
claims. In particular, the project seeks to answer the following questions: 1)
What did the scientists involved expect to achieve through the Bravo Medical
Program and how were their expectations linked to the development of
international radiation safety policies and standards? 2) How were doses
reconstructed and how has the continued uncertainty of radiation science
contributed to ongoing debates about compensation? 3) How did the Marshallese
and other parties outside the national laboratories make use of the scientific
evidence? 4) Why did the Marshallese come to claim that they had been treated
like "human guinea pigs"? These are historical questions, which we plan to
answer through historical analysis.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The
Bravo debate is not over. On-going compensation claims rest in part on the
concept of "changed circumstances," which provides for a renegotiation of
compensation if new evidence emerges suggesting that knowledge about
environmental or medical conditions have changed. How and why has the knowledge
changed? Why does the scientific information remain contested more than 50 years
later? The Bravo Medical Program also provides a window through which to view
broader questions about the contestation of scientific knowledge. How and why do
scientific claims get contested? How can contestation be extended for long
periods of time, even after many of the players have died? These questions have
a broad relevance in a variety of environmental and healthy policy debates such
as the safety of nuclear power, the reality and severity of global warming, and
the risks and benefits of use of genetically modified organisms. This project
offers an opportunity to approach broad questions of scientific uncertainty in
relation to health and environmental policy, and to address the question of why
scientific closure has often proven so difficult to obtain in these domains.