* 0822112
* FUNCTIONALIZED DIAMONDOIDS AND THEIR ELECTRONIC PROPERTIES FOR FIELD EMISSIONS
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Nicholas Melosh, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 08/31/2011
* USD 460,184.00

The Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program at NSF Division of Chemistry will
support the international collaborative research project of Prof. Nicholas
Melosh of Stanford University and Prof. Peter Schreiner of Justus-Liebig
University Giessen. This international collaborative research project will
examine the fundamental properties and applications of diamondoids, a newly
discovered nanoscale form of carbon. Diamondoid molecules consist of 2-6 diamond
cages fused together, combining both the remarkable properties of diamond with
the uniformity and functionality of a nanomaterial. Profs. Melosh and Schreiner
and their students will investigate how these materials can be chemically
modified with high specificity, and determine how these molecular substituents
affect electronic and structural behavior. Diamondoid properties ranging from
dielectric constant, band gap, electron affinity, and energy level alignment
will be measured using a combination of ultraviolet photoemission spectroscopy,
field emission, microwave probes and electron tunneling. Diamondoids are unique
model systems to examine how electronic structure develops in nanomaterials
because they are molecularly pure, atomically uniform, and include a systematic
sequence of sizes and shapes. Diamondoid thin films are expected to
significantly impact technological applications involving electron emission,
such as displays, based upon their similarity to hydrogen-terminated diamond.
Field- and thermionic- electron emission from diamondoid surfaces will reveal
how diamond and diamond-like structures enhance surface emission, which could
lead to a new generation of robust displays and
lighting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This international collaborative research project
is supported jointly by NSF and the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) in
Germany. The study is also supported by the Office of International Science and
Engineering (OISE) at NSF.&lt;br/&gt;