* 0822091
* Conference: Contemporary Combinatorics, Memphis, TN
* MPS,DMS
* 04/15/2008,03/31/2009
* Bela Bollobas, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Bruce E. Sagan
* 03/31/2009
* USD 17,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Contemporary Combinatorics 2008&lt;br/&gt;Memphis, TN, March
28--29&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this conference is to bring together a
group of outstanding mathematicians loosely connected to combinatorics,
understood in the widest sense. This year the emphasis will be on group theory
and number theory. The meeting will give a chance to mathematicians from the
Mid-South to benefit not only from the lectures but also from personal contacts
with the speakers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main speaker at the conference is
one of the most distinguished mathematicians today, Professor John Thompson of
the University of Florida, Fields Medalist and Wolf Prize winner. There will be
several other exciting speakers at the meeting; they have been chosen because
they are not only excellent mathematicians, but also wonderful expositors and
very approachable people. Among other speakers, we shall have Andras Sarkozy of
the Eotvos University of Budapest, one of the most frequent collaborators of
Paul Erdos, who has made major contributions to additive number theory; Vojtech
Rodl of Emory University, one of the most powerful combinatorialists today, who
has greatly extended Szemeredi's Regularity Lemma; Cameron Stewart of the
University of Waterloo, who has done important work on combinatorial number
theory; Florian Luca of the National University of Mexico, who has proved
several conjectures of Paul Erdos in number theory; Balazs Szegedy of the
University of Toronto, who has been proved deep results in study of the limits
of graph sequences, a substantial project started by Lovasz, Borgs, Chayes, Sos
and Vesztergombi. Andras Sarkozy, who has had a vast experience teaching
undergraduates and graduates, will give a special `public' lecture aimed at a
very wide audience, including some of the best high school students from the
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unlike the East Coast or the Bay Area on the West
Coast, the Mid-South cannot boast of many high-level mathematical conferences;
the Contemporary Combinatorics 2008 meeting in Memphis goes some way towards
redressing the balance. The formula whereby personal contacts between the
lecturers and the other participants is greatly encouraged has been found very
successful so far, so this is what we are planning for this year as well. There
is no doubt that listening to lectures by John Thompson, Andras Sarkozy, Vojtech
Rodl, and others, and, especially, talking to them during the conference will be
very inspiring for young and established mathematicians alike. The NSF grant is
absolutely vital for the success of the meeting; most of it will be used to help
graduate students and senior mathematicians come to Memphis so that they can
benefit from the lectures and the personal contact with the speakers.