* 0822907
* Scholars Award: The Appropriate Technology Movement in American Political Culture
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Jordan Kleiman, SUNY College at Geneseo
* Standard Grant
* Kelly A. Joyce
* 08/31/2010
* USD 131,766.00

This Scholar's Award from the NSF's program in Science, Technology and Society
supports research that examines the history of the Appropriate Technology
Movement in the United States. The Appropriate Technology Movement (ATM) emerged
in the 1960s as an alternative strategy for international economic development
based on technologies that are small in scale, democratically controllable, low
in capital commitment, environmentally sustainable, and adaptable to local
cultural conditions. As the movement gained momentum in the late 1960s,
appropriate technologists set their sights on the social and environmental
reform of the industrialized world as well. This study will examine several
topics related to this effort as it unfolded in the U.S., including the ATM's
historical connections to the counterculture and the Environmental Justice
Movement, its interaction with the state, and its gender politics. Scholarly and
popular accounts of the movement are based on an exceedingly narrow body of
evidence and are thus burdened by a number of misconceptions: that the movement
is a manifestation of romantic anti-modernism and is thus anti-technology and
anti-city; that its only strategy for social change is the development and
dissemination of "green" hardware; and that it devolved into a new-age fad in
the 1970s and disappeared shortly thereafter. This study will gather evidence
that may help clear up these misconceptions by drawing on extensive primary-
sources. The data sources include oral histories collected from thirty AT
organizations in over 20 states, as well as substantial archival research.
Examination of this evidence will make possible a more balanced assessment of
the ATM's strengths and weaknesses and will reveal that the movement's effort to
combine small-scale, community-controlled technology with an array of
cooperative economic institutions is deeply rooted in the American populist
tradition. This research will also explain why the effort to translate AT
principles into public policy has met with only limited success. This research
will result in a scholarly book on the history of the American branch of the ATM
and will be of interest to scholars, policymakers, activists, and technology-
users more generally.