* 0823122
* SBIR Phase II:   Isobutanol biocatalyst - Engineering pathway enzymes for higher isobutanol productivity.
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2008,10/31/2010
* Peter Meinhold, Gevo Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 10/31/2010
* USD 500,000.00

The intellectual merit of this Phase I SBIR research is the development of a
biocatalyst for the commercial production of isobutanol using molecular
techniques. During Phase I of this proposal, a bacterial microorganism was
engineered that produced isobutanol at reasonably high rates and reaching high
concentration, indicating that a biotechnological process for the production of
isobutanol is feasible. During Phase II research, any limitation to biocatalyst
productivity will be removed using molecular techniques resulting in a
microorganism that produces isobutanol at a rate that allows for economically
competitive production of isobutanol. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts
of this Phase II SBIR research will be reneweable isobutanol produced for both
the transportation fuel market as well as the chemical market. Higher alcohols,
such as butanol and isobutanol that can be produced from the same biomass as
ethanol are attractive second-generation biofuels due to their higher energy
content and their low hygroscopicity. Successful completion of the Phase II work
will help enable a process for the biotechnological production of isobutanol
that is economically competitive with the petrochemical market. This not only
delivers a better second-generation biofuel but also reduces the dependence on
imported oil, lowers greenhouse gas emissions and expands the use of biobased
products in the chemicals market.