* 0823973
* Collaborative Proposal: Integration of Biomolecular Self-Assembly and Capacitance Spectroscopy on Pathogen Diagnostics-On-Chip
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Saiful Khondaker, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 08/31/2011
* USD 100,275.00

&lt;br/&gt;Objective:&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to develop
novel pathogen diagnostic systems by integrating biomolecular self-assembly,
capacitance spectroscopy, and microfluidics into single lab-on-chip. The
approach is that the array of antibody nanotubes, incorporating antibodies for
target pathogens on nanotubes, captures pathogens and the capacitance change of
the nanotube between electrodes will detect and identify the strain of pathogen.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the proposed
lab-on-chip system could enable rapid detection of contaminating microorganisms
with small sample volume utilizing the protein nanotube technology combined with
antibodies specific for targeted organisms. The effort will contribute to
advances in pathogen sensing and diagnostics by the development of a highly
sensitive, selective, reproducible, and false-positive-free detection platform
of pathogens in the detection limit of a single cell level. This ultra-compact
lab-on-chip diagnostic tool could also be useful for point-of-care applications
in remote clinical laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact:&lt;br/&gt;This research has broader social impact on health care and
homeland security since harmful pathogens can be detected and identified by the
proposed lab-on-chip instantaneously with fewer false-positive signals. The
educational broader impact is extends to local high school students in New York
City, many of them are from underrepresented groups, to prepare for serious
scientific carrier through the proposed educational outreach program. The
investigators will also engage in educating local school teachers and K-12
students by leveraging an existing program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;