* 0823058
* Improving Communication in Cross-Disciplinary Collaboration
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Sanford Eigenbrode, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2012
* USD 289,986.00

Many pressing problems are complex in that they require to be addressed in a
cross-disciplinary manner. An emerging literature on the challenges of cross
disciplinary research emphasizes the critical importance of effective
communication. How this is to be achieved is less well understood. In this
project, an explicitly philosophical approach is adopted to develop the
intellectual common ground that is requisite for effective communication in
cross disciplinary collaborations. The need for a philosophical approach stems
from the disparate views about the nature of objects studied (metaphysics) and
methods of knowing them (epistemology) favored by different disciplines. The
premise of this proposal is that a carefully structured process of identifying,
understanding, and incorporating philosophical dimensions will serve to
facilitate effective communication between cross disciplinary research team
members. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach to be taken here is to use a set of
questions?the ?toolbox??that probes the epistemological and metaphysical aspects
of scientific research. In a workshop setting, CDR participants examine these
questions as individuals and share their views within their team. The proposed
project will extend and improve the toolbox-based method through several
distinct activities involving cross disciplinary research including the
development of a description of the diversity of existing research
collaborations for which the method can be effective, an analysis of knowledge
construction and communication in predominant types of research teams, and an
adaptation of the toolbox method for greatest effectiveness in these teams. It
will also include a test of the revised toolbox with working teams, the use
these test sessions to study communication processes and dynamics within this
type of research, and the dissemination of the findings of this project to the
community of cross disciplinary research practitioners and students through
publications, a conference, and an edited volume.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will improve the practice of cross disciplinary research in diverse
types of collaboration. Its impacts will therefore be felt across the range of
activities in which such research is required. Some of these areas of
collaborative research are critical for guiding policies aimed to improve human
wellbeing, such as those concerning sustainable natural systems and complex
public health issues. Others are part of expanding interdisciplinary research at
the forefront of discovery, such as computational biology, neurosciences, and
nanotechnology. In addition, the project aims to advance epistemology and the
philosophy of science by incorporating insights from scientists engaged in cross
disciplinary research?philosophy, therefore, is not merely a resource for this
project but a direct beneficiary of it. It will also promote teaching, training,
and learning by improving the sophistication and skills of graduate students
directly involved as workshop participants and those who work as research
collaborators. The conference/workshop and project deliverables will reach the
growing international audience of students and scientists seeking to build their
capacity for cross-disciplinary collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;