* 0823263
* Incorporating institutional, political, and other non-economic drivers in models of large-scale energy transformations to address climate change
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Nathan Hultman, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 12/31/2011
* USD 254,881.00

If human societies are to address climate change by reducing greenhouse gas
emissions, they must better understand the pathways by which transformative
technologies become significant components of mainstream energy systems.
Currently the primary tools for modelling the potential adoption and effects of
new technologies are called integrated assessment models (IAMs). As of now, IAM
representations of technological change are incomplete: while they include
robust representations of certain economic factors, they do not include
institutional, behavioral and social factors. Studies of technological change
suggest that all of these these are fundamentally important to technology
adoption and use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks to develop better
representations of non-economic drivers of technological change in energy
transformations. The investigators will begin with camparative case studies
involving two large-scale energy technologies (ethanol and nuclear power) in
three countries (Brazil, Sweden, and the United States). The remainder of the
work combines theory, field investigation, and modeling with the goal of
developing improved, more valid IAMs. Improved projections of technology
diffusion for climate change mitigation could help both the private sector and
policymakers design more effective mitigation policies and implementation
strategies.