* 0823163
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Immigration, Science, and the Cold War: Rehabilitating Nazi Germany's Rocket Engineers in Huntsville, Alabama
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Monique Laney, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kelly A. Joyce
* 08/31/2009
* USD 7,975.00

This doctoral dissertation project, supported by the Science, Technology &amp;
Society program at NSF, examines the cultural and social impact of bringing the
German rocket experts to the United States under the post-Second World War
secret military operation "Project Paperclip." These German rocket scientists
are considered instrumental in putting the first American satellite into orbit
for the U.S. Army and the first Americans on the moon. This research focuses on
how these engineers and their families integrated into the community of
Huntsville, Alabama, beginning in 1950. This study explores how the men's
previous work for the Nazi regime was interpreted by themselves, their family
members, and their neighbors in Huntsville, to allow for smooth local
integration and seemingly unquestioned celebration of these Germans as American
heroes. By contrasting diverse local perspectives with national and
international perspectives over time, this study shows how changing national and
local foci shaped representations and evaluations of the German rocket
engineers. The primary focus for this study is the time period from 1950 to
1970, i.e., from the Germans' arrival in Huntsville until the moon landing in
1969. The project uses an interdisciplinary combination of methods from cultural
anthropology, sociology, history, and communication studies to show how
divergent sources inform the construction of multiple historical narratives.
Central to the study are oral histories collected from members of the German
families and from white, Jewish, and African American members of the Huntsville
community. The oral histories are combined with archival material, newspaper
articles, and memoirs to illustrate how memories of World War II, the Holocaust,
Jim Crow, the experiences of Jews in the Cold War South, and male and female
perspectives are reflected in narratives about the meaning of Project Paperclip
for Huntsville, Alabama. This project seeks to provide a new approach to the
history of science and technology by linking science and immigration and
analyzing their impact on communities.