* 0823813
* The Challenge of Integrating Magnetic Nanostructures into Functional 3-D Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Vitali Metlushko, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Anupama Kaul
* 07/31/2012
* USD 341,018.00

The objective of this research is to investigate the influence of 3-D magnetic
layer geometry on the performance of magneto-electronic devices. Most magnetic
nano-structures today are ultrathin or nanostructured films and multilayers. The
key challenge for the future will be a suitable technology to integrate and to
contact nanostructures in a reliable manner. Real devices are truly
3-dimensional structures, particularly where the roughness and shape of the
contact lines influences a performance to such an extent that they modify the
mechanism of operation. The topography must absolutely be taken into
consideration during the design phase. This move towards non-flat device
structures requires advanced fabrication, testing, and modeling in realistic 3-D
geometries. The intellectual merit of this proposal lies in its potential
impact: this research has the potential to overcome the limits of CMOS
performance, power dissipation and scaling, and open a new approach to
electronic circuitry with faster switching time and lower power consumption.
This new magneto-electronics could be the next level of performance for
electronic components in the near future. Since this project brings together
several sophisticated and forefront interdisciplinary techniques and concepts,
it provides a rich environment for training and education of students in nano-
fabrication, theoretical modeling, and modern characterization and visualization
techniques. The project will have a broader impact on curriculum development,
involvement of underrepresented groups, infrastructure enhancement, and broad
outreach to grades K-12 (Chicago inner-city high-schools and the Illinois
Mathematics and Science Academy) at a level of sophistication currently beyond
the reach of many inner-city schools.