* 0823352
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Ordering Knowledge, Reordering Empire
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Katharine Park, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2009
* USD 12,000.00

Introduction: The proposed project will examine the social structures implicit
in practices of empirical knowledge production in seventeenth-century English
science. It will argue that those structures were recapitulated in the
organization of the new English colonies then being established across the
Atlantic. That is to say, the knowledge economy of English science was
reconstituted in the political economy of the British Empire. To illustrate this
point, the project will reconstruct in detail the knowledge economy of practical
science in this period in England. It will then examine in light of those
knowledge-making practices a series of case studies on the process of political
and economic development in seventeenth-century colonial ventures in which
English scientists played a prominent role. Among the cases are the Hudson?s Bay
Company and the colonies of New England, Virginia, Carolina, Jamaica, and
Tangier. Research on these case studies will be conducted at the relevant
English archives between September 2008 and February 2009.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project considers the
commonalities in three transitions to modernity whose specific interconnection
has heretofore gone unexamined by scholars; namely, the revolution in the
management of practical science that accompanied the scientific revolution in
England, the expansion of English merchant capitalism across the Atlantic in the
seventeenth century, and the development of political structures within the
English empire that for the first time took the management of global trade to be
a central concern of the state. Three intellectual contributions will made in
doing so: 1) A new model for understanding the Scientific Revolution which
considers developments in seventeenth-century science in conjunction with other
modernizing developments such as state formation; 2) An argument that
science?which operated across political, social, economic, and religious
boundaries?was foundational to the colonial experience in the seventeenth-
century Atlantic to an extent as yet not fully recognized by historians; and 3)
A new way of understanding the relationship between science and commerce in the
seventeenth century, considering not only how the results of exploration and the
expansion of commerce shaped European understanding of the world, but also how
the sciences themselves shaped the process of expansion.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This project will foster a deeper
historical understanding of the origins of our global commercial system and of
the implications of the relationship between science and commerce both in the
past and in the present day. Results of the study will be disseminated to
scholarly audiences through presentations at academic conferences and through
articles in scholarly journals. Wider dissemination will be achieved through
publishing the results in book form and through the development of undergraduate
and graduate syllabi on the scientific revolution; on science and commerce in
the early modern world; and on the history of economic and political development
in the Atlantic world.&lt;br/&gt;