* 0823121
* CT-ISG: Collaborative research: Enabling Routers to Detect and Filter Spoofed Traffic
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2007,07/31/2011
* Jelena Mirkovic, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel M. Weber
* 07/31/2011
* USD 204,734.00

0716452&lt;br/&gt;Jelena Mirkovic&lt;br/&gt;University of
Delaware&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0716829&lt;br/&gt;Peter
Reiher&lt;br/&gt;UCLA&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CT-ISG: Collaborative Research:
Enabling Routers to Detect and Filter Spoofed
Traffic&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IP spoofing exacerbates many security
threats.If spoofing were eliminated or sufficiently reduced, defenses against
DDoS, distributed scanning and intrusions would be much simplified and more
effective. Of particular interest are spoofing defenses that will be both
practical (cheap to deploy and operate) and effective (provide significant
benefit in sparse deployment. This project develops two such defense mechanisms:
(1) Clouseau, which enables routers on asymmetric paths to accurately infer
associations between the route descriptor and the source address. It will
support multiple associations (in case of multipath routing) and will promptly
update associations when routes change. Clouseau will be integrated with two
very effective spoofing defenses: route-based filtering and hop-count filtering,
and will protect deploying networks from spoofed traffic. (2) RAD, which helps
networks protect themselves from reflector
attacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Clouseau and RAD will operate completely
autonomously. &lt;br/&gt;Deployment of Clouseau at as few as 50 chosen Internet
autonomous systems, together with RBF or HCF, will reduce amount of spoofed
traffic on the Internet to less than 3%. In isolated deployment, Clouseau with
RBF or HCF will reduce spoofed traffic received by the deploying network to less
than 3%. RAD system will offer a significant protection from reflector attacks
in isolated deployment and an almost perfect protection when RAD is deployed in
the Internet core. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is leading to a
significant reduction of spoofed traffic in the Internet. All code will be
released to the public, and graduate and undergraduate students will receive
valuable training from participation in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;