* 0823865
* Optimal Distributed Control of Power Grids with Multiple Alternative Energy Distributed Generation Microgrids: Towards Reliable, Sustainable and Clean Power Generation
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2013
* Feng Lin, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 12/31/2013
* USD 311,334.00

The objective of this project is to develop a modeling and control framework for
control and information exchange of power systems with alternative energy
distributed generation (AEDG)sources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
approach is to: &lt;br/&gt;(1) develop hybrid models for power systems
containing AEDG sources; &lt;br/&gt;(2) develop a systematic way to achieve
optimal information exchange among&lt;br/&gt;distributed controllers;
&lt;br/&gt;(3) design local control units and supervisory controllers that
control a&lt;br/&gt;microgrid or a power system with multiple microgrids in a
distributed fashion; &lt;br/&gt;(4) implement a benchmark system with multiple
AEDG sources to verify the modeling and control framework and
methodology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merits: &lt;br/&gt;(1) Power
systems with AEDG sources are modeled as hybrid systems. &lt;br/&gt;(2) Overall
control is achieved through the combination of local control and supervisory
control. &lt;br/&gt;(3) A formal and systematic way to design optimal
information exchanges among distributed supervisors is
proposed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: &lt;br/&gt;Alternative energy
sources are well-known for the capability of being used forclean electricity
generation and for improving energy security. Tremendous challenges are
introduced in the system operation strategy, protection, communication,
stability and reliability by deploying AEDG systems at a large scale. The
success of this project will help us to achieve clean and sustainable
electricity generation using alternative energy sources. The results of this
project will also provide a systematic approach to optimal design of control and
communication among distributed systems. At least one female and under-
represented minority student will be involved in this project. International
collaboration will be pursued to broaden the impact.