* 0823693
* Collaborative Research: The Pulse of Holocene Glaciations in New Zealand's Southern Alps
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2013
* Robert Finkel, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 09/30/2013
* USD 85,074.00

Human civilizations have developed during the Holocene epoch that began
approximately 11,500 years ago. The Holocene is classically considered a period
of outstanding climate stability. However, recent paleoclimate records suggest
that abrupt climatic shifts did occur within the Holocene and that some of those
coincided with twists and turns in human history. Although directly influencing
human habitat, temporal and spatial patterns, natural variability and driving
mechanisms of Holocene climate are not well understood, hampering reliable
evaluation of current climate change. Holocene climate swings were large enough
to impact humans but small enough to get lost in the ?noise? of natural
variability in most geological climate records. Glaciers in many areas on Earth,
however, have responded sensitively and quickly to the Holocene climate changes
and have produced distinctive landforms, or moraines. The age of these landforms
directly indicates when these continental Holocene climate changes occurred, but
so far a robust, uniform and reliable dating tool for moraines was lacking.
Recent progress in the field of cosmogenic dating demonstrates that moraines can
be dated with unprecedented accuracy throughout the Holocene period, allowing
novel perspectives on the characteristics of Holocene climate changes. This
grant is an interdisciplinary, multi-group effort to date the Holocene moraine
sequences in New Zealand?s Southern Alps by applying high-precision 10Be surface
exposure dating (SED) combined with local calibration of the 10Be production
rate, to evaluate the underlying climate changes, and to analyze the results
within an interhemispheric perspective. New Zealand appears to be an ideal
location for such a study: (i) terrestrial paleoclimate data from southern mid-
latitudes, influenced by tropical and polar signals, are sparse and urgently
needed to evaluate the regional footprint of climate changes; (ii) up to five or
more different Holocene moraines are preserved in front of individual glaciers,
allowing insight into the details of the Holocene climate changes in southern
mid-latitudes, including the ?Little Ice Age?; (iii) glaciers in southern mid-
latitudes respond to atmospheric/oceanic changes (no continental climate
effects); (iv) the general landform setting and rock type is well suited for our
SED approach; (v) a suite of detailed glacier landform (geomorphologic) maps of
New Zealand?s Southern Alps have been developed, paleo-snowlines have been
reconstructed in detail, and glaciological modeling studies are ongoing by our
collaborators, making this one of the better investigated glacier records on
Earth. To achieve a regional, detailed chronology of glaciations on a prime site
in southern mid-latitudes, we will combine large valley glacier systems with
smaller valley glaciers on both, the semi-arid east flank as well as on the very
humid west flank of the Southern Alps, evaluating the importance of different
precipitation regimes for glaciations. We will compare our glacial chronologies
to the few records available from New Zealand and elsewhere, testing the
regional to inter-hemispheric character of the Holocene glacial pulse-beat. One
of the foci herein will be the time period known as the ?Little Ice Age, where
detailed historical records are available for European glaciers. Intellectual
Merit and Broader Impacts: We expect to greatly improve our understanding of
drivers of Holocene glacier fluctuations in southern mid-latitudes by tackling
key questions such as: Were Holocene glaciations inter-hemispheric? Were
atmospheric circulation changes involved in driving these events or were both,
global and regional forces involved? This project represents a unique
opportunity to create a reference data set of Holocene glacial fluctuations in
southern mid-latitudes. These data should be of high value to calibrate climate
models and to the broad community of climate scientists and glacial geologists.
We further develop the method of cosmogenic 10Be dating and our
geochemical/geochronological tool-kit will be applicable to future Holocene
moraine-dating projects. The new atlas of geomorphic maps of the central
Southern Alps will be updated with our glacial chronologies during this project.
In addition to extending the LDEO/CU curriculum, a female master student will be
educated, several early-career scientists will be involved, and high school
students and teachers (?Lamont-Doherty Secondary School Field Program?) will
actively participate in this project. Beyond standard data dissemination, we
will present the project at public events, such as the annual L-DEO Open House
(typically 4,000 visitors) and will use our close contacts to New York public
media to seek coverage of this project in newspapers (New York Times) and
television (History Channel). The project will foster the fruitful collaboration
between the Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory, the University of Maine, the UC
Berkeley, and the GNS Science, NZ.