* 0823983
* Photonically-triggered SiC-GaN and Superjunction based High-gain, High-temperature, and High-voltage Bipolar Power Transistor
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2008,01/31/2014
* Sudip Mazumder, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* john zavada
* 01/31/2014
* USD 307,646.00

Project objectives are 1) Realizing a high-gain, high-voltage and high-
temperature monolithic SiC-GaN-OGBT (optically-gated bipolar transistor)
triggered in a non-latched manner using a low-power short-wavelength photonic
source; 2) Reducing photonic-triggering power by optimization of optical-
absorption efficiency using a GaN-SiC heterojunction structure; 3) Reducing OGBT
conduction drop using localized charge-compensation and conductivity modulation;
4) Experimental characterizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The emitter and base of the OGBT are made of GaN while the
collector is made of SiC, thus achieving optical efficiency and retaining
excellent breakdown voltage and temperature characteristics of SiC. OGBT
eliminates oxide-reliability problem at high temperature and breakdown-voltage
limitation in insulated-gate devices. N-type SiC substrate-based OGBT structure
circumvents the problem of unavailability of P-type substrate required for
N-channel SiC IGBTs. Optical triggering of OGBT eliminates negative-gate-bias
referencing need for N-substrate SiC IGBT. Superjunction-based charge-
compensation technique in SiC-GaN-OGBT yields high blocking voltage and low
forward-conduction drop. Proposed work explores ohmic-contact issues for
connecting N-GaN to P-SiC and hetero-epitaxial growth of GaN on SiC. OGBT has
implications for high-power, high-temperature, and high-frequency power system
with enhanced reliability due to optical isolation, EMI and parasitic-noise
immunity, device stress mitigation, and synergistic integration of photonic and
wide-bandgap device structures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;Broad applications include fly-by-light, electric ship,
electric/hybrid vehicles, telecommunication, spacecrafts, FACTs, pulsed power,
and microwave power amplifiers. The results of the research will be integrated
into 2 undergraduate/graduate courses. The project will support 1 Ph.D. student
and aims to incorporate, per year, 4 senior-design and undergraduate-research
students (including 2 under-represented and 1 honor-role student), and 1 middle-
school student.