* 0823208
* Scholar's Award: The Forensic Self: Personal Identification from the Renaissance to the Genome
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Kenneth Alder, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Kelly A. Joyce
* 08/31/2009
* USD 113,353.00

The research from this NSF award, co-funded by the Science, Technology &amp;
Society program and the Law &amp; Social Science program, will engage a broad
question of public concern: How have the sciences of identification shaped our
sense of who we are? The project takes its title from John Locke, who coined the
term, "the forensic self," to suggest how a person's identity--his or her inner
sense of self--depends on an awareness of having to answer to others, and to the
criminal courts in particular. Preliminary research by the investigator has
suggested how the forensic techniques, long deployed to make individual citizens
accountable to the law, have also defined our self-understanding as members of
racial groups and descendants of genealogical lineages. The project investigates
five forensic techniques in chronological sequence, each based on a particular
feature of the body: Renaissance handwriting analysis (the hand), nineteenth-
century anthropometry (bones), early twentieth-century fingerprinting (skin),
twentieth-century serological testing (blood), and contemporary DNA-typing
(genes). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The recent adoption of DNA-typing techniques has
shown how the forensic sciences can be deployed not only to mark out
individuals, but also to assess their character, kinship, and heritage. This
project will suggest how the forensic sciences have long served these multiple
roles. Unlike prior histories of the forensic sciences, which have focused on a
single technique in a single nation or period, this project takes a comparative
and synthetic approach. Using previously untapped archives in both the U.S. and
France, it compares the distinct methods of validating expertise in the Anglo-
American and French-Continental legal systems, and traverses the divide between
the early modern and modern eras. This project seeks to understand how in
measuring ourselves as individuals we fit ourselves to the social body, and to
its histories.