* 0823480
* P2C2: Multi-Century Streamflow Derived from Watershed Modeling and Tree-Ring Data
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2014
* Franco Biondi, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 07/31/2014
* USD 291,801.00

Funding is provided to test a new technique in an effort to quantify the effect
of watershed topography, vegetation dynamics, natural disturbance, and land use
changes on proxy-augmented stream-flow records. The technique combines
hydrological parameters derived from tree-ring records coupled with a
mechanistic model. The premise of the research is that dendrohydrologists have
employed sophisticated regression techniques to extend runoff records, but this
empirical approach cannot directly test the influence of watershed factors that
alter stream-flow independent of climate.

The researchers posit that such a new approach can help better define
uncertainty in paleoclimate reconstructions because it employs tree-ring records
to generate long time series of precipitation and possibly temperature which
then can be used as input to a mechanistic watershed model to calculate stream-
flow. The analysis will be conducted with data from the upper reaches of the
Walker River on the boundary between the Sierra Nevada of California and the
Great Basin of Nevada. The researchers have already generated a 2,300-year tree-
ring record of water-year precipitation from the region and will use this time
series as a basis for analysis.

The broader impacts involve supporting an undergraduate and graduate student
during the length of the project as well as providing a new methodology for
using tree-ring data to assess hydroclimatic variability.

