* 0823732
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Sustaining Community among Hill Country Tamil in Central Sri Lanka
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2008,03/31/2010
* Mythri Jegathesan, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 03/31/2010
* USD 14,321.00

Graduate student, Mythri Jegathesan, under the supervision of Dr. E. Valentine
Daniel, will undertake comparative research on how small minority communities
persist under conditions of adversity. The research will be carried out among
Hill Country Tamil tea estate workers in Sri Lanka. Hill Country Tamils comprise
over three-quarters of Sri Lanka's estate workforce. Despite their economic
importance, they have a history of disenfranchisement, social and legal
discrimination, and institutional neglect, which makes maintenance of strong
communities a challenge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Jegathesan will focus specifically
on two tea estates, one that receives support from non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) and one that does not. Jegathesan will investigate the
difference that this outside intervention, assessment, and programming makes for
maintaining successful and effective community forms. She will employ a mixed-
methods ethnographic apporach, conducting life history interviews, collecting
accounts for event analysis, observing at rituals and other community defining
events, and carrying on participant observation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research is important because it will help social scientists to understand how
systematically and historically marginalized communities, whose livelihoods are
grounded in an internationally traded commodity, are affected by outside
interventions. This will contribute to more nuanced theory of globalization and
development, which can be extended to other contexts. The research also will
contribute to the education of a social scientist.