* 0823251
* P2C2: Insolation Control on Ice Sheet Mass Balance in the 41-Kyr World: A Test of Multiple Hypotheses
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2008,03/31/2012
* Maureen Raymo, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 03/31/2012
* USD 377,860.00

Funding is provided to investigate physical mechanisms responsible for the
41,000 year glacial cycles of the Late Pliocene and Early Pleistocene. The
premise of the research is that the glacial cycles of this time are an enigma
with respect to existing theories of climate.

The de facto application of the standard Milankovitch model predicts that
Northern Hemisphere (NH) ice volume should vary linearly and coherently with NH
summer insolation (i.e., June 65°N) at the obliquity (41,000 year) and
precession (21,000 year) cycles. Yet, the data indicates that the precession
frequency is only barely discernable in a small section of Late Pliocene ice
volume records.

Similarly, most computer models that have been used to study the climate history
of the Late Pliocene and Early Pleistocene interval also predict a strong
precession signal in the modeled ice volume. The researcher poses the questions;
"Are numerical climate models missing some fundamental piece of climate or ice
sheet physics? Or is it our assumptions about ice volume proxies that are
flawed?"

Specifically, the researcher will evaluate the signal of meltwater outflow from
the Mississippi Drainage Basin in the Gulf of Mexico to test two competing
hypotheses to explain the conundrum of the 41,000 year Milankovitch cycle world.
The first hypothesis is the integrated insolation hypothesis of Huybers that
predicts the timing of ablation/meltwater events on the southern margin of the
Laurentide ice sheet should be paced by obliquity. The other is the anti-phase
precession ice hypothesis of Raymo which predicts that Laurentide
ablation/meltwater events should be paced strongly by precession.

The broader impacts involve a strong educational mentoring portion and an
equally strong intellectual portion that may help lead to transformative
advances in understanding ice sheet and sea level dynamics.

