* 0823296
* The Decline and Fall of the Superconducting Super Collider
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Michael Riordan, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2011
* USD 466,707.00

Introduction: This proposal seeks to carry out further research on the failure
of SSC (the superconducting super collider) project in order to produce an
extended monograph on the topic. As yet, there is no comprehensive history of
the SSC that discusses the diverse scientific, technological, economic, and
political influences that initially worked together to get the project launched
but subsequently led its demise. The research team has already gathered much of
the information and has published shorter journal articles on the subject. The
primary goal of the project is to fill in critical gaps that the researchers
identify in the proposal. To date, they perceive a dearth of in-depth oral
history interviews with crucial physicists who did not join the SSC laboratory,
and arrangements for such interviews have been made. In addition, none of the
SSC project managers have participated in oral history interviews, and a number
of them have agreed to do so. The researchers already have records of such
interviews with many DOE officials, but there is a serious need to complement
these interviews by doing research in documents, which is part of the program of
work. Another area that will receive attention is the refusal of the European
high-energy physics community to participate as equal partners in SSC. Extended
interviews with key European physicists will be done; others will be identified
and interviewed as part of the process. Interviews with Japanese physicists have
already been conducted, and this material will be incorporated into the
monograph that is to be produced. Political aspects of the international
components will be integrated into the story. Finally, additional attention will
be devoted to providing a considered understanding of the conflicting narratives
developed by SSC's supporters and opponents and how that served to shape public
discourse.

Intellectual Merit: The reasons for the failure of the SSC were many and
complex. The researchers have managed to connect with many of the persons,
organizations, and areas which contributed to the final result. Having these
components enumerated and their contributions made clear (to the extent that
this is possible) will be of great service to the practitioners of particle
physics as well as to those charged with stewardship for this science. The
resulting detailed presentation and analysis of the history of the SSC will be
invaluable in light of the very impressive quantity of materials (documents,
interviews, etc.) the researchers will have collected and assembled.

Broader Impact: The final report of this project will be a key contribution to
the history of contemporary science, and to an understanding of the development,
funding, and support of large-scale scientific-technical-engineering projects.
The proposed activity will also result in important contributions to our
understanding of the factors responsible for the public and governmental support
of basic science, applied science, and technology. These in turn will be
valuable resources in the teaching of the interaction between science and
technology and the culture at large, and most importantly in the role that
international cooperation and international institutions will play in the future
when considering such large projects as the Large Hadron Collider, the space
station, investigations of global climate change, large scale geophysical
projects, and genomics.