* 0823086
* SGER:   Open Verification Platform and Event-based Semantics
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2008,02/28/2010
* Carolyn Talcott, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 02/28/2010
* USD 149,820.00

We now rely on computer software for everything from pacemakers and telephones
to automobiles, airplanes, and spacecraft. Software is often the most expensive
and least reliable component in the systems in which it is embedded. The
construction and verification of software requires a range of expertise that is
typically available only from a team of individuals and shared semantic models.
Current technology for software development does not support such collaborative
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is performing an exploratory
study to design and prototype an open verification platform based on an
evidential tool bus (ETB) for the integration of multiple logic-based tools. The
Open Verification Platform (OVP) builds on the ETB to support the social
construction of verified code for embedded software in cyber-physical systems.
Such a platform would be used to synthesize the contributions of multiple
sources of expertise in the verification of software, including domain experts,
requirements analysts, developers, testers, and verification experts. The OVP
design initiates a much-needed dialogue between researchers in cyber-physical
systems (CPS) and verification tools to explore the architectural and semantic
challenges in building collaborative tools. The project is using the OVP to
bootstrap such a dialogue. The vision of the OVP effort is formal software
development as a collaborative endeavor between diverse viewpoints and sources
of expertise. It integrates formal verification tools within a social networking
model so that problems can be solved quickly with the help of the appropriate
experts. The broader impact of this proposal is in the design of a continuous
social process for developing trustworthy cyber-physical systems, and for the
rigorous training of software development teams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of
this effort, the project is organizing a workshop on Event-based Semantics to be
held at CPSWEEK 2008, in St. Louis, Missouri. The shift towards openness,
distribution of real time, embedded and critical systems, and the deep
integration of software into physical systems, combined with the need for
certification, results in a major verification challenge. The proposed workshop
sets the stage for a new research area developing event-based models, logics,
specification languages, and verification tools to support the design,
development, maintenance, monitoring and evolution of cyber-physical systems and
other distributed, real-time, embedded systems. The workshop seeks to develop
broad agreement on the critical issues facing the modeling and design of
distributed real-time systems in order to bridge the gap between the formal
models and the urgent CPS engineering challenges. &lt;br/&gt;