* 0823003
* CNH: International Network of Research on Coupled Human and Natural Systems (CHANS_Net)
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2015
* Jianguo Liu, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2015
* USD 524,907.00

Coupled human and natural systems (CHANS) are integrated systems in which humans
and natural components interact. CHANS research recently has emerged as an
exciting and integrative field of cross-disciplinary scientific inquiry, with
research projects covering a variety of coupled systems in locations spanning
the globe. Until now, however, this type of research has largely been undertaken
in the traditional mode of individual projects, each focused on one or a small
number of sites. Although these individual projects have generated many
important insights, it is essential to systematically transform the field to be
more than the sum of its parts and to provide broader insights of greater
scientific and societal significance than those resulting from individual
projects alone. This project aims to foster that transformation by developing an
international network of research on CHANS (CHANS-Net) to facilitate
communication and collaboration among members of the CHANS research community
(e.g., ecologists, social scientists, geoscientists, and engineers). CHANS-Net
has four interrelated objectives: (1) To promote communication and collaboration
across the CHANS community through virtual interaction; (2) To facilitate
communication and collaboration through face-to-face interaction; (3) To
generate and disseminate comparative and synthesis scholarship on CHANS
complexity; and (4) To strengthen, broaden and diversify the CHANS community.
These objectives will be achieved through a series of activities, including the
creation of a state-of-the-art web-based Virtual Resource Center to offer timely
exchange and dissemination of important information, the organization of
symposia and workshops to compare and synthesize the latest research findings
and methods on CHANS complexity across various research sites, the publication
of first-rate comparative and synthesis results on CHANS complexity, and the
establishment of a CHANS Fellows program to enable the participation of students
and junior researchers in CHANS-Net activities, with particular efforts to
encourage the participation from underrepresented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will advance discovery and understanding of
CHANS complexity by enhancing communication and collaboration across the CHANS
community. It will elevate CHANS science to a higher level of synthesis by
taking advantage of the knowledge and strengths of the site-based CHANS
research. It will offer useful information for researchers in various fields and
other people from around the world who are interested in CHANS. It will further
stimulate interest in CHANS research and increase the number and the
effectiveness of scholars pursuing CHANS research. In addition to the production
of scholarly synthesis, this project will yield many other very important
products, such as the identification of research gaps and priorities,
improvement in methods for rigorous comparative analyses across site-based CHANS
studies, training of a new generation of leaders in CHANS research, and building
of professional relationships that will lead to longer, deeper, and broader
collaboration in the future. This project is supported by the NSF Dynamics of
Coupled Natural and Human Systems (CNH) Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;