* 0823901
* BRIGE: Molecular Mechanisms of Bacterial Adhesion through Surface Biopolymers
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2011
* Nehal Abu-lail, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 07/31/2011
* USD 195,000.00

EEC-0823901 Abu-lail

BRIGE awards maintain global competitiveness by increasing the diversity of ENG
researchers, who are initiating research programs early in their careers. BRIGE
awards further the broaden participation of engineering researchers by
increasing the number of engineering graduates, by improving the representation
of women and minorities in engineering, and by understanding how to improve
recruitment and retention of engineering students.

Initial attachment of pathogenic bacteria to a surface is considered a key
preliminary step in biofilm formation and subsequent infections. For many years,
research to understand the attachment mechanisms focused on macroscale
exploration of the effect of factors such as roughness and motility on the
attachment. While such macroscale investigations can be very interesting,
molecular-scale studies of bacterial interactions with surfaces can detail the
molecular mechanisms of attachment. Despite the importance of such molecular-
scale measurements, a clear relationship between the molecular properties of
bacterial surface biopolymers and the adhesion of pathogenic microbes to
surfaces does not exist. Motivated by the lack of such studies, this research
aims to provide a preliminary understanding of the molecular effects of
bacterial surface biopolymers on the initial attachment of Listeria
monocytogenes to a model surface. The central hypothesis of this application is
that surface biopolymers of L. monocytogenes are essential molecular components
that strongly affect the bacterial surface charge, wettability, and elasticity
and thus initial attachment of this microbe to surfaces. The PI will research
the molecular effects of the surface biopolymers of L. monocytogenes on their
initial attachment to surfaces using atomic force microscopy (AFM). AFM is
unique among adhesion measurement techniques in its ability to quantify the
interaction forces between bacteria and surfaces at a molecular level in liquid
media that mimics that in which interactions occur. The results of this
application will be instrumental to researchers designing new effective
preventive and treatment strategies to bacterial infections.

The PI will intertwine the research with educational activities integrating
mathematics and bioengineering with the training of graduate and undergraduate
students from diverse backgrounds. The education plan will: 1) provide mentored
teaching and research experiences to a team of students consisting of a graduate
student, two upper-level women engineering students, and two freshman disabled
undergraduate students; 2) develop a teaching module that can be incorporated
into upper-level bioengineering courses to enhance effective student learning of
mathematical modeling and curve fitting; and 3) collaborate with an existing NSF
GK-12 grant to incorporate hands-on experiments in the mathematics curricula of
middle and high school students. The educational activities are geared to
enhance the learning and scholarship of the participating students, especially
those underrepresented in engineering, and to nurture their self-growth to be
more independent and lifelong learners and researchers. The participating
students in these educational activities are expected to gain an appreciation
for the excitement of scientific research, learn to read and interpret
scientific literature, design, perform, and analyze experiments, communicate
their findings in both oral and written format, and work well within a team.
Finally, the outreach hands-on experiments are expected to strengthen the middle
and high school students' performance in mathematics and stimulate their
interests in engineering. The results of the research will be disseminated to
the scientific community through seminars, technical journal papers, and
professional conference presentations and to the general public through news
releases.

This BRIGE grant will broaden the participation of and increase opportunities
for all engineers including those from groups underrepresented in the
engineering disciplines. This BRIGE grant will also encourage the PI to become
actively and competitively engaged in research as an independent investigator.