* 0823820
* A Towed Electromagnetic Survey Across the Kane Megamullion: Mapping the Uppermost Gabbro/Serpentinite Contact
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Robert Evans, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 06/30/2010
* USD 186,591.00

Intellectual Merit: Oceanic core complexes (OCC) are widespread features along
the mid-Atlantic Ridge and other slow and ultra-slow spreading ridges. They are
often found in inside corners of ridge discontinuities, and recently have been
observed to occur in clusters over large areas of the seafloor. Sampling of
these structures has shown that they are low-angle detachment faults exposed at
the seafloor that unroof and expose sections of lower crust and mantle. These
faults accommodate large amounts of deformation through effective strain
accumulation over periods of time, sometime in excess of 1 Myrs. The uplift and
exposure of mantle peridotite is inherent to the uplift process. The presence of
shallow peridotite promotes serpentinization across the features that, in at
least one instance, results in moderate temperature hydrothermal venting fueled
by exothermic reactions associated with the serpentinization. Discrimination of
serpentinite from gabbro is difficult on the basis of seismic velocities alone.
We suggest electrical conductivity as an alternative approach to identifying
serpentinite within OCCs. This project is a ?proof-of-concept? pilot experiment,
towing a seafloor EM system across the Cain and Abel domes within the OCC south
of the Kane transform fault on the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. This will test our
ability to discriminate, on the basis of electrical conductivity: a) the
uppermost (~0-30m) contact geometry (laterally) between serpentinite and gabbro
across the dome of the mound; and b) the variations in the nature and geometry
of the fault core that accommodates most of the strain during plate separation.
This experiment will be the first of its kind.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: This project marks the start of an international collaboration between
the P.I. and scientists at IPGP in Paris. We anticipate a number of joint
activities that will include seeking funds for the PI to spend time in Paris,
and for Paris colleagues to visit WHOI. The data set collected in this pilot
study will be appropriate for a small general examination project or as a
project for a summer student fellow. WHOI runs a summer student program which
annually brings around 20 students for 12 weeks and exposes them to their own
research project and to a wide range of educational experiences. Many of these
students go on to graduate school. The institution also supports and runs a
minority trainee program which seeks to expose students from underrepresented
backgrounds to ocean science. If appropriate candidates apply, then a summer
student could come from this pool.&lt;br/&gt;