* 0823848
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Boundaries, Style and Cultural Interaction in the U.S. Southwest
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2009
* Barbara Roth, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2009
* USD 14,810.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Barbara Roth, David Yoder will analyze prehistoric
Puebloan pointed-toed sandals from museum collections throughout the United
States. Most of the collections to be analyzed were excavated 50 to 100 years
ago, yet very little is known about how or when Puebloan pointed-toed sandals
were made. General belief is that these artifacts were in use from approximately
A.D. 700 - 1100, were made by all northern Puebloan groups, and had a
distinctive four warp construction method. However, very little empirical proof
backs these claims, and in some cases directly contradicts the conventional
wisdom. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;An understanding of the basic temporal and
geographic nature of an artifact is essential before it can be used to
investigate human behavior. This project will provide this basic understanding
for pointed-toed Puebloan sandals by examining multiple specimens through
physical and radiographic analysis as well as radiocarbon dating. The physical
analysis will focus on basic measurements, raw materials, and construction
styles. The radiographic analysis will utilize soft-X ray radiography (for the
first time in a major archaeological research program) to inspect the hidden
internal construction characteristics of sandals. Ten to fifteen sandals will
also be radiocarbon dated. When combined, these data will inform archaeologists
how, when, and where Puebloan pointed-toed sandals were made and used. The
final, and most important aspect of this research, will then be using this
information to identify particular styles in footwear that may indicate
prehistoric cultural boundaries. Whether such boundaries exist, the degree of
permeability of the boundaries, and if they changed through time, can increase
our knowledge of how prehistoric people viewed ethnicity and
identity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, while greatly benefiting
archaeologists, will also provide essential information and assistance to
numerous museums and the public at large. Most museums have no descriptive or
technical information on the sandal assemblages they hold. To help remedy this
situation, upon completion, all participating museums will receive the results
of the individual analysis of artifacts from their collections. Help will also
be offered to assist the museums in the creation of displays that exhibit
prehistoric Puebloan sandals; helping to inform the public on these amazing
pieces of prehistory. This project will also be the first to use soft X-ray
radiography in a major archaeological research program. This method permits
artifacts that are not very dense, such as perishables, to be X-rayed and still
produce readable images of high quality. In essence, it allows a researcher to
'see inside' an artifact of low density, revealing construction details that
would otherwise be hidden. Soft radiography is extremely useful because of its
applicability to perishables, non-destructive nature, and low cost. This project
will pioneer the utility of this technique, its methodology, and its usefulness
in perishable research. &lt;br/&gt;