* 0823974
* BRIGE: Understanding and Development of Bioseparation and Biosensing Schemes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Susan Zhou, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 08/31/2011
* USD 174,919.00

EEC-0823974&lt;br/&gt;Zhou&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will
develop gold-coated magnetic nanoparticle (AuMNp)-based protein detection and
separation and obtain fundamental understanding of magnetic field-induced
microfluidics for efficient separation and rapid detection. Electrochemical
Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) and Surface Plasmon Resonance (SPR) will be used
for the novel AuMNp-based protein detection. Finite element analysis will be
performed to determine the effect of magnetic field, device geometry, fluid
mixing, and reaction kinetics on protein transport and protein separation; and
the effect of protein surface adsorption and binding, magnetic field and device
geometry on the reaction rate of AuMNp -based protein binding under a magnetic
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work of using gold shell magnetic core
nanoparticle for bioseparation and biosensing is unique in providing more robust
and easy surface functionalization, high adsorption capacity, as well as
amplified and high sensitive EIS and SPR signal. More importantly, the
core/shell nanoparticle-based biosensing and bioseparation is also unique in
that it has the potential of being used in magnetic field-induced microfluidics
with integrated lab-on-a-chip bioseparation and biosensing capability. The
biochip has the prospect of producing low-cost, rapid, hand-held devices for the
practice of diagnostic medicine, the identification of biological weapons, the
control of food safety and environmental pollutions, and basic life sciences
research. The proposed work will result in fundamental understanding of magnetic
field-induced AuMNp - based efficient protein separation and rapid protein
detection in microchannel. This knowledge base will contribute significantly to
the urgent need of the development of integrated hand-held microfluidic devices
for proteomic and genomic analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
will produce a knowledge base for course development. The layered architecture
of integrated research and mentoring for a continuum of students from middle
school to graduate students will advance awareness of bionanotechnology to
middle school students under the mentoring of undergraduate students (1-2 each
summer). It will advance understanding and discovery through the second year
program where graduate students, will be mentors. And, it will also provide
opportunities to recruit and retain underrepresented students. The proposed
research will have a society impact of addressing the compelling economic
incentives for rapid, inexpensive and sensitive detection, for the diagnosis of
disease markers, control of food safety and environmental pollutions or
biohazards.