* 0823009
* SBIR Phase II:   MEMS for Secure RFID Applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2010
* Joshua Cross, Cerberex Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2010
* USD 545,000.00

This SBIR Phase II research project will demonstrate a working ?alpha? prototype
of a MEMS-based approach to security for RFID and other electronic security
applications. MEMS resonators have very narrow bandwidths and high frequencies
which vary from resonator to resonator. This natural frequency variation can be
used to uniquely identify a resonator, and makes cloning a specific signal
extremely difficult ? in essence creating a ?voiceprint?. This approach to RFID
security overcomes the drawbacks of encryption which include more complex and
expensive tags and the need to manage encryption keys. MEMS resonators for RFID
tags are unique, secure, cost effective, CMOS compatible, and fast to read, with
low power requirements and low overhead. This research project will demonstrate
in a real environment with material temperature swings, working vacuum
encapsulated MEMS chips with attached antennas, a low-cost prototype reader with
maximum 10cm read range, and reader and system software to extract MEMS response
signals to compare with stored signals for chip identification.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will have broad impact on the security of
identification of both people and goods. For example, the RFID tags used in the
implementation of US passports were recently cloned which calls into question
the security of those documents. Since MEMS resonators cannot be cloned, they
can provide significant security assurance to economically validate a given
passport. MEMS resonators can also be used to economically authenticate
pharmaceuticals since counterfeit drugs are increasingly prevalent (the World
Health Organization projects a $75 billion counterfeit market in 2010) and have
caused deaths. &lt;br/&gt;