* 0823650
* Collaborative Research:  Reconstruction of a continuous, high-resolution record of late Quaternary paleohydrology and paleoclimate of the Amazon basin
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Gary Dwyer, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 08/31/2012
* USD 368,300.00

Baker/Hollander Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide funds to
reconstruct a high-resolution, 30,000 year record of Amazon Basin climate change
and to reconstruct a high-resolution record of the North-South sea surface
temperature (SST) gradient of the western equatorial Atlantic from fossil
foraminifera geochemistry. Fieldwork will consist of high resolution Chirp
seismic reflection profiling of the upper continental slope north and south of
the Amazon submarine canyon and fan complex to ensure continuous and conformable
sediment deposition at the coring site and the collection of a new suite of
piston cores and surface multi cores using the new long coring capability on the
R/V Knorr. Analytical research will focus on two "target" cores, one north and
one south of the Amazon fan, employing clay mineralogy to elucidate terrestrial
sediment sources, paired analyses of planktonic foraminifer with minor element
ratios (Mg/Ca and Ba/Ca) and oxygen isotopes to determine SST and salinity (SSS)
at centennial scale resolution. Alkenone Uk37 and D/H analyses on algal lipids
will be conducted as complementary measures of SST and SSS. Finally, abundance
analysis and D/H and d13C measurements of terrigenous plant waxes will be
conducted to assess continental hydrological and vegetation variability across
the glacial-deglacial-Holocene climatic transition. The PIs will also produce a
pollen time series to determine whether changes in major vegetation type were
associated with changes in climate. Broader Impacts include a tightly linked
international collaboration with Brazilian scientists, the involvement of
graduate and undergraduate students in all phases of this research and the study
of climate variability in a critical tropical region of the planet.&lt;br/&gt;