* 0823008
* SBIR Phase II:  Low-Cost Ultra-Efficient 50-gm, 300-W Servoelectronics Module with Integral Sensors
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2008,04/30/2013
* William Townsend, Barrett Technology Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 04/30/2013
* USD 1,042,500.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase-II research project aims to
cut the manufacturing cost of an innovative power-efficient ultra-miniature,
brushless-servo-electronics module from $1,000 to $100. The module integrates
all rotor-position sensing, vector-based commutation, controls, and power
supplies needed to drive high-performance brushless servomotors rated up to 300
W (Root Mean Square) and 2 KW (peak) into a single 50-gram module not much
bigger than a bottle cap. The cost reduction relies on a set of innovations led
by replacement of laser optics used for rotor-position sensing with an array of
magnetic field sensors measuring a calibrated target magnet. Phase I
demonstrated that well-placed shielding enables high precision and excellent
commutation performance even in the proximity of stray fields produced by high
switched currents and spinning rotor magnets located in the motor body only
millimeters from the sensor array. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This servo-electronics
module fits the definition of disruptive technology for entrenched players, such
as Danaher/Kollmorgen, Siemens, Fanuc, and Yaskawa, while it will enable scores
of original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) to improve the performance,
compactness, power efficiency, and reliability of their machines at competitive
prices. As machines become more intelligent through embedded processing and
sensor fusion it will improve not only industrial productivity, but quality of
life as society ages. While embedded processors and MEMS-based sensors have
become tiny, highly effective, and affordable, similar improvements in
servomotors have evolved more slowly. At fractional-horsepower levels the power
electronics contribute significantly to total motor-system bulk and complexity.
Providing smaller and more efficient servo-electronics will enable OEMs to
increase the competitiveness of their products. Robots will become more agile
with additional degrees of freedom and less mass to accelerate. &lt;br/&gt;