* 0823235
* The American Postwar Physics Elite: An Internet Resource Pilot Project and Research Initiative
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* R. Joseph Anderson, American Institute of Physics
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2010
* USD 52,112.00

This project will address an imbalance in the study of the American postwar
physics community. Currently, the historical study of this period revolves
mainly around two topics: particle physics theory and experimentation, and
relationships between the Cold War military-industrial complex and the academic
physics community. Developments in physics outside of these areas have received
comparatively little attention. Due to vast expansions in the physics community
during this period, the social and intellectual development of this community
cannot be easily traced through singular narratives. This project proposes two
means for undertaking and encouraging new avenues of analysis: the creation of
an internet resource and the undertaking of a research initiative. Both revolve
around a reconsideration of the nature of the physics elite.

The project will accumulate information on an elite sub-community of roughly 600
members self-selected by the broader physics community (through prizes,
appointments, and membership in elite organizations) from 1945-2008. This
information will offer insight on the social and intellectual dynamics of the
broader community encompassing all of its intellectual, pedagogical,
infrastructural, administrative, and advisory facets. With the aid of a Project
Assistant, a historical research tool will be created by placing this
information on the internet in an Interactive Guide to the American Postwar
Physics Elite (IGAPPE). IGAPPE will feature profiles of institutions, lines of
research, as well as the ca. 600 aforementioned individuals. The profiles will
emphasize precise information (e.g., dates of residency) over commentary; they
will be hyperlinked to each other, and will contain references to archives and
secondary literature, and links to relevant online resources (many hosted by the
American Institute of Physics). IGAPPE will also serve as a pedagogical resource
for historians gaining familiarity with this expansive community, and for
physics students wishing to understand the background of their own research and
discipline.

The research initiative component will entail a prosopographical analysis (a
collective study of the lives of members of a group that aims to determine
patterns of relationships and activities), and it will focus on the information
gathered for the assembly of IGAPPE. That study will result in scholarly
articles and eventually a book. These will make assertions concerning the
nature, role, and attainment of elite status in this period and
historiographical representations thereof; they will identify previously
neglected nodes of elite activity; and they will speculate on how classes of
elites (as opposed to elite individuals) impact the nature of physics and its
role in society.

The resulting internet reference tool and scholarship from this project will
advance broader aims. It will foster new historiographical currents in the study
of postwar physics, identify and preserve vital records, and better equip
researchers to discuss a broader range of issues of concern to them. The project
can be expanded in the future to encompass broader swathes of physics and other
scientific communities.