* 0823572
* Doctoral Dissertation Social Categories and Health Care Outcomes
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2009
* Mary Anglin, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 07/31/2009
* USD 7,991.00

Graduate student Alyson Anthony, guided by Dr. Mary Anglin of the University of
Texas, will investigate whether social categories mediate health care outcomes.
Earlier research has found that social inequalities affect Black women's chances
for diagnosis with AIDS and for receiving medical care. However, such studies
typically focus on health care access barriers faced by women who do not
regularly participate in medical care and support services. In contrast, Anthony
will focus on minority women who are receiving regular care but who nevertheless
are at increased risk for HIV-related mortality compared to other women. Anthony
will examine the relationship between historically-driven conditions of
inequality, the care women receive, and women's own understandings of themselves
and their disease course. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher will carry out
the research in an urban center in the American south. She will conduct semi-
structured interviews with Black women and women of other racial and ethnic
backgrounds who are receiving health-related support services. She also will
interview employees of a federally-funded care service coalition. Additional
data will be gathered by participant-observation in women's daily lives and
social networks to illuminate the daily life and personal contexts in which
women grapple with health and survival. Finally, the researcher will carry out
participant-observation at the service coalition in order to examine practical
concerns and the logistics of programs targeted to research participants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By examining the daily lives of both women receiving care
and of their caregivers, this research will contribute to the broader social
science literature on the relationship between contemporary forms of racial,
gendered, and class-based differentiations and inequalities in North America.
The research also will contribute to the education of a graduate student.