* 0823670
* Community of Soundscapes - Expanding Environmental Awareness through Capture and Sharing of Sonic Experiences
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Elisa Giaccardi, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Alphonse Desena
* 08/31/2011
* USD 75,000.00

DRL- 0823670&lt;br/&gt;PI: Elisa Giaccardi
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this Communicating
Research to Public Audiences project, the University of Colorado at Boulder, in
partnership with the University of Colorado Museum of Natural History, the City
of Boulder Open Space and Mountain Parks, the CU- Boulder Office of Diversity,
Equity and Community Engagement, is building on the work they have done via
their NSF research award, A Meta-Design Framework for Participative Software
Systems, in which they have been developing participative software systems (PPS)
and applications of the software. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Community of Soundscapes
will employ newly developed mobile computing and collaborative mapping
technology in programs that help users gain greater insights and stake into the
shared environment in which they live and visit. Sound Camera, a digital
recording device outfitted with GPS mapping software, allows users to collect
audio clips of their sonic experiences as they explore their cities, parks and
other environments and upload them online onto a digital map through a Web 2.0
application. They can then compose, annotate, and share soundscapes of the
places where the sounds were recorded. A Web site will be developed to expand
the project?s reach to audiences not in the Boulder programs. Professional
development training will be provided for collaborators and through the Colorado
Alliance for Environmental Education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational
goals are to promote literacy of PSS and engage the public in personally
meaningful activities that benefit environmental education (cognitive goal) and
expand environmental awareness (affective goal). The project work and its
evaluation processes (by Wells Resources, Inc.) are intended to advance the
field of informal science education with respect to PSS and to study how these
new technologies might affect shifts in the kinds of experiences various
audiences prefer to have. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;