* 0823685
* BRIGE: Sorption Behavior of Contaminants to Manufactured Nanomaterials for Potential Use as Remediation and Water Treatment Technologies
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Heather Shipley, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Paul L. Bishop
* 07/31/2011
* USD 174,054.00

CBET-0823685&lt;br/&gt;Shipley&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BRIGE awards maintain global
competitiveness by increasing the diversity of ENG researchers, who are
initiating research programs early in their careers. BRIGE awards further the
broaden participation of engineering researchers by increasing the number of
engineering graduates, by improving the representation of women and minorities
in engineering, and by understanding how to improve recruitment and retention of
engineering students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This BRIGE award will investigate the
mechanisms and the ability of nanomaterials to adsorb specific contaminants. The
research seeks to further the development of efficient and cost effective water
treatment and remediation technologies. A significant amount of work has been
done in batch processes on bulk crystals (activated carbon, iron oxides,
aluminum oxides, etc) ability to adsorb a specific contaminant. But little
corresponding work has been conducted on nanomaterials; the high surface area of
many nanomaterials makes them ideal sorbents for contaminants. The PI seeks to
study the desorption of contaminants under environmental and engineered
conditions to better understand and model unique adsorbents. Preliminary
research by the PI using groundwater from Brownsville, TX has suggested that
nanomaterials can be used to remove arsenic, several naturally occurring
radionuclides, and heavy metals. But others were not removed from solution and
the difference is not yet understood. Understanding the difference, leads to
better prediction of sorption behavior and application to environmental
engineering technology. The PI will determine the interaction of nanoparticles
and adsorbates with batch and column experiments for both adsorption and
desorption. The PI will use equilibrium isotherms, sorption and desorption
kinetics, and specific surface analysis tools to characterize the mechanisms of
sorption and desorption. Adsorbates will include heavy metals such as mercury,
lead, cadmium, and arsenic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UTSA is a minority institution
with a population of 28,500 students of which roughly half are of Hispanic
background. The work promotes engineering research projects using innovative
methods to address engineering problems while training the next generation of
engineers. It also creates new research opportunities while encouraging the
involvement of both undergraduate and graduate students that are from a
traditionally underrepresented student population. The research will provide
fundamental understanding on the sorption behavior of contaminants to
nanomaterials. These outcomes will yield understanding that can be applied to
the future development of water treatment and remediation technologies that
could be functional for small individual treatment systems and/or for central
publicly owned treatment facilities using the unique properties of
nanomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This BRIGE grant will broaden the
participation of and increase opportunities for all engineers including those
from groups underrepresented in the engineering disciplines. This BRIGE grant
will also encourage the PI to become actively and competitively engaged in
research as an independent investigator.&lt;br/&gt;