* 0823383
* BRIGE: Reversing the Fontan Paradox: Univentricular Circulation with Mechanical Cavopulmonary Assist
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2010
* Amy Throckmorton, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 07/31/2010
* USD 172,317.00

EEC-0823383&lt;br/&gt;Throckmorton&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BRIGE awards maintain
global competitiveness by increasing the diversity of ENG researchers, who are
initiating research programs early in their careers. BRIGE awards further the
broaden participation of engineering researchers by increasing the number of
engineering graduates, by improving the representation of women and minorities
in engineering, and by understanding how to improve recruitment and retention of
engineering students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This BRIGE project will research
mechanical circulatory assist for single ventricles for patients affected by
congenital heart defects. Single ventricle heart defects are the leading cause
of death among birth defects in the first year of life. Those patients who
survive surgical palliation, which is achieved in three separate, staged
operations, face lifelong physical limitations and morbidity. The end result of
surgical palliation is a ?man-made? physiology, which consists of a single
functional ventricle to drive blood flow through the systemic circulation and no
right ventricle to pump venous return through the lungs. The compliant venous
circulation must adapt to a higher pressure for blood to flow passively through
the lungs. Researchers have recently theorized that a pump designed to augment
flow from through the cavopulmonary connection would reverse the pathophysiology
of the univentricular circulation. While no blood pump is currently available
for cavopulmonary assist, researchers are aggressively pursuing various designs
for this application. Two fundamental questions, however, have not been
addressed: 1) which type of blood pump is ideal for cavopulmonay assist, and 2)
what biofluid dynamic conditions are superior for pressure augmentation in the
cavopulmonary connection. To address these questions, the PI plans to conduct a
study 1) characterizing the interaction of blood pumps in a simulated
cavopulmonary connection using boundary conditions of pre-swirl and post-swirl,
continuous and physiologic puslatile flow dynamics; 2) performing laser
measurements in a prototype of the cavopulmonary connection and a selected blood
pump configuration to validate numerical predictions; and 3) conducting a blood
bag experiment to measure the hemolytic levels produced from the interaction of
the cavopulomonary connection and mechanical assist. The PI will use
Computational Fluid Dynamic modeling, quantitative laser flow measurements, and
hemolysis testing to help resolve critical questions regarding mechanical assist
to patients with failing single ventricle physiology. The combination of
intravascular intervention and biological tissue engineering offers considerable
and multiple advantages in the development of new biodevices with the superior
characteristics of hydraulic efficiency, percutaneous placement, and
biocompatibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI seeks to enhance participation of
women and minority students at the Virginia Commonwealth University (VCU) by
providing an opportunity to work on a multi-disciplinary, multi-institutional
bioengineering research project addressing a complex and significant human
health problem. Since the VCU School of Engineering is located in a
multicultural urban setting, the PI will recruit students from underrepresented
minorities to work on this project. The PI will also actively recruit
underrepresented students through VCU?s Office of Minority Affairs. The PI will
integrate the project design approach and concepts into a freshman level course
and will disseminate the research results through journal and conference
publications with student authorship. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This BRIGE grant
will broaden the participation of and increase opportunities for all engineers
including those from groups underrepresented in the engineering disciplines.
This BRIGE grant will also encourage the PI to become actively and competitively
engaged in research as an independent investigator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;