* 0823411
* SBIR Phase II:  Developing a Commercial Video Game for Tweens to Support Complex Systems Thinking
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2008,09/30/2013
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 09/30/2013
* USD 966,885.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II research project will
support middle school students in learning STEM concepts and problem solving
through the use of a problem-based curriculum and video game with embedded
scaffolds (e.g., guidance, tools, resources). The project will focus on the
design, development, and testing of the usability, feasibility, and
implementation of the Virtual Astronaut Learning Platform (VALP), an immersive,
problem-based video game approach to improving STEM learning outcomes. The
three-part model will combine the latest in learning sciences research and
design with the best in commercial game play, and includes a new serious game-
learning methodology - Mission Based Learning; a new game genre, First Person
Explorer; and an approach - STEaM, which integrates creativity into STEM
activities. The research will include iterative design and rapid prototype
testing in school settings during Year 1 and a full-scale quasi-experimental
design field test in Year 2. Additionally, the research will examine learning
gains related to STEM concepts and problem solving approaches, changes in
attitudes towards STEM-related careers, and changes in student self-efficacy
related to science inquiry and technology; and will help to advance knowledge
related to effective educational game design and
implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Virtual Astronaut Learning Platform
will result in a commercial quality 3D game environment that supports single
player and collaborative multi-player learning activities. VALP is a collection
of game-based STEM learning environments that will be sold as a supplement to
existing curriculum and textbooks, thus enhancing the availability of engaging
and effective STEM learning activities for students. VALP learning activities
are being mapped to national STEM standards and will include a teacher's guide
to ensure appropriate integration into the larger STEM curriculum. Set 50 years
in the future and based on realistic future science and technology capabilities,
VALP will enable students to see how space will be explored in their lifetime,
and how STEM content provides them with the knowledge and tools they need to
solve real problems in space. Findings from the design process as well as from
the learning outcomes research will add to the growing body of research related
to effective embedded scaffolding techniques, problem-based learning approaches,
and STEM learning and game-based learning approaches for diverse populations.