* 0823794
* Collaborative Research: Development of Unmanned Aircraft System for Research in a Severe Storm Environment and Deployment within the VORTEX 2
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2011
* Erik Rasmussen, Rasmussen Systems LLC
* Standard Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 01/31/2011
* USD 13,275.00

The purpose of this project is to develop and utilize unmanned aircraft systems
(UAS) to obtain critical meteorological observations aloft in the rear flank
region of supercell thunderstorms. This is a pilot project with the initial
emphasis being on the system development and obtaining experience in utilizing
such systems in severe storm environments. If the pilot development project is
successful, the Principal Investigators intend to participate in the second
Verification of the Origins of Rotation in Tornadoes Experiment (VORTEX 2). The
investigators will utilize the expertise in unmanned aircraft operations of the
University of Colorado to develop a system that is sufficiently safe to obtain a
Certificate of Authorization for operation from the Federal Aviation
Administration. Observations will be used to evaluate specific hypotheses
related to the baroclinic generation of vorticity at the rear of the supercell
updraft, and subsequent reorientation of that vorticity into the observed
counter-rotating low-level vortices. The cyclonic member of this pair appears
often to be the antecedent tornadic vortex.

Intellectual Merit Supercell tornadogenesis is the result of a complex series of
processes. Evidence suggests that the vorticity in a tornado originates as
horizontal vorticity between the supercell updraft and a trailing rear flank
downdraft (RFD). The RFD, in turn, appears to be partially the result of small-
scale precipitation structures unique to supercells: the hook echo and/or a
narrow descending reflectivity core. In some supercells, the vorticity generated
between the major vertical drafts is drawn upward in the updraft, leading to
arched vortex lines and associated counter-rotating vortices in the rear flank
gust front convergence zone. Under certain conditions, that appear to be
governed by the degree of negative buoyancy in the RFD, tornadogenesis can occur
in the vicinity of the cyclonic member of the counter-rotating pair.

Broader Impacts An important goal of this work is that it will contribute to the
development of a rapidly-deployable mesoscale and stormscale UAS sensing system.
The system will be suitably designed to greatly reduce regulatory hurdles to its
future deployment. Important knowledge will be gained on technical and
regulatory issues that will allow future deployments of UAS for weather
research.

Collected observations will improve understanding of RFD buoyancy and tornado
cyclone genesis. This information may lead to improvements in the tornado
warning process via the diagnosis of rear-flank precipitation morphology and
hydrometeor structure using Doppler radars with dual-polarization diversity
capability. Further, it is anticipated that RFD buoyancy can be estimated
through knowledge of the low-level thermodynamic stratification. Eventually, it
is likely that operational meteorologists can make much better discriminations
between potentially tornadic and non-tornadic supercells.