* 0823041
* Collaborative Research: CRIF: CRF: Extensible Cyberenvironments for Empirical and Semiempirical Hamiltonian Parameter Optimization and Dissemination
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Sudhakar Pamidighantam, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 08/31/2013
* USD 703,599.00

Alexander D. MacKerrell of the University of Maryland at Baltimore, Sudhakar V.
Pamidighantam of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Adrian E.
Roitberg of the University of Florida, and John W.D. Connolly and Michael Sheetz
of the University of Kentucky are supported by the NSF Division of Chemistry
under the Cyberinfrastructure and Research Facilities Program. This project will
create Cyberenvironments to automate the process of parameterization for
classical molecular mechanics (MM) and semi-empirical (SE) Hamiltonians and
allow for wide dissemination of the developed parameters. Project goals include
an extensible cyberenvironment for i) the rapid and systematic parameterization
of novel Hamiltonians and ii) the systematic extension of currently available
models, with the resulting parameters sets from both i) and ii) to be made
available via the cyberenvironment. The integrated environment will include a
database of experimental and quantum mechanical reference data to be used in the
parameterization process along with computational resources for data
acquisition, automatization of QM reference data generation and automatization
of parameter optimization processes. GridChem Computational Chemistry Grid will
serve as the computational cyberinfrastructure for Quantum Chemical and
Molecular Mechanics services and will include workflows from which specific
parameterization schemes will be created and executed. Workflow management tools
specific to generating QM reference data, monitoring parameter optimization and
analysis will be implemented and will include interfaces allowing for expert
intervention in the parameterization process. Many existing popular MM and SE
Hamiltonians will be integrated from which a wide range of parameters
encompassing biological, organic and inorganic species will be accessible for
direct use or further optimization. The infrastructure will be extensible in
terms of data sources and energy functions allowing for its applicability in any
parameterization scheme.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide for more
accurate descriptions of the static and dynamic properties of a wide range of
material, pharmacological and biological systems using theoretical methods by
simplifying the task of parameter optimization. This will allow for the
generation of high quality parameters for a wide variety of molecular systems.
Improvements in the accuracy of modeling as well as the range of accessible
chemical systems will benefit such fields as chemistry, nanotechnology, medicine
and biology, among others. In addition, analytical models used in engineering
fields such as structural mechanics and fluid dynamics will become accessible to
molecular level treatments.