* 0823717
* The History of American Geographical Science
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2008,12/31/2011
* Geoffrey Martin, Association of American Geographers
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 12/31/2011
* USD 25,021.00

This project seeks to reveal the forms and content of geographic thinking and
accomplishment in the United States c. 1870-1960, tracing the processes involved
from subject matter to discipline and then to science. The hitherto unknown data
needed to complete this investigation has been drawn from 123 archival
collections located in more than a dozen countries. The material collected is
complemented by extensive correspondence available to the investigator from
geographers with personal recollections of what was happening in both American
academic and governmental geography in those decades. A collection of nearly
51,000 archival sheets will be classified and utilized in the course of this
project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geography is the last remaining large field of
learning in America that does not have a published history of its record and
performance. With this work will come new insights concerning the contributions
of geographers as they developed hypotheses and laws on a multiplicity of
matters: innovation and criticism facilitated new insights concerning the ways
in which geographers and geologists, anthropologists, demographers,
conservationists, sociologists and others exchanged with, or learned from, each
other. Examples include geographers' contributions to matters involving
agriculture on the High Plains, evaluating the Isthmian (Panama) Canal Route,
the relevance of mapping and aerial photography with regards to both World Wars,
conservation undertakings, and the coming of numeracy to the field. This
research effort will provide a new synthesis of geographic knowledge, mediating
science, history, and philosophy. In that fashion it provides an evolving design
for geographical science, demonstrates the multitudinous ways in which science
makes its advances, and provides paradigmatic divides that initiate new
sequences of scientific advance. This study will almost certainly generate
further investigations in the scientific advance of the field of geography. It
will also provide a work of reference of value to both faculty and students,
with details provided on little known archival sources, including the relevance
of each major archival deposit.