* 0823495
* Collaborative Research:  Learning to Read a Second Language:  Neural Basis and Individual Variations
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Zhong-Lin Lu, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 08/31/2012
* USD 259,772.00

Learning to read one or more foreign languages is essential for social and
economic success in this era of globalization. Decades of research have provided
much insight into the cognitive and neural mechanisms of reading, especially
native-language reading. Less is known, however, about how the brain associates
the words we see with their pronunciations when we learn a new language. With
support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Chuansheng Chen (University of
California, Irvine) and Dr. Zhong-Lin Lu (University of Southern California),
will probe this issue through an innovative design with an artificial language
based on written Korean. This collaboration, which also includes researchers at
Beijing Normal University, will use functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
to map the neural networks of two types of reading: "sounding it out" (known as
"assembled phonology") or memorizing the pronunciation of the whole word without
sounding out syllable by syllable (known as "addressed phonology"). First, the
(most likely distinct) neural networks for the two types of reading will be
identified. Second, how these neural networks differ across people speaking
different native languages (e.g., alphabetical English vs. logographic Chinese)
will be studied. Third, behavioral, neuroanatomical, and neurofunctional
measures will be used to predict individual differences in learning to read a
new language. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide solid empirical
evidence for the fundamental neural bases of learning to read in a second
language. Results from this study will greatly advance our understanding of the
neural basis of reading, with major implications for developing more efficient
second language learning programs and reading difficulty interventions. The
proposed study will also provide many training opportunities for both US and
Chinese graduate students and junior researchers to gain experience in
international collaboration.