* 0823554
* P2C2: Extend the Record of the Indian Summer Monsoon Variability to the Past 2000 Years with Inter-Annually Resolved Speleothem Isotopic Records from the Core Monzoon Zone of India
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2010
* Ashish Sinha, California State University-Dominguez Hills Foundation
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 07/31/2010
* USD 193,262.00

Funding is provided to develop a network of inter-annually resolved proxy
records of precipitation from the core monsoon zone of India using the oxygen
isotope composition of stalagmites from strategically located caves throughout
the core monsoon zone of India. The ultimate science goal of the research is to
develop a composite record of monsoon rainfall variability of the past 2,000
years as a 'paleo-equivalent' of the All India Rainfall time series. This will
serve as a benchmark to assess the variability of the Indian Summer Monsoon
(ISM) and to place its 20th century precipitation variability in the context of
the past 2,000 years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additionally, monsoon proxy data
sets resulting from this research will be compared to the instrumental and proxy
data sets of last 2,000 years to examine variability in coupled atmosphere-ocean
modes such as the Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation (AMO) and the El Nino-
Southern Oscillation (ENSO). This research will help improve Indian monsoon
predictive capabilities on inter-annual to decadal
timescales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts involve a strong
educational mentoring portion and an equally strong intellectual portion. The
proposal supports undergraduate students at a primarily undergraduate-centered
institution. The revised project includes support for a senior thesis. The
science goal of helping to develop a better understanding of the ISM is an
important scientific aim in itself but especially since the monsoon system
directly and indirectly affects such a large number of people.