* 0823151
* Analysis of Drosophila germ cell sex determination and male germline stem cell niche development
* BIO,IOS
* 11/15/2008,10/31/2013
* Matthew Wawersik, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Anthea Letsou
* 10/31/2013
* USD 386,462.00

Matthew J. Wawersik&lt;br/&gt;IOS-0823151&lt;br/&gt;Analysis of Drosophila germ
cell sex determination and male germline stem cell niche
development&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Germ cells are the only cells that produce the
sperm and eggs required for sexual reproduction. Proper germline development is,
therefore, critical for survival of the next generation. Two important steps in
this process are the decision made by germ cells to develop as male or female so
they produce either sperm or eggs, and the ability of these cells to develop
into functional germline stem cells required for continuous gamete production.
However, relatively little is know about the cellular and molecular mechanism
regulating these processes. Through genetic and molecular analyses in the fruit
fly, Drosophila melanogaster, the Wawersik lab is working to define these
mechanisms. As the basic process of germ cell development is remarkably similar
in flies, mice and even humans, they expect that better understanding of these
mechanisms will help determine how defects in germ cell development can cause
infertility and germ cell tumors. Thus, work by the Wawersik lab has important
implications for patients suffering from cancer and infertility. Furthermore,
since this work is being performed by a research team at a primarily
undergraduate institution, these studies provide an exciting and highly relevant
backdrop to teach fundamental aspects of genetics, as well as cellular,
molecular and developmental biology to the next generation of American
scientists. &lt;br/&gt;