* 0823345
* UV Photonic Crystal Light Sources
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2008,02/28/2010
* Hui Cao, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 02/28/2010
* USD 222,200.00

Hui Cao, Northwestern
University&lt;br/&gt;0601249&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
Ultraviolet (UV) lasers and light emitting diodes (LEDs) have potential
applications in high-density optical storage, high-resolution laser printing,
solid-state lighting and display. The investigators propose to utilize photonic
band structures to reduce the threshold of UV lasers and to increase the
efficiency of UV LEDs. The structural disorder introduced unintentionally during
the fabrication process often limits the photonic band gap effects. The
investigators propose a new approach, i.e. to utilize higher-order band
structures. This approach increases the feature size and reduces the amount of
lattice defects in the crystals. Owing to the large exciton binding energy, ZnO
exhibits strong exciton emission even at room temperature. However, the non-
directionality of exciton emission limits the efficiency of UV LEDs. The
investigators propose to use two-dimensional photonic crystal to make ZnO
exciton emission highly directional. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
investigators envision that the success of their program will enrich the
research and education environment of students, teachers, and their colleagues.
The successful development of UV photonic crystal lasers and LEDs will have
significant impact on the development of short-wavelength compact light sources.
The investigators will be actively involved with the development of a dynamic,
customized, web-based course for pre-college and first year undergraduate
students in the area of light wave phenomena in nanostructured materials". They
will post their research results in the Global Research Gallery of the NSF
funded Materials World Network (MWN) for public viewing. Working with the
National Center for Learning and Teaching in Nanoscale Science and Engineering,
the investigators will develop an implementation plan to insert "nanophotonics"
into modern physics courses. They will use Northwestern physics classes to
develop a proto-type module. &lt;br/&gt;