* 0823113
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Children's Performance of Problem-Solving Genres
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Elinor Ochs, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2009
* USD 14,996.00

Graduate student Heather Loyd, advised by Dr. Elinor Ochs, will undertake
research on how children learn and deploy culturally-valued communicative
skills. She will investigate how children appropriate and parlay speech and
other expressive genres to secure their social networks, gain prestige, handle
life predicaments and otherwise participate in the social life of the streets
and family. While much anthropological research on genre has focused on the
communicative worlds and speech economies of adults, we know very little of how
genre competence is socialized and manifest in childhood across different
communities and settings.

The research will be carried out in 12 months of fieldwork in inner city Naples.
She will employ an ethnographic and micro-interactional design to examine how
boys and girls use verbal and embodied genre forms such as greetings, animation,
innuendo, complaints, and teasing to attain social ends such as strengthen a
relationship, gain respect, convince people to do things, and win an argument.
Ethnographic methods will include participant-observation in homes and peer
groups, video- and audio-recordings of everyday communicative practices in these
settings, in-depth, open-ended interviews, and youth-narrated home and
neighborhood tours. These data will be used to identify and analyze 1)
linguistic, corporeal, affective, and aesthetic genre features and strategies
displayed to problem-solve and navigate social, moral and material worlds; 2)
family and peer group attitudes towards children's genre performances; and 3)
how children are socialized into gendered expressive genres and moral
frameworks.

The research is important because by exploring genres as social resources, the
study will illuminate how problem-solving genres affect how boys and girls in
this community think, feel, and act in relation to local moral frameworks and
economic contingencies. These findings will help to illuminate the processes by
which class and other socioeconomic differences are learned and acted upon by
children. Funding this research also supports the education of a graduate
student.