* 0823689
* CEDAR/GEM Postdoc:  Assess the Impact of Non-Hydrostatic Processes on the Response of the Thermosphere/Ionosphere System to Magnetospheric Forcing
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Timothy Fuller-Rowell, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Farzad Kamalabadi
* 08/31/2010
* USD 83,714.00

This project will perform a series of investigations to assess the impact of
non-hydrostatic processes on the response of the thermosphere/ionosphere system
to magnetospheric forcing. Several General Circulation Models (GCMs) will be
involved, including the Global Ionosphere-Thermosphere Model (GITM) and the
Coupled Thermosphere Ionosphere Plasmasphere model (CTIP) along with data sets
from Fabry-Perot interferometers (FPI) and from the CHAMP and GRACE satellites
to characterize the non-hydrostatic processes and its impacts on the neutral
density variation, and to model these effects in fully coupled global
ionosphere-thermosphere circulation models. The specific investigations to be
performed are: (1) Examine the magnetospheric energy input uncertainty related
to the variability of the electric field, using the Geospace General Circulation
Model (GGCM) for the magnetosphere. The relative importance of the electric
field variability to the average electric field and its dependence on the level
of solar activity, geomagnetic activity, and season will be examined; (2)
Compare the non-hydrostatic GITM model with the hydrostatic CTIP model to
quantify the significance of non-hydrostatic processes in driving both the
neutral and ion distributions; (3) Investigate the dependence of the non-
hydrostatic phenomena on the spatial resolution of GCMs and the temporal
variation of the energy inputs. Examining the dependence of the non-hydrostatic
processes on both the magnitude and the speed of energy inputs in the
thermosphere/ionosphere system will elucidate the critical conditions for
significant non-hydrostatic phenomena; (4) Use the simulations and the FPI
vertical wind observations to confirm the importance of the nonhydrostatic
processes on the development of large vertical winds; (5) Compare the
simulations with neutral density data from CHAMP and GRACE satellites to
understand the large neutral density disturbance in response to the intense
electromagnetic energy inputs. The cusp region neutral density enhancement is
observed by the CHAMP satellite. The satellite data will be compared with both
GITM and CTIP simulations to examine the importance of the non-hydrostatic
processes on the neutral density; (6) Examine the impact of non-hydrostatic
processes on atmospheric composition and the nitric oxide distribution. Of
particular interest is the possible transport of nitric oxide from the upper to
the lower atmosphere due to the change of the atmospheric vortices.