* 0823497
* All-Dielectric Metamaterial Imaging Device
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2011
* Hossein Mosallaei, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 07/31/2011
* USD 299,978.00

The objective of this research is to exploit the concept of near-field focusing-
imaging devices offering high-resolution features. The approach is to enhance
decaying fields and tailor phases of propagating waves emanating from an object.
This will be accomplished utilizing coupled dielectric metamaterials modeling
impedance surfaces. Arrays of plasmonic dipoles will also be tailored to achieve
terahertz sub-wavelength imaging.

Intellectual Merit: The core of this project is to investigate theoretically and
numerically the foundations for achieving high-resolution focusing-imaging
components. The goal is to exceed the current diffraction limit in microwave
imaging of one wavelength by a factor of more than five and obtain sub-
wavelength features. To achieve this goal, we develop a new approach to
reconstruct the evanescent fields of an object. Dielectric particles are
tailored to provide electric-magnetic resonances and define impedance surfaces.
Coupled meta-surfaces will support surface waves launched by the evanescent
fields. This can enable sub-wavelength focusing with resolution of a fifth of a
wavelength. Optical sub-wavelength imaging using an array of resonant dipoles is
also exploited for terahertz sub-wavelength focusing with the goal of better
than a twentieth of a wavelength resolution.

Broader Impacts: The proposed research is expected to impact the area of near-
field focusing and imaging, enabling nanoscale imaging with significantly
improved resolution over current technologies. Possible applications include
medical and molecular imaging. A wide range of educational initiatives together
with the Northeastern STEM and multicultural PRIME centers are planned. This
includes involvement of K-12, high-school, and graduate students. New courses
will also be developed.