* 0823805
* Elimination of low-K interfacial transition regions on crystalline Ge, and on ultra thin Ge passivation layers on GaAs and InGaAs: a pathway to EOT scaling to 0.5 nm
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Gerald Lucovsky, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2012
* USD 330,000.00

From: Gerry Lucovsky&lt;br/&gt;10 June 2008&lt;br/&gt;Ref: Proposal
00823805&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Short Abstract &lt;br/&gt;i) Objective and
Approach: The objectives of this research are to provide a science base for
optimization of scaled Ge CMOS devices by reducing defects at Ge dielectric
interfaces, and to minimize low-K interfacial transition regions that limit
equivalent oxide thickness scaling. The approach includes optimization of wet
chemical pre-deposition cleaning, nitride passivation of Ge surfaces to prevent
subcutaneous oxidation during high-K dielectric depositions, advanced
spectroscopic techniques to monitor evolution of N from buried interfaces during
post deposition anneals, and spectroscopic and electrical studies comparing
interfacial and bulk defects. &lt;br/&gt;ii) Intellectual Merit: The proposed
research will extend nano-CMOS devices to the 11 nm 2022 processing node by
developing device-quality Ge-dielectric interfaces without native Ge oxide,
nitride and oxynitride interfacial transition regions. Integration of nano-scale
Hf Ge oxynitride interfacial layers will reduce attainable EOT scaling by
eliminating lower-K SiON interfacial layers on Si substrates. In-house
cathodoluminescence and spectroscopic ellipsometry plus synchrotron XAS and XPS
will distinguish between pre-existing, and processing and stress induced
defects. Exploratory studies will evaluate a similar approach for compound
semiconductor substrates.&lt;br/&gt;iii) Broader Impact: This project will
expand the Research Experience for High School Women program to include women
from Columbus area high schools, including summer research opportunities on the
OSU campus. With support from the College of Engineering, the Women in
Engineering Program, and the Department of Electrical &amp; Computer
Engineering, an expanded program will include local high school junior-level
science teachers, selecting highly motivated and talented women and pairing them
with OSU engineering faculty. Similar programs will be implemented at NCSU.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;