* 0823022
* SBIR Phase II:   Extended Performance Red VCSELs
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2008,02/28/2014
* Mary Brenner, Mytek, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 02/28/2014
* USD 1,127,930.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will demonstrate
significantly improved output power, temperature range of operation, and
reliability of red VCSELs. Commercialization of red VCSEL technology has been
plagued by the limited temperature range and output power of the devices and
unknown reliability characteristics. The Phase I project demonstrated the 1)
feasibility of improving output power and temperature range through a number of
techniques, 2) that the fundamental limit of the temperature range is at least
as high as 125째C, and 3) dramatically improved reliability. The Phase II
approach proposed here breaks away from traditional models for fabricating
VCSELs and consists of a variety of growth and fabrication methods allowing us
to provide a high thermal conductivity path from the active region to the
package. The goals and expected technical results are to demonstrate > 0.5mW
single mode, and >1mW multi-mode useful output power at 670nm at 85째C, and the
same power output power objectives for 655nm at 65째C on a reproducible basis.
This project will also demonstrate greater than 10,000 hours device lifetime at
85째C continuous operation. Project activities consist of design, wafer growth
and fabrication, performance testing, and reliability testing.

To date, the only commercially available VCSELs have been at 780nm to 850nm, due
to the substantial materials challenges at other wavelengths. This proposed
effort is applicable to a variety of VCSEL wavelengths (similar thermal issues
exist at 1310nm to 1550nm), as well as other optoelectronic devices.
Commercially, a significant enhancement in red VCSEL performance can enable the
migration of plastic fiber based home and auto networks to higher data rates,
faster and higher quality laser printing, longer distance and more precise
motion control sensing, new types of portable or wearable medical sensing, and
improved robustness and cost of radiography equipment. The success of this
project not only creates a significant business opportunity for a red VCSEL
supplier, but also enhances the competitiveness of customers by making available
a valuable new technology. The reduction in power consumption and improvement in
medical technology costs address particularly important societal issues.

