* 0823498
* Linking Atmospheric and Ocean Circulation Variability to Abrupt Climate Change Over the Last 40 Kyr
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2014
* Matthew Schmidt, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 08/31/2014
* USD 317,103.00

Intellectual Merit: This research seeks to identify the cause of the largest
climate events of the last glacial cycle by using the geochemistry of the
calcarious tests of planktonic and benthic foraminifera to reconstruct the
timing of tropical/subtropical atmospheric circulation change in relation to
variability in North Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation AMOC. The work
is motivated by recent findings that North Atlantic Ocean salinity changes
during the last glacial cycle show that abrupt climate change events are
associated with significant changes in the low-latitude hydrologic cycle,
suggesting that tropical atmospheric circulation plays an important role in
climate change. &lt;br/&gt; Research will involve documenting past sea surface
temperature and salinity as well as large-scale ocean circulation changes by
using unique temperature and salinity proxies in foraminifera tests from
sediment cores from the Florida Straits. Proxies include Mg/Ca-paleothermometry,
oxygen isotope analyses, and Ba/Ca ratios in planktonic (floating) foraminifera
tests. Companion data from benthic (seafloor dwelling) foraminiferal records
from the same cores will identify the timing of Florida Current transport
changes across major climate transitions. Because the relative timing between
signals will be established in a single core, research goals will be to identify
the influence on the subtropical/tropical Atlantic hydrologic cycle on the
hydrologic cycle and to examine of abrupt climate events during the last glacial
period were driven by atmospheric circulation change that then impacted AMOC.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The recent rise in greenhouse gases in
the atmosphere and their potential to strengthen the hydrologic cycle gives
urgent need to better understanding the role of freshwater fluxes in ocean-
atmosphere interactions. This research will help us understand past changes in
the tropical hydrologic cycle during abrupt climate events. Furthermore, the
companion high-resolution records of intermediate-water density changes have the
potential to determine the rate and timing of large-scale ocean circulation
change across the largest climate transitions of the last 40,000 years and can
be used in climate modeles to predict how recent changes in the hydrologic cycle
will alter global climate in the near future. Data will be archived at the World
Data Center for Paleoclimatology at NOAA in Boulder, Colorado. Results will be
incorporated into graduate classes at Texas A&amp;M. The work will support a
graduate student and include the training of undergraduates. Efforts will be
made to recruit undergraduates from groups under-represented in the science
through Texas A&amp;M?s Department of Multicultural Services.&lt;br/&gt;