* 0823695
* SGER:  A Pilot Study on Imaging Bimaterial Interfaces Along the North Anatolian Fault With Fault Zone Head Waves
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Yehuda Ben-Zion, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2009
* USD 14,415.00

The proposed pilot study is associated with recording microseismicity and fault
zone waveforms along a section of the North Anatolian fault that ruptured in the
M=7.3 1944 earthquake and is partially creeping. The main goals are to image
bimaterial interfaces in the fault zone structure, and to a lesser extent also
to clarify the microseismicity patterns along that section of the fault. The
analysis of head waves will provide a test for the predicted sense of the
velocity contrast across the study area based on the detailed geological
observations of damage asymmetry across the North Anatolian fault.The results
will contribute to developing improved understanding of the long-term evolution,
internal organization and seismic potential of the North Anatolian fault.The
issue of possible statistical preference of earthquake propagation directions on
large faults can have profound implications for estimates of seismic shaking
hazard in large metropolitan areas like Istanbul, San Francisco and Los Angeles.
Analysis of the recorded local microseismicity patterns will contribute to the
understanding of creeping sections of large continental strike-slip faults. The
study will be done in collaboration with the group of Prof. Mustafa Aktar from
the Kandilli Observatory in Istanbul, Turkey, and will form parts of the
education of USC graduate student and Kandilli student/researcher. This SGER is
jointly funded by the Office of International Science and Engineering, ANESA
program, and the Geophysics program in GEO/EAR.