* 0823793
* BRIGE: Fluidic Assisted Heterogeneous Integration of Thin Film Devices For Advanced Photonic Systems: A manufacturable and scalable integration platform
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Sang-Woo Seo, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence S. Goldberg
* 08/31/2011
* USD 170,158.00

0823793 Sang-Woo Seo, CUNY City College BRIGE: Fluidic Assisted Heterogeneous
Integration of Thin Film Devices For Advanced Photonic Systems: A manufacturable
and scalable integration platform

Intellectual Merit: The objective of this research is to develop a new
integration method of photonic devices onto silicon with wafer-level mass
production capability. This will create low cost and high volume manufacturing
of integrated photonic systems seen in current silicon-based electronic
technology. The approach to achieve this goal is based on combining
heterogeneous thin film photonic device integration with a self-assembly
technique. Precise device alignment will be automatically achieved through
surface driven capillary effect using a controlled attracting medium and shape
in a binding site. This integration method may well revolutionize integrated
photonic systems by combining photonic technology with current microelectronic
technology into a batch process and bring a significant advance and impact
towards wider deployment of photonics into various applications

Broader Impacts: The power of this research is in the ability to bring and
combine different materials and devices into a single material platform to
realize the full potential of integrated microsystems. This leads to numerous
interdisciplinary applications within the fields of electrical engineering,
biomedical engineering, and applied physics. This will be a great opportunity
for students to obtain interdisciplinary knowledge and research experience
through their participation in the research activities. Students will gain
unique experience in micro-fabrication technology and theoretical model
development. This will better prepare students for industry and graduate study
in nano/micro technology areas upon their graduation. Located in the New York
City area, The City College of New York is committed to providing a high-quality
education to its predominant minority students. Research opportunities resulting
from the proposed program will promote more underrepresented minority groups to
pursue in advanced degrees in science and engineering and assure their success
in future careers. It will also enhance engineering curriculum at The City
College through various seminars, undergraduate senior projects, and hands-on
experience with advanced photonic devices resulting from the proposed research.