* 0823125
* Analyzing Collaboration: The Case of a Long-Term, Interdisciplinary Study.
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Elihu Gerson, Gerson, Elihu M
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2012
* USD 102,832.00

This research, supported by the Science, Technology & Society program at NSF,
examines a long-term scientific collaboration. Collaboration is a topic of
continuing interest in studies of science and in science policy. This research
focuses on the organization of collaborative work, in an attempt to understand
how the details of work organization enable and constrain joint efforts among
scientists. Collaborations articulate multiple tasks and participants in
negotiating agreements about technical choices, scheduling of tasks and staff,
ensuring access to materials, establishing co-authorship and publication rights,
and coordinating details of the work. Collaborations must also accommodate the
obligations imposed by the organizations in which they participate. Technical
and administrative requirements interact in complex ways.

This research project investigates a collaboration that studies the anatomy,
endocrinology, and development of the external genitalia of female Spotted
Hyenas (Crocuta crocuta), together with hyena behavior, social organization, and
ecology. Female hyenas are bigger and more aggressive than males, and the
females and cubs in a clan dominate the males. For more than 20 years, the
collaboration being studied has centered on a unique colony of hyenas at the
University of California, Berkeley. In addition, collaborators at Michigan State
University are continuing 30 years of field observation of a single clan of
hyenas in southern Kenya. Collaborators come from biological psychology,
zoology, animal behavior, developmental biology, anatomy, endocrinology, human
and veterinary medicine, neurobiology, molecular biology, and other specialties.
The exceptional disciplinary breadth and longevity of the project make it an
especially interesting case.

The collaboration is being studied via participant observation, interviewing,
and archival research. The research will reconstruct the broad history of the
hyena collaboration, identify and describe the mechanisms used to build, modify,
and maintain the collaboration, and lay the foundation of an analytical model of
the collaboration process. The research project will provide insights into the
ways that coordination mechanisms bridge the technical efforts of scientists and
the expectations of research managers despite the absence of a central mechanism
of control. More broadly, by improving understanding of the complexities of the
research process, the project will aid science policy analysts and research
administrators in identifying ways to improve effective collaboration.