* 0823458
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS:  Cross-Disciplinary Analyses Using Multi-Attribute Utility Theory
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2009
* L Keller, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 07/31/2009
* USD 5,200.00

The goal of this work is to study three particular types of decisions that
involve more than one objective. The first set of decisions includes those with
health outcomes. These can be either medical decisions, or decisions relating to
lifestyle choices. These decisions often involve tradeoffs between length of
life and overall well-being. The second set of decisions includes those with
outcomes that are defined geographically. This is a typical feature of
environmental policy decisions. These decisions involve evaluating one or more
factors over many different regions, and are often too complex to be carried out
practically without the help of decision analysis tools. The third set of
decisions include those made in competitive game theory situations. Traditional
game theory often considers only the physical or monetary outcome of these
situations, but decision analysis is well-equipped to study the effects of other
factors which may be important to the players.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The common
feature shared by these three decision types is that each one involves trying to
maximize or minimize multiple objectives simultaneously. For these decisions to
be feasibly analyzed, certain assumptions must be made about the structure of
decision makers' preferences over the possible outcomes. The goal is to develop
models simple enough to make the decisions tractable, but detailed enough to
accurately reflect the preferences. In all three situations being studied, a
better understanding of how these decisions should be made would be extremely
beneficial.