* 0823101
* Palmer, Antarctica Long Term Ecological Research Project
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2008,07/31/2013
* Hugh Ducklow, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Clough
* 07/31/2013
* USD 6,293,323.00

Since 1990, Palmer LTER (PAL) research has been guided by the hypothesis that
variability in the polar marine ecosystem is mechanistically coupled to changes
in the annual advance, retreat and spatial extent of sea ice. Since that time,
the hypothesis has been modified to incorporate climate migration, i.e. the
displacement of a cold, dry polar climate by a warm, moist climate regime in the
northern component of the PAL region, producing fundamental changes in food web
structure and elemental cycling. The observed northern changes are affecting all
trophic levels and elemental cycling, and the primary mechanism of change
involves match-mismatch dynamics. The proposed research builds on previous
findings, with a new emphasis on process studies and modeling to elucidate the
mechanistic links between teleconnections, climate change, physical
oceanographic forcing and ecosystem dynamics. The proposed research will examine
the hypothesis that regional warming and sea ice decline associated with
historical and on-going climate migration in the northern part of the study area
have altered key phenological relationships, leading to changes in species
distributions, increasing trophic mismatches and changes in habitat, food
availability, ecosystem dynamics and biogeochemical cycling. Through targeted
process studies linked to numerical model simulations, the research also will
test the hypothesis that deep cross-shelf canyons characterizing the core study
region are focal areas for ecosystem processes that result in predictable,
elevated food resources for top-predators. The effort includes the addition of 3
new PIs: a zooplankton ecologist with expertise in biogeochemical fluxes, a
phytoplankton ecologist focusing on bio-optics and autonomous observations using
gliders, and a numerical simulation modeler specializing in coupled global
models of ocean circulation, plankton ecology and biogeochemical cycles. The
program will add trace metal sampling and analysis, moored physical
oceanographic sensors, a moored sediment trap in the south, drifting sediment
traps and stable carbon (del 13C) and nitrogen (del 15N) isotope analyses.
Missions lasting up to 45 days using gliders deployed before, during and after
summer cruises will, along with moorings and satellite remote sensing of sea
ice, ocean color, sea surface temperatures and wind fields, greatly extend the
observational program in space and time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since its
inception, PAL has been a leader in Information Management to enable knowledge-
building within and beyond the Antarctic, oceanographic and LTER communities.
PAL has designed and deployed a new information infrastructure with a relational
database architecture to facilitate data distribution and sharing. The Education
and Outreach program capitalizes on the public's fascination with Antarctica to
promote scientific literacy from kindergarten students to adult citizens
concerned with climate change and environmental sustainability. Through
communicating results to the public and working with scientific assessment
bodies (e.g., IPCC) and Antarctic Treaty parties to protect Earth's last
frontier, PAL researchers contribute to the national scientific agenda and the
greater public benefit.