* 0823293
* Southern Appalachia on the Edge - Exurbanization &amp; Climate Interaction in the Southeast
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2008,10/31/2015
* Theodore Gragson, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 10/31/2015
* USD 8,026,132.00

The Coweeta Hydrologic Lab Long-Term Ecological Research Project was one of six
original LTER projects established in 1980. Nestled in the Southern Applachian
Mountains in western North Carolina, the field site is built upon a long history
of U.S. Forest Service watershed manipulations and water quality and quantity
monitoring dating from the early 1930s. Historically, Coweeta research focused
on the vegetation and soil processes that explain the responses to the various
watershed manipulations, including forest-to-grassland inter-conversions,
conifer-to-hardwood forest inter-conversions, thinning, clearcutting, and other
silvicultural practices. The proposed research would continue the long-term
measurements, field experiments and interdisciplinary modeling from the small
watershed studies, while extending them to the regional scale so as to account
for increases in resource demand and competition from adjacent and more distant
areas. Focus will remain on the provisioning ecosystem service of water
quantity, the regulating service of water quality, and the supporting service of
maintaining biodiversity. This extension is justified on the basis that
landscapes in the southeastern U.S. are expected to change profoundly in the
next five decades as the socioeconomic factors driving the dramatic
exurbanization of the past three decades persist, while changes to the rates,
frequencies and intensities of important climatic factors occur.