* 0823741
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: "Modern Scientific Agriculture" - The Interactive Formation of Knowledge about Soil Nutrients and Fertilizers in Post-Socialist Poland
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2010
* Dong Ju Kim, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 02/28/2010
* USD 10,694.00

Mr. Dong Ju Kim, under the guidance of Professor Gillian Feeley-Harnik, will
undertake research on local ideas of modern farming, scientific knowledge,
responsible ownership, and sustainable management of land in Wielkopolska, a
western province of Poland. The focus of the research is on interactive effects
between extra-local scientific knowledge and economic policies, and local
knowledge and land management practices.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The researcher
will employ multiple social scientific research methods, including ethnographic
observation and semi-structured interviews with experts, managers, and
scientists. Research will be conducted in corporate farms, beet sugar factories,
agricultural research stations, and local environmental organizations. Topics to
be investigated include long-term agricultural planning and specific practices
such as, crop rotation, fallowing, use of fertilizers and natural and chemical
pesticides, soil testing and monitoring, and the use of shelter
belts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is important because it will help
social scientists better understand how ordinary people understand and respond
to scientific information of all kinds. The research also will contribute to
understanding how and to what degree new sustainability policies for
agriculture, such as those of the recently reformed European Common Agricultural
Policy, are implemented and put into local practice. Supporting the research
also contributes to the education of a social scientist.