* 0823390
* Doctoral Dissertation Research - Sites of Disorder and Diversity: The Autism Spectrum in Individual Bodies and Social Worlds
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/2008,10/31/2009
* Richard Taub, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Kelly A. Joyce
* 10/31/2009
* USD 7,930.00

This dissertation research, supported by the Science, Technology &amp; Society
Program and the Biological Sciences Directorate through the Biology &amp;
Society initiative at NSF, examines perceptions and understandings of autism.
Once thought of as a rare disorder, autism has skyrocketed in prevalence over
the past twenty-five years, with 2007 figures placing prevalence rates as high
as 1 in every 150 to 155 Americans. This increase in diagnosed cases has
mobilized massive research efforts to understand, and eventually to prevent or
cure, the biological and genetic bases of autism. However, a growing
'neurodiversity' movement among autistic self-advocates argues that autism ought
to be reconceptualized in a radically different paradigm. Calling upon the
language of minority identity and drawing parallels to prior civil rights
movements, such self-advocates redefine autism as a critical and pervasive
element of personhood, demanding accommodation and protection against attempts
at elimination through biological and genetic intervention. The result of this
conflict has been a contentious public debate over how autism ought to be
defined, and what kind of response it requires. Little research, however, has
systematically investigated the impact of these issues on the lives and work of
those personally and/or professionally involved with the autism spectrum.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is an ethnographic study using participant
observation and interviewing in a variety of sites where definitions of autism
spectrum disorders are actively negotiated, disseminated and deployed. Sites for
sustained fieldwork include a private school run by a person on the autism
spectrum, a public school classroom, a clinic, and a research center; shorter-
term observation and interviews will be conducted at a variety of national
conferences, support groups, community centers, and resource coordination
meetings. The researcher will also be monitoring and archiving public
discussions on Internet weblogs and forums. The project aims to answer the
following questions: 1) How are ideas about bodily disease and identity used in
the sites where knowledge about autism is created and deployed?; 2) How are
these models used by people who are themselves diagnosed with autism spectrum
disorders?; 3) Do conflicts arise between these discourses? How are these
conflicts managed?; 4) What are the possibilities for other, alternative ways of
viewing autism that do not engender these conflicts and ambivalences between
scientific innovations and the individuals they are meant to serve? This
research stands to inform general publics interested in understanding the autism
spectrum, as well as to contribute to the scholarly literature on the social
study of disease.