* 0823023
* STTR Phase II:  High Resolution Spectrometer-on-a-Chip Based on Nano-Optic Plasmonic Device
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2010
* Byounghee Lee, NanoLambda, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 07/31/2010
* USD 500,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II project is to develop an
ultra-compact, high-resolution and low-cost spectrometer-on-a-chip, based on
plasmonic nanowire arrays. In response to the growing demands for miniaturized
non-invasive spectroscopic sensor, there have been many efforts to miniaturize
optical spectrometers using various conventional technologies. However they are
not yet conducive to both dramatic miniaturization and also high spectral
performance at low production cost. Unlike the bulky and expensive conventional
diffractive optical devices, the proposed nano-optic device utilizes the
wavelength-dependent plasmonic phenomena occurring on metal nanowire surfaces
and the gaps between the metal nanowires. This single layered nano-optic filter
array is expected to enable a high resolution spectrometer-on-a-chip, overcoming
the limits of diffractive optics. This proposal is to design, and fabricate the
nano-optic filter array structure using standard wafer processes, to integrate
it with a custom designed CMOS detector array to form a spectrometer-on-a-chip.
The anticipated outcome of this project are spectrometer-on-a-chip samples for
customer test and evaluation, and demonstration of high spectral resolution
(10nm) over 380nm ~780nm wavelength range in a compact size, less than 5 mm x 5
mm x 2 mm, at significantly lower cost.

If successful the proposed ultra-compact high-resolution low-cost spectrometer-
on-a-chip can be used in various applications such as high-resolution color
sensing, multiple gas detection, and mobile/wearable health monitoring. Consumer
electronics manufacturers, portable medical device vendors, and wireless sensor
node suppliers can be all potential customers. As a key component to these
markets, it is anticipated that the total addressable market for the proposed
spectrometer-on-a-chip will be over $1 billion in around 2012. Considering the
manufacturability of the proposed technology and the readiness of the markets,
it is feasible to launch the first commercial product in 2010. The proposed
activities will contribute to enhancing color quality and color consistency
across consumer color devices, and has potential to contribute to advancing
personalized point-of-care, environmental monitoring, and homeland security by
enabling non-invasive, high-throughput, low-cost sensing. The proposed
activities will provide further solid understanding of the phenomena occurring
when a light interacts with nanostructured metal, and enhance the mass
production capabilities of nano-structures. Successful completion of this
project will also open up new application opportunities in the convergence areas
of information, bio and nanotechnologies.