* 0823258
* Doctoral Dissertation Research on Generation and Its Problems in Harvey, Highmore and their Contemporaries
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2008,01/31/2010
* Domenico Meli, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 01/31/2010
* USD 11,995.00

Introduction: The PIs propose to examine William Harvey's and Nathaniel
Highmore's mid-seventeenth century studies of physiology, in particular
embryology and their role in debates during the period over generation, the
nature of living material, and the development of organisms. They plan to do
archival research at the British Library and at the Wellcome Institute in
London, and in Oxford at the Bodleian Library and in the university records.
These archives contain the correspondence and notebooks of the seventeenth-
century physician and physiologist Nathaniel Highmore, as well as contemporary
notes on experiments and lectures that are closely related to his
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: Highmore was a friend and
collaborator of William Harvey: a comparison between their works will clarify a
number of issues related to the problems of generation emerging from
contemporary debates. Central developments in early modern science, philosophy,
and medicine converged in Highmore's remarkable work, particularly, in his
discoveries and novel explanations of reproductive organs, generation, and
hysteria. The archival research builds on two studies of Highmore's s published
works that have been presented at history of science conferences. There are
several respects in which archive visits are crucial to the dissertation: the
extensive collections of unpublished writings will shed light on Highmore's
medical education, intellectual sources, interactions with patients, the role of
experiments and medical experience on his research, the development of his
thought, and the reception of his published texts. No close examinations of
these important sources have been published. This project focuses in particular
on the early stages of the appropriation of chemistry by academic medicine,
which remains virtually unexplored. Moreover, studying the student notebooks
will enhance historical understanding of early seventeenth-century medical
education, particularly the extent to which students were exposed to the new
sciences, philosophies, and experimentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impact: The proposed project examines major questions about life that persist to
this day: What distinguishes living from non-living matter? At what point do
fetuses acquire human status? The aim is to provide a critical analysis and
historical understanding of these questions that are heavily enmeshed with
ethical and religious values. These issues also serve as a locus at which to
examine how different areas of science, medicine, metaphysics, epistemology, and
theology informed each other during the mid-seventeenth century. The
interdisciplinary and synchronistic nature of the project means that it has
broad ramifications for early modernists. The theme of the upcoming joint
meeting of the British, US, and Canadian history of science societies,
"Connecting Disciplines," reflects the field's recognition of the value of
interdisciplinary studies. Portions of the research will be presented during
2008, both at the international meeting and at a conference on early modern
chemistry, physiology and medicine. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funds for this project
were provided by a joint venture of the BIO and SBE directorates known as
"Impacts of Biology on Society," which is administered via the STS program.