* 0823503
* Late Holocene ITCZ Shifts from Sedimentary Lipids on Tropical Pacific Islands
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Julian Sachs, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 08/31/2013
* USD 593,625.00

This proposal will support an attempt to reconstruct the position of the
Intertropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ) during the last 2,000 years by measuring
hydrogen isotope ratios in lipids from well-dated, rapidly accumulating
sediments from freshwater, saline and hypersaline basins on 13 islands between
2°S and 10°N across the Pacific Ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite convincing
evidence from tree rings and mountain glaciers for a Medieval Warm Period
800-1300 A.D. and a Little Ice Age 1400-1850 A.D. in Northern middle latitudes,
there is little known about the magnitude and geographic footprint of the
climate changes associated with those events, especially in the tropics. Yet the
tropics play a central role in the climate system owing to the massive fluxes of
latent heat and moisture that emanate from there, and the possibility exists
that mid-latitude climate anomalies of the last 2,000 years were caused or
amplified by climate changes in the tropics. Whether passive responders or
active players in these two events, initial results from this team suggest that
tropical rainfall patterns underwent large changes during those episodes. Lipid
hydrogen isotope data indicate that the Galapagos (1°S, 90°W) were wet, and both
Washington Island (5°N, 160°W) and Palau (7°N, 134°E) were dry during the Little
Ice Age compared to the modern and Medieval Warm Periods. The simplest
interpretation of these findings is that the ITCZ was located south of its
present mean position of ~7°N during the Little Ice Age. Drier than modern
conditions in both the Galapagos and Washington Island during the Medieval Warm
Period suggest that the ITCZ was positioned north of its present location at
that time. In order to confirm these findings and gain a detailed understanding
of Pacific ITCZ changes during the last 2,000 years, decadally-resolved lipid äD
records from lakes and lagoons within, north and south of the modern ITCZ range,
and removed from direct monsoonal and continental influences, are required. The
Marshall and Gilbert Islands (15°N to 3°S, 162°E to 177°E) are ideal, spanning
quasi-symmetric gradients of rainfall to the north and south of the ITCZ and
having many suitable fresh and saline basins to core. Clipperton Atoll (10°N,
109°W) and Christmas Island (2°N, 157°W), along with the Galapagos, Washington
Island and Palau provide the remainder of sites needed to reconstruct changes in
the position of the ITCZ.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support a
female graduate student and facilitate the education of undergraduate students
in environmental research. The proposed research will foster international
collaborations with scientists and governments in several Pacific Island
nations, France and Ecuador.