* 0823749
* Neural Systems for Face Evaluation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Alexander Todorov, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Akaysha Tang
* 08/31/2012
* USD 549,992.00

People form impressions about other people from surprisingly minimal
information, particularly from faces, which are a particularly rich source of
social information. Despite the saying "don't judge a book by its cover," people
automatically evaluate faces on multiple social dimensions such as competence
and trustworthiness, and these evaluations predict important social outcomes
ranging from electoral success to judicial sentencing decisions. In order to
understand the functional and neural basis of face evaluation, it is necessary
to identify the basic dimensions of face evaluation, introduce tools for
formally modeling how faces vary on these dimensions, and probe the neural
responses to faces that vary on these dimensions. With support from the National
Science Foundation, Dr. Alexander Todorov and colleagues at Princeton University
will address these questions by combining computer modeling of how faces vary on
social dimensions with behavioral studies, Virtual Reality (VR) studies, and
brain imaging (functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging) studies. The studies
involve not only participants who have typical face perception abilities but
also prosopagnosics, those who are unable to recognize individuals by face
alone. One current hypothesis is that faces are evaluated on two fundamental
dimensions--valence and dominance--that are sensitive to different types of
facial information. Valence evaluation of faces tracks expressions signaling
whether the person should be avoided (angry expression) or approached (happy
expression) and dominance evaluation is sensitive to features signaling physical
strength (masculinity and facial maturity). The current studies will investigate
how behavioral and brain responses to faces change as a function of their
perceived valence and dominance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The findings will be
central for understanding the neural mechanisms underlying face perception and
social cognition. Characterizing the processes of face evaluation is essential
for building comprehensive models of person perception and social cognition and,
ultimately, understanding the social brain. The findings of this research will
be important for social psychologists, cognitive neuroscientists, political
scientists, and behavioral economists, and will be of interest to vision and
computer scientists. This project also includes opportunities for research
experience by undergraduate and graduate students in Social Neuroscience.