* 0823015
* SBIR Phase II:  Shape memory polymer AAA Endograft
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2008,12/31/2011
* Jeff Castleberry, EndoShape Inc
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 12/31/2011
* USD 574,582.00

This SBIR Phase II project aims to continue the development of novel endografts
for percutaneous treatment of abdominal aortic aneurysms (AAA) using unique and
proprietary shape memory polymer (SMP) technology. Abdominal aortic aneurysms
are both common and lethal in the older population, affecting between 7 and 13 %
of older persons (> 60 years), accounting for between 13,000 and 18,000 deaths
per year in the US alone, and increasing in diagnostic prevalence as both
diagnostic techniques improve and the population ages. Endovascular treatment
using covered stainless steel or Nitinol stent-grafts is now the preferred
option for AAA treatment. However, current devices are far from perfect, and
complications from endovascular repair such as endoleaks, continued growth of
the aneurysm, device migration, arterial dissections, and other problems persist
at very high (> 25-35%) rates. Most if not all these problems can be traced to
the inherent limitations of the materials used in current devices. We propose to
continue the highly promising Phase I work with particular focus on four areas:
finalize polymer formulation; develop methods to manufacture patient-specific
endograft designs; finalize biocompatibility evaluation; and evaluate endografts
in acute and chronic animal studies. Anticipated deliverables at the end of the
Phase II project are a finalized polymer formulation particularly suitable for
endografts, complete ISO 109993 biocompatibility evaluation, methods to
manufacture patient-specific endografts, and comprehensive data on the acute and
chronic vascular response of the shape memory polymer endografts.

The broader impacts of this work lie in the development of the next generation
of medical devices using advanced materials with characteristics that can be
customized to the patient. The successful development of useful devices from
such technologies should pave the way for a plethora of commercial opportunities
including tissue-engineering applications whereby the "seeds' of new tissues or
organs can be incorporated into shape memory polymer devices and delivered using
minimally invasive methods into the target site to eventually grow healthy
tissue. The ability to fuse shape memory polymer technology with advanced three-
dimensional imaging and automated manufacturing methods, such as rapid
prototyping and stereo-lithography, promises to open up the exciting prospect of
creating patient-specific devices within the operating suite; devices that once
manufactured can be compacted in situ into a catheter and delivered immediately
into the patient. Lastly, successful completion of the overall project should
have immediate impact on a disease that is the 13th leading cause of death in
the US, and consequently on human health.