* 0823512
* Doctoral Dissertation Grant: Sociocultural Context of Mental Illness in Prisions
* SBE,BCS
* 11/15/2008,04/30/2010
* Joseph Galanek, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 04/30/2010
* USD 14,255.00

Graduate student Joseph Galanek, under the direction of Dr. Atwood D. Gaines,
will undertake innovative research on the relationship between psychology and
culture by systematically exploring the experience of prisoners who have mental
illness diagnoses. Anthropologists have demonstrated that social and cultural
factors influence the onset, course, and outcome for many illnesses. The
researcher will build on these findings by examining closely the relationship
beween the social and cultural factors and individual mental health in the
micro-scale environment of a prison.

The research will be conducted at a state penitentiary in the United States. The
researcher will employ both qualitative and quantitative methods. He will
conduct qualitative interviews with inmates and staff to identify salient social
and cultural factors that may mediate mental illness within the prison setting.
The social and cultural factors to be explored include family support,
relationships with staff, participation in employment, and institutional
understandings of mental illness and its treatment. Direct observation of the
prison environment will also be utilized to understand the lived experience of
the incarcerated research participants. Statistical analyses will be conducted
to determine whether particular themes derived from the qualitative interviews
are associated with diffent institutional relationships and illness
trajectories.

This research contributes to social science theories of the relationship between
social and cultural factors and the onset, course, and outcome of illness. The
findings of this study will contribute to developing appropriate treatments and
interventions for individuals with mental illness who are currently
incarcerated. The research funding also supports the education of a social
scientist.