* 0823090
* P2C2: North American Monsoon Variability Using Instrumental and Tree-Ring Data
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Ramzi Touchan, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 08/31/2013
* USD 607,832.00

Funding is provided to investigate the behavior of the North American Monsoon
(NAM) as a critical source of moisture for northwestern Mexico and the U.S.
Southwest. Specifically, the researchers will design and apply new techniques to
develop a tree-ring network that targets long-term NAM variability in the US
Southwest. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will use partial-width indices
(earlywood and latewood) from this network, combined with stable-carbon isotope
measurements from tree rings, to reconstruct and examine the long-term
variability of monsoon season precipitation, its relation with winter
precipitation and widespread droughts in western North America, and to
ocean/atmosphere circulation in the Pacific Ocean. The tree-ring data will also
be combined with downscaled general circulation model (GCM) simulations to help
understand the spatial and temporal characteristics of the NAM in the
southwestern U.S. over the last few centuries as a means of providing a baseline
for assessing both the instrumental records and the skill of downscaled GCMs in
replicating natural variability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts
involve a strong educational mentoring portion and an equally strong
intellectual portion. The research will help support graduate and undergraduate
student involvement in a cutting-edge paleoclimate project whose goal is to use
tree-rings science to better inform regional water resource planners.