* 0823653
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Descendants' Organizations and Cultural Heritage in Kiowa Society
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Daniel Swan, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2010
* USD 6,609.00

A core finding of recent research on heritage and historical consciousness is
that interpretations and representations of the past are rooted in the
contemporary moment. Their significance is seen as lying not in the past, but
rather in the cultural work that they are made to perform in the present.
Previous studies have focused on the role of heritage and historical
consciousness in large scale nationalist and separatist movements. Far less is
known about how they are deployed in smaller but still culturally distinct
social settings. This research will fill that gap. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Graduate student Michael P. Jordan, supervised by Dr. Daniel C. Swan,
will undertake research on the ways in which heritage and historical
consciousness are brought into the social dynamics and internal politics of the
Kiowa Tribe of Oklahoma, a federally recognized American Indian tribe with
headquarters in Carnegie, Oklahoma. Nineteenth century Kiowa society was
stratified and social rank continued to influence tribal politics into the mid-
twentieth century. To examine the uses of the past today, the researcher will
focus on recently created formal descendants' organizations, groups organized by
lineal descendants to commemorate their nineteenth century ancestors. He will
employ a mixed methods approach, combining the study of inter- and intra-group
interaction, analysis of the discursive and material aspects of performance
events, and informal and formal interviewing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
investigation of this interesting case will provide a window into the larger
phenomenon of how consciousness of the past is deployed in the present. The
research is important because the phenomenon under investigation is found world
wide. The research will contribute to theory about how and why contemporary
social groups continue to make use of highly localized distinctions despite
globalization. In addition, assessment of the ways in which descendants'
organizations utilize intellectual property associated with 19th century
historical figures will contribute to social science understanding of cross-
cultural variation in intellectual property systems. The research also will
contribute to the education of a graduate student.