* 0823864
* Electromagnetic Band Engineering for Novel THz Thermal Sources
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Hao Xin, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 09/30/2011
* USD 289,851.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
ECCS-0823864&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Electromagnetic Band
Engineering for Novel THz Thermal Sources&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI Name: Xin, Hao
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI Institution: University of
Arizona&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Context:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research
Objectives: The objective of this research work is to demonstrate a low cost and
highly efficient thermal radiation-based THz source. The approach is to utilize
advanced electromagnetic band engineering with electromagnetic crystals to
modify the normal broad peak of the blackbody radiation in the infrared (IR) or
higher frequency ranges to achieve a sharp radiation peak in the desired THz
region. By incorporating semiconducting or liquid-crystal layers into the EBG
structure, real-time tunable THz sources will also be considered. Novel modeling
and simulation techniques that incorporate both the electromagnetic and thermal
dynamics will be combined with state-of-the-art fabrication facilities and
testing equipment to realize the optimized designs and experimentally
demonstrate the basic ideas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merits: This research will explore several novel ideas of combining
electromagnetic bandgap engineering with thermal sources to dramatically enhance
their THz emission. The accurate modeling approaches, the advanced band
engineering techniques, and tunable electromagnetic crystals to be studied will
contribute significantly to the understanding and engineering of materials,
blackbody radiation, and their applications in THz systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research may lead to a completely
new type of THz source and enable numerous interdisciplinary THz application
concepts, including non-destructive medical imaging, remote sensing for
transportation, bio-chemical agents and explosives detection for homeland
security, all-weather high resolution radar, and high bandwidth communications.
A concurrent and integrated research education component will include active
participation of both graduate and undergraduate student and industrial
researchers. It will emphasize outreach to underrepresented groups such as women
and minorities and to local K-12 organizations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;