* 0823014
* SBIR Phase II:  Low Dielectric Fiber for High Frequency Circuit Board Applications
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2008,10/31/2010
* Brian Morin, Innegrity LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 10/31/2010
* USD 425,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to develop
the production and application of low dielectric fibers for use in high
frequency circuit board applications. As the frequency of digital communications
approaches the frequency at which microwave ovens work, the importance of the
dielectric properties of the substrate material on which digital circuits are
formed is becoming of critical importance. This project will use material and
processing strategies to increase the physical properties and reduce the cost of
fibers based on cyclic olefin copolymers. These fibers will be woven into
fabrics and made into prototype circuit board materials to show their utility.
The anticipated results of the project is a fully developed fiber which is ready
to be commercialized which can be combined with glass fiber to reduce the
dielectric constant and dielectric loss of high frequency circuit board
substrate materials, but in all other ways is compatible with processes and
materials used to manufacture these circuits.

The broader impact/commercial potential will be the achievement of processing
blends of amorphous and semi-crystalline polymers in fiber extrusion at speeds
approaching 2 kilometers per minute. If successful, this project will introduce
a low cost material that enables further advances in digital data processing and
communication, with all the incumbent benefits, doing so with reduced energy
dissipation in the circuit board materials. The materials are also lighter
weight than their glass fiber predecessors, and therefore reduce the weight of
mobile electronic and communication devices.