* 0823510
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Religious Identity in a Muslim Majority Charter School
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2009
* Kamran Ali, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 07/31/2009
* USD 14,978.00

University of Texas graduate student Alisa Perkins, under the supervision of Dr.
Kamran Ali, will undertake research on how immigrant students adapt to school
systems, the educational pathways they and their families choose, and the
educational outcomes of these decisions. Immigrant youth are now the fastest
growing sector of the American child population. These post-1965 immigrant
children are remarkably diverse in terms of race and ethnicity, linguistic
background, and socioeconomic characteristics. Across the country, schools are
being transformed by these new waves of immigration. These demographic changes
are introducing novel ethnic, race and cultural configurations to schools and
are generating new challenges to which districts must respond, with profound
implications for American society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Perkins will
investigate these issues through a systematic ethnographic study of first and
second generation Yemeni and Bangladeshi students in a Muslim majority charter
school in Michigan. The researcher will examine the relationship between
expressions and perceptions of Muslim identity within the school and such
factors as concentration of Muslim students, racial diversity, class, gender,
and school organization. She will conduct her research with a twelve-month
period of participant observation and structured and semi-structured
interviewing within the charter school, as well as within student homes and
neighborhoods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studies that expand our knowledge of how new
immigrants are interacting within the school system will enhance social science
theories of the formation of racial, ethnic and religious identity in the
context of contemporary immigration. Such studies also will help to create
appropriate and effective policies for diverse schools and communities. This
project also will contribute to the education of a social scientist.