* 0823459
* The Construction of the Advanced Laser Interferometer Gravitational Wave Observatory (AdvLIGO)
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2008,07/31/2018
* Jay Marx, California Institute of Technology
* Cooperative Agreement
* Mark Coles
* 07/31/2018
* USD 205,120,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Advanced LIGO MREFC Construction
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gravitational waves offer an unprecedented opportunity to
see the universe from a new perspective, providing access to astrophysical
insights that are available in no other way. Advanced LIGO?s (AdvLIGO) goal is
to pioneer a new field of gravitational-wave astronomy. AdvLIGO is an upgrade to
the initial Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO) detectors
and will take place over FY 2008 ? FY 2015. LIGO was conceived as an
infrastructure to support a series of improving instruments, and AdvLIGO will
re-use the civil construction, vacuum equipment, and environmental monitoring
system while replacing the detector components at the Hanford, WA and
Livingston, LA observatory sites. The AdvLIGO design is the product of the LIGO
Laboratory research and development program and the focused effort of the LIGO
Scientific Collaboration, informed by the experience from initial LIGO. The
complete AdvLIGO detector consists of three interferometers: one 4-km instrument
at the Livingston site, and two 4-km instruments at the Hanford site. The
instruments are taken through integration and test, with the prime project
objective met when each interferometer is capable of being brought reliably to
an operational state (?locking?) for multi-hour periods. The Caltech-MIT LIGO
Laboratory, with Caltech as the responsible fiduciary institution, will carry
out the project. Other members of the LIGO Scientific Collaboration (LSC), on
subcontract from Caltech/MIT, will participate in all phases of the effort. The
UK (Science and Technology Facilities Council funding) and Germany (Max Planck
Institute funding) are contributing significant capital equipment and manpower,
complementing the NSF funding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: AdvLIGO
will increase the sensitivity over initial LIGO by more than a factor of 10, and
thus the volume searched and potential rate of signals by a factor of more than
1000. The available bandwidth is larger, and the frequency response tunable, to
address a range of astrophysical sources of gravitational waves. It is
anticipated from current astrophysical knowledge that there will be frequent
observations of gravitational waves, allowing a broad exploration of heretofore
inaccessible astrophysics, cosmology, and relativity. Tests of general
relativity in the strong field region near black holes will provide data that
will help advance numerical relativity and gravitational theory. AdvLIGO will
observe in coordination with other gravitational-wave detectors. The resulting
observations will complement those from existing photon and neutrino
observatories, increasing their reach, and giving new qualitative and
quantitative understanding of the cosmos.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:
AdvLIGO is the long-term focus of the entire LSC, including 46 institutions and
roughly 600 members globally. In this light, implementing AdvLIGO will directly
support a scientific community which came into being due to LIGO. In addition,
LSC education and outreach activities of member institutions (including the LIGO
Laboratory?s very active program) will be greatly enhanced by the onset of
gravitational-wave astronomy -- and the new eye on the universe, achieved by
pushing instrument science to fundamental limits, will inspire a generation of
young people to consider the excitement of science and engineering as a
career.&lt;br/&gt;