* 0823505
* Student Travel Support for the  2008 INFORMS Southwest Regional Conference; College Station, Texas;  April 18-19, 2008
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2008,05/31/2008
* Halit Uster, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Robert L. Smith
* 05/31/2008
* USD 10,000.00

This award provides funding for travel support for students to attend the
INFORMS (Institute for Operations Research and Management Sciences) Southwest
Regional Conference at Texas A&amp;M University in College Station, Texas. The
conference is scheduled to take place on April 18-19, 2008. The format of the
conference is very similar to that of an INFORMS General Meeting. It comprises
plenary speaker(s), discussion panels, tutorials, and technical sessions. Travel
support to this professional conference will benefit students in various
dimensions. First, they will have the opportunity to disseminate their research
and establish relationships with other researchers in the region. Second, they
will gain invaluable experience-based knowledge in establishing student and
regional organizations that promote the OR/MS profession. Third, it will help
foster the professional preparation of students as future academicians and
practitioners. They will have the opportunity to interact with several
experienced colleagues in both domains as well as with other students. Lastly,
being a regional conference of relatively a much smaller size than an annual
INFORMS meeting, the students will have much more significant opportunity to
achieve their above outlined objectives effectively and efficiently. In
addition, travel support to this conference will provide an INFORMS conference
experience to several students who do not attend the annual meetings as well as
facilitate a more significant involvement of underrepresented groups in such
events.