* 0823341
* Konza Prairie LTER VI: Grassland Dynamics and Long-Term Trajectories of Change
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2008,10/31/2015
* John Blair, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 10/31/2015
* USD 6,164,830.00

Since its inception in 1980, long-term studies and experiments at Konza Prairie,
Kansas, have been linked by an overarching theme that integrates fire, grazing
and climate variability as essential and interactive factors responsible for the
origin, evolution, persistence and functioning of tallgrass prairie. Because
human activities are directly, by managing grazers and fire, and indirectly, by
changing atmospheric chemistry and climate, altering the key drivers of
ecological processes in grasslands worldwide, Konza research is increasingly
used to address critical global change issues. In this proposal, core Konza
experiments and datasets will be extended, while new experiments, datasets and
cross-site studies are initiated. Studies of woody plant encroachment into
grasslands will be expanded. Multi-site studies are a very strong aspect of the
Konza program, and include collaborative work in sub-Saharan Africa to test
models of grassland function developed at Konza. The Konza program leverages a
large amount of funding for education and outreach, with impressive results. A
remarkable number of graduate students have obtained their degree through Konza
research. The Konza schoolyard K-12 program serves thousands of students through
the 125 educational programs administered annually. Minority participation in
the schoolyard and undergraduate research programs is stellar. The new focus on
restoration of degraded grassland ecosystems has important implications for
conservation and maintenance of biodiversity.