* 0823211
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Internationalizing Apartheid: The Technopolitics of South Africa's Synthetic Coal-to-Oil Project
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Gabrielle Hecht, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Kelly A. Joyce
* 08/31/2009
* USD 11,908.00

This doctoral dissertation project, supported by NSF's program in Science,
Technology &amp; Society, examines the development of the South African coal to
liquid fuel program, known as SASOL. Combining archival, oral history and
ethnographic research at sites in South Africa, the project aims to produce a
history of this understudied industry. SASOL was funded by the South African
national government during Apartheid as a strategic priority for securing South
Africa's fuel independence. The research project traces the development of
SASOL's synthetic fuel technology in the context of Apartheid South Africa and
cold war politics. The study also focuses on the planning and subsequent
development of Sasolburg and Secunda, the towns established by SASOL to house
its workers. The study explores how urban planning and racial segregation shaped
the spatial formation of SASOL's towns. By analyzing a large technological
institution in South Africa, the research widens the scope of science and
technology studies beyond typical developed world settings. The research places
the SASOL program in the international context of mid-twentieth century
modernism and the Cold War, offering a major reinterpretation of the role of
technology, science and expertise in the history of Apartheid by showing the
links between SASOL's synthetic technology, the planning of its company towns,
and international networks of expertise, labor and capital. The project
illustrates the enduring appeal of large-scale technological projects to
governments in developing world settings. The insights gained from this study of
SASOL and its company towns may be relevant to many similar large-scale
government projects, particularly those concerned with the development of
alternative fuel sources.