* 0823699
* CEDAR Postdoc: The Effect of Atmospheric Tides on the Equatorial and Near-Polar Ionosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Thomas Immel, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Farzad Kamalabadi
* 08/31/2011
* USD 168,552.00

This project investigates tidal coupling between the neutral lower atmosphere
and the ionosphere at equatorial and near-polar latitudes. The recent discovery
that tropospheric tides have a strong effect on the structure of the equatorial
ionosphere at altitudes extending up through the F-region motivates this work,
and was the basis for the targeted approach to addressing the effects of tidal
coupling on the ionosphere that will be undertaken. Analysis of recent
ultraviolet (UV) nightglow observations from the TIMED (Thermosphere Ionosphere
Mesosphere Energetics and Dynamics) and IMAGE (Imager for Magnetosphere-to-
Aurora Global Exploration) satellites demonstrated that there is a correlation
between zonal structures seen in the nighttime ionosphere with the atmospheric
tides. The coupling mechanism was interaction of tides in the neutral atmosphere
with the E-region dynamo, which couples the zonal structure via plasma uplift
through F-region altitudes. This project will use a combination of experimental
data and simulations to investigate the global nature of tidal effects on the
ionosphere, from their apparent origins through the thermosphere. The
Constellation Observing System for Meteorology, Ionosphere and Climate and
Taiwan's Formosa Satellite Mission #3 (COSMIC/FORMOSAT-3) mission provides over
1500 GPS (Global Positioning System's) radio occultation profiles of electron
density from 100 to 450 km altitude every day, as well as profiles of
temperature, pressure, and refractivity from near the surface to 60 km altitude
with substantial geographic and temporal resolution. The profiles have tight
accuracies such that the tidal structures that affect the ionosphere should be
clearly evident at ionospheric altitudes; in addition, tidal features consistent
with tropospheric forcing may also be detectable in the stratosphere and
troposphere. The GPS radio occultation profiles, of electron density,
temperature, pressure, and refractivity, are a good resource for comparison with
ionospheric and tidal studies using incoherent scatter radar (ISR) measurements
of electron density, ion drift velocities and temperatures, and derived neutral
winds. ISR measurements from Poker Flat, Millstone Hill, and Jicamarca will be
used to allow examination of tidal effects at equatorial, mid, and high northern
latitudes with high temporal and local spatial coverage. The observations of
tidal structure with altitude, latitude, and season will be compared with
simulations from the TIME-GCM/GSWM (Thermosphere Ionosphere Mesosphere
Electrodynamics General Circulation Model/Global Scale Wave Model).