* 0823070
* SBIR Phase II:  Life-like, Expressive Avatars for the Instruction of Young Learners who are Deaf
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2008,09/30/2012
* Jason Hurdich, VCOM3D, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 09/30/2012
* USD 1,279,584.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II research project will
develop a new authoring tool that will allow persons proficient in American Sign
Language (ASL) to create animated stories and instructional material in ASL. The
goals of this authoring tool are: 1) to support the creation of instructional
materials that assist Deaf and Hard-of-Hearing (HH) students in the elementary
and middle grades in learning to read; 2) to support the creation of animated
ASL stories, including the full range of ASL grammar, that can be enjoyed by
Deaf and Hard-of-Hearing students; and 3) to provide a tool that can be used by
older students, at the secondary and university levels, to learn about the ASL
by creating animated ASL passages. The project includes the development and
testing of exemplary reading instruction for Deaf students reading at grade
level K-6. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will result in improved, computer-
based reading instruction for the 50,000+ K-12 Deaf/HH students in the U.S.
whose first language is ASL, as well as students that are taking ASL courses.
Currently, Deaf children are delayed in developing language skills, to the
extent that the average reading level of a Deaf high school graduate is no
greater than 4th grade. Since Deaf children have difficulty developing phonemic
awareness, and are often isolated from contextual information available to
hearing students, teaching reading to Deaf children requires the application of
several unique methods that go far beyond simply translating English text. By
providing educators and developers of educational software with products that
allow them to develop personalized signing avatar tutors for Deaf children, this
project will make possible the creation of instruction that is available
'anytime, anywhere' for assisting Deaf children in developing literacy skills.