* 0823921
* Fiber optic surface enhanced Raman sensor for high sensitivity and automatic molecule identification
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2013
* Jin Zhang, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 09/30/2013
* USD 330,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to develop and demonstrate a novel
fiber sensor based on surface enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) using metal
nanostructures for chemical, biological, and environmental detection. The
approach is to integrate 1) novel nanoparticle substrates that provide the high
sensitivity and consistency, molecular specificity, and applicability to a wide
range of compounds; 2) a unique hollow core optical fiber probe with double SERS
substrate structure that provides the compactness, reliability, low cost, and
ease of sampling; and 3) an innovative matched spectral filter set that provides
automatic preliminary molecule identification.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit is to eliminate some of the existing road blocks for the
practical applications of current SERS sensors. The novel sensor developed is a
transformative technology since its unique capabilities will help revolutionize
the way chemical and biological detection is conducted, with potential single
molecule detection capability. This in turn will impact many aspects of human
lives, ranging from medicine and national security to food safety and to
chemical and environmental industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts
are to maintain the competitive edge of the US through the multidisciplinary
education and training of students in the fast growing fields of nanoscience and
nanotechnology. Promotion of diversity is focused on the encouragement and
recruitment of women in science and engineering, with the PI as a role model.
Outreach to local and Bay Area K-12 schools will involve high school students to
participate in the research and inspire children to be future scientists and
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;