* 0823287
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Intersection of Intimate Partner Violence and Chronic Illness
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,12/31/2009
* Margaret Winchester, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 12/31/2009
* USD 14,930.00

Graduate student Margaret S. Winchester, with the guidance of Dr. Janet W.
McGrath, will undertake ethnographic research on the interactions between
multiple determinants of female status and vulnerability under conditions of
chronic illness. In an era of gains in access to treatment and lengthened life
expectancies, understanding long-term illness experience has become increasingly
critical.

The research will be carried out in two sites in Uganda, one urban and one
rural. The researcher will take a multiple stakeholders approach to exploring
the factors that affect how women experience living with HIV. She will collect
data on governmental policy, service provision, and women's experience in the
context of HIV treatment. She will interview government representatives and
social, medical, and legal service providers. She will conduct a demographic
survey of a sample of HIV positive women in each site, supplemented by
administering a standard scale on household power relationships. Quantitative
data collection will be followed by more intensive interviews with a sub-sample,
focusing on utilization of services, gender norms for intimate partner violence,
intimate partner violence and treatment, and women's awareness of rights and
legal protections.

The research is important because it will contribute to updating hierarchical
models of power, by conjoining data from stakeholders and HIV policy makers with
the lived experiences of those now living long-term with chronic illness. The
research also will help to develop policies to remove subtle barriers to
effective treatment over the long run. Finally, the research supports the
graduate education of a social scientist.