* 0823088
*  Law, Democracy, and Religion: The Case of Bangladesh
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,01/31/2012
* Lamia Karim, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 01/31/2012
* USD 73,998.00

Dr. Lamia Karim will undertake research on democracy, legal reform, and women's
organizations in Bangladesh. Islamists and secularists have different visions of
the ideal Bangladesh state and the roles of women in it. Karim will investigate
the differential effects of secular and relgious women's organizations in
promoting women's rights.

The study is comparative and ethnographic. The researcher will compare the
strategies and effects of two human rights non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
and one conservative Islamic missionary group. The research is organized around
four overaching topics: (1) the role of pro-women's organization in securing
human rights for Muslim women; (2) how female beneficiaries of human rights
programs evaluate Islamic laws, democracy and individual rights; (3) the role of
Islamic women missionaries who advocate Islamic laws as the sole source of
justice for women; (4) how rural male elites and clergy respond to the
feminization of rural power structures by human rights NGOs. The research
methodology is based on ethnography, focus group interviews, case studies, news
reports, and interviews with a cross-section of rural and urban women and men.
The findings of this research will contribute to social scientific understanding
of the relationship between democracy, law, religion, and human rights,
particularly for women. The results also will inform culturally specific
policies to increase the human security of women.