* 0823253
* P2C2: Northern Annular Mode (NAM) Variability during the Little Ice Age and Medieval Warm Period in a Cave Ice Core Record from Northwestern Romania
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Bogdan Onac, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 09/30/2011
* USD 132,694.00

Funding is provided to investigate the twin hypotheses that decade-to-century-
scale climate variability was a persistent feature over the past two millennia
in Eastern Europe and that the Little Ice Age and Medieval Warm Period were part
of this pattern of decadal-to-centennial variability. Specifically, the
researchers seek to obtain an annual to decadal resolved record of climate from
layered ice and speleothems from caves in Northwestern Romania
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers aim to address a number of important
science questions that include: 1) What was the response of temperature and the
hydrologic cycle to Northern Annular Mode (NAM) variability over the last 2,000
years in southeastern Europe? 2) What was the oxygen isotopic signature of
extreme climate events during the Little Ice Age (LIA) and Medieval Warm Period
(MWP) and how does this compare to other parts of the North Atlantic such as
Greenland? 3) Is the spatial signature of the climate response, and published
vegetation anomalies associated with the LIA and MWP, consistent with changes of
the NAM? and 4) What are the combined effects of changes in radiative forcing
and persistent NAM patterns on regional-scale climate?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts involve the possible development of a new archive for
paleoclimate information; support of graduate student and postdoctoral scholars;
the fostering of strong international cooperation between U.S. and Romanian
scientists; and the development of educational displays for visitors to Apuseni
National Park in Romania about cave environments and their role in climate
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;