* 0823945
* A Constrained Optimization Approach to Preserving Prior Knowledge in Neural-Network Modeling and Control of Dynamical Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2014
* Silvia Ferrari, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 07/31/2014
* USD 322,112.00

Proposal Number: ECCS-0823945&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: A Constrained
Optimization Approach to Preserving Prior Knowledge in Neural-Network Modeling
and Control of Dynamical Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI Name: Ferrari,
Silvia&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI Institution: Duke
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to develop and
implement a unified theory for memory and forgetting in artificial neural
networks. The novel learning algorithms developed through this research will
eliminate interference and catastrophic interference in nonlinear and fully-
connected neural networks, thereby enhancing their applicability in a number of
engineering applications. The approach is to formulate learning through a
constrained backpropagation approach that optimizes the neural network
performance subject to long-term memory constraints, which may be deteriorated
over time via a penalty function or Lagrange
multipliers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of the proposed research is the development of a novel constrained
backpropagation approach that combines constrained optimization theory and
classical backpropagation. The newly developed adjoined error gradient and
algebraic training formalisms together allow to formulate constrained
backpropagation efficiently and effectively, while also exploiting existing
artificial neural networks algorithms, such as Levenberg-Marquardt and resilient
backpropagation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
activity will enhance the applicability and effectiveness of on-line adaptive
neural networks in a broad spectrum of complex science and engineering problems,
namely, function approximation, solution of differential equations, system
identification, and control. The constrained-backpropagation theory and
algorithms will be implemented on data-assimilation problems, which will benefit
society by producing timely predictions about environmental change and
dispersion of urban pollutants, and on adaptive dual control, which will produce
flight control systems that are fault and damage-tolerant, and make piloted
airplanes safer and easier to fly. Also, they will be demonstrated through
benchmark problems in robotics and mine hunting using Graphical User Interfaces,
for educational and dissemination purposes. This approach has already been
proven successful at creating positive synergies and collaborations between Duke
University and K-12 students from the Chapel Hill (NC) public schools, as well
as small local industries.