* 0823989
* Collaborative Research: Design and Integration of Complex Digital Systems for High Energy Physics
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Shuvra Shikhar Bhattacharyya, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2012
* USD 150,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to investigate novel techniques and
tools to enable geographically-distributed, multidisciplinary teams of
scientists and engineers to design, integrate, and test complex digital systems
for high energy physics. The approach is to: (1) develop design methodologies
that allows investigators from different institutions and disciplines to
collaborate on complex digital systems; (2) establish an Internet-based design
framework that includes version control, automated testing, and
hardware/software change tracking; and (3) utilize hierarchical dataflow
specifications to model, test, and implement these
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to intellectual merit, the project
has the potential to provide new techniques to design complex digital systems
and to offer new insights into these systems. These techniques are applied to
design and test a trigger system in the upgraded Large Hadron Collider. The
upgraded collider has the potential to lead to exciting discoveries in high-
energy physics, such as improved understanding of particle mass generation,
extra dimensions, dark matter, and supersymmetry, which introduces a partner for
each known particle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to broader impacts,
project results are integrated into courses on digital system design and
programming concepts, and presented to K-12 students and teachers. Results and
tools are to be disseminated to other researchers through a project website.
Project participants, including minorities and women, will benefit from exposure
to multidisciplinary research. Resulting techniques and tools should be
applicable to a wide variety of complex digital systems, including those for
high-energy physics, wireless communications, medical imaging, and scientific
computing. The project should also advance understanding of issues in long-
distance collaboration on complex design projects.