* 0823315
* Responses of Root Hydraulic Conductivity to Elevated CO2: Patterns and Mechanisms
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* Maciej Zwieniecki, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 08/31/2014
* USD 464,189.00

Rising atmospheric CO2 concentration could have serious consequences for
terrestrial ecosystems. These effects are often examined in terms of direct
influences on carbon uptake and losses by plants. However, elevated levels of
CO2 may result in significant changes in performances of native and crop
ecosystems via indirect effects involving uptake and usage of other resources
such as water and nutrients. In most native ecosystems, water is the most
limiting resource. Therefore, any impact of rising CO2 level on water uptake and
usage by vegetation will affect plant and ecosystem productivity as well as
affecting the hydrologic biosphere-atmosphere feedbacks. To date, there is some
evidence that elevated CO2 may reduce foliage resistance to water loss but
considerably less is known about potential changes in other components of water
flow within the soil, through the plant and to the atmosphere. The proposed
study will examine the effects of projected rise in atmospheric CO2 on a number
of forest and crop species. More specifically, effects on root hydraulic
conductivity which often constitutes a major barrier to water flow will be
examined. Preliminary results along with theoretical considerations indicate
that high CO2 may result in a significant change in root uptake and transport
capacity of water. The proposed study will also examine the mechanism(s) that
may best explain why CO2 would affect root water transport properties. The
results will have significant utility for models of plant and ecosystem growth
responses to future climates. The study is also designed to determine potential
differences in species responses thus providing a mechanistic understanding of
CO2 affect on the larger scale ecological processes of biodiversity and
population dynamics. Finally, the study will engage K-12 as well as
undergraduate students in conceptual and experimental aspects of this research.