* 0823728
* LTREB: Long-Term Studies of Seedling and Small Sapling Community Dynamics in a Neotropical Forest
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2007,04/30/2014
* Stephen Hubbell, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 04/30/2014
* USD 446,347.00

This grant supports a continuation of a long-term study of a tropical rain
forest and how it is responding to climate change. The forest is in the Panama
Canal on Barro Colorado Island (BCI), a biological reserve managed by the
Smithsonian and one of the botanically and ecologically best known tropical
forests in the world. The grant is to study germination and survival of
seedlings, stages of tree life histories that are most sensitive to climate.
Large changes in seasonal and annual rainfall patterns are predicted in the
tropics due to increasing atmospheric CO2, which may cause major changes in the
tree species composition and turnover rates of tropical forests. Seedlings are
early warning systems because of their drought sensitivity. Results of this
project should be practically beneficial in forecasting how tropical rain
forests will respond to climate change. The study also adds to basic
understanding of how tropical rain forests work and why they have so many tree
species. The subject research plot, five football fields in size, has twice the
tree species found in all of North America north of Mexico. This project will
test the hypothesis that seedling fluctuations let more species coexist by
giving rare species a competitive edge in years when common species fail to
reproduce. Prior support has resulted in the training of many U.S. students in
tropical botany and ecology (over 200 undergraduate and graduate trainees since
1980, including 7 Ph.D.'s and 4 Master's students). Students, colleagues, and
PIs associated with this project have already published more than 100 papers and
3 books based on data from this project.