* 0823387
* Education, Innovation, and Discovery:  The Distinctive Promise of the American Research University
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2008,12/31/2009
* William Green, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 12/31/2009
* USD 184,974.00

Interdisciplinary (99)&lt;br/&gt;This project is a two-day conference on
"Education, Innovation, and Discovery: The Distinctive Promise of the American
Research University." The conference is scheduled to take place in Washington,
DC on November 13 and 14, 2008. It is the fourth major forum sponsored by the
Reinvention Center, a consortium of research universities established in 2000
and inspired by the Boyer Commission report, "Reinventing Undergraduate
Education" (1998). The conference coincides with the tenth anniversary of the
publication of the Boyer report, which challenged research universities to
reinvent their undergraduate education so that it emphasizes inquiry,
investigation, and discovery and takes full advantage of their unique research
cultures, values, and resources. This conference is an opportunity for leaders
in research universities to take stock collectively of the reforms and advances
in undergraduate education that have emerged in the past decade, highlight
approaches and practices that have produced consequential results, and build on
these experiences to further the process of reinvention. The overarching goal is
to continue the process of determining how the research university environment
of discovery and creativity shapes and adds distinctive value to undergraduate
education and to use the knowledge gained to improve curricular and pedagogical
practices. Specific objectives are: &lt;br/&gt;- To investigate diverse
approaches to General Education in order to guide individual campuses as they
craft their foundational curriculum &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- To bring the
diversity and internationality of the research university community to the
forefront so that they are recognized and appreciated as genuine educational
assets &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- To advance knowledge and understanding of
assessment and accountability and engage faculty so that they may make a
meaningful contribution to current discussions and also incorporate assessment
into their teaching and student learning &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- To demonstrate
ways in which technology can be used to enrich teaching and increase students'
engagement, retention and intellectual and cognitive growth
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- To promote strategies for educating undergraduates to be
productive citizens in an increasingly global and scientific environment
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- To demonstrate ways in which a research-inflected
education will strengthen students' development of fundamental skills in
quantitative reasoning, scientific literacy, and writing and also foster the
development of higher order cognitive skills &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These
objectives are key in constructing an undergraduate education that connects the
research university's core missions to generate and transmit knowledge with the
national need for a robust workforce that can compete in a global economy.