* 0823405
* Shortgrass Steppe Long Term Ecological Research
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2008,10/31/2012
* John Moore, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 10/31/2012
* USD 2,092,332.00

Twenty-five years of intensive study has revealed a Shortgrass Steppe (SGS)
ecosystem for which, despite chronic water stress, periods of severe drought,
and intensive grazing by large herbivores, the essential ecological structure
and functioning remain intact. With global change, however, a range of
conditions is anticipated to develop far outside those experienced during the
last several thousand years. Forecasting how the SGS will respond depends on
understanding of key ecosystem drivers, including climate, physiography, biotic
structure, natural disturbance, and human land use. The resilient ecosystem,
bounded within natural variation but interrupted by human influence, may be
supplanted by an unfamiliar one, with humans playing a much more direct role.
The goal of the proposed research is to test the limits of resilience, function
and structure of the SGS, by both continuing past work and by experimentally
manipulating factors in new experiments that are known from previous work to be
important. Multiple temporal scales of change and a combination of long-term
monitoring, short- and long-term experiments will enable forecasts of the
impacts of global change on the SGS. Experiments will involve manipulating
factors that will most likely change in the future, and selecting ecological
attributes and interactions previously identified either as vulnerable to change
or likely to influence multiple other interactions. The project is organized
into research groups that focus on biotic interactions and ecosystem processes,
with multiple interdisciplinary studies united by cross-LTER studies, data
synthesis and modeling.

Besides publishing hundreds of peer-reviewed journal articles and scholarly
books in outlets with global reach, including a recent SGS synthesis volume,
SGS-LTER impacts Colorado State University, communities and land users within
Colorado, and beyond. Activities include outreach to ranchers, non-governmental
organizations and land managers (especially from the U.S. Department of
Agriculture); a large educational program integrated across K-12; involvement by
hundreds of undergraduates as field crew, independent study students, and REU
students; and an active graduate program. Much SGS education work reaches out to
groups underrepresented in STEM disciplines. The ability to provide outreach is
vastly improved upon recent completion of new classroom building at the field
site. SGS maintains a proactive Information Management system that works to
improve access to long-term data sets and the project web page is being
redesigned to facilitate data access.