* 0823491
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:   The Negotiation of Slum-Upgrading Programs in  Belo Horizonte, Brazil
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Gustavo Rivera Jr, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2009
* USD 14,300.00

Graduate student Gustavo Rivera, Jr., with the guidance of Dr. Kesha Fikes, will
undertake research on the limits and effects of urban governance in regulation
of land use by the poor. The researcher will examine how urban renewal experts
and squatter settlement residents reconcile conflicting notions of spatial usage
and habitation when public housing is constructued within squatter
spaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be carried out in Belo Horizonte,
Brazil's third largest city. During the first phase of the project, the
researcher will conduct archival research to become familiar with the history of
housing policies, urban renewal, and squatter settlements (favelas) in Belo
Horizonte. In the following phases, the researcher will conduct in-depth
interviews with urban renewal experts and favela residents before and after
relocation to new public housing units, and observe at participatory planning
meetings where both experts and residents are present. The researcher also will
collect visual documents, such as hand-sketched drawings of houses, photographs
of interior domestic spaces, and aerial maps, which he use to elicit ideas about
the city and use of space from informants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
will shed light on how governments can work more effectively with residents of
squatter settlements, and whether relocation to public housing provides a
channel for traditionally marginalized residents to acquire more rights and
legitimacy as citizens. It thereby will contribute to social science theories of
place, space, urban governance, and citizenship. The research also will
contribute to the education of a graduate student.