* 0823338
* Assessing Collaboration Across Organizational Boundaries in U.S. Green Construction: Does working together with new information technology result in better buildings?
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Gina Neff, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Quinetta Roberson
* 07/31/2012
* USD 218,082.00

Communication and collaboration across functional and organizational boundaries
are among the hardest problems in management. Among other things, the media that
are used to communicate significantly shape the substantive and social
dimensions within which collaboration can happen, but we know little abut how to
choose and use particular media. This research team will use comparative case
studies and surveys to build and test theory about how new 3-D imaging affects
communication and collaboration across organizational boundaries in the
sustainable design and construction industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers have already completed initial field work and theory building. The
NSF support will enable this inquiry to progress in three stages: a) a
qualitative field assessment of collaboration during a large construction
project in a major U.S. city, b) in-depth interviews with 50 industry leaders in
order to develop quantitative measures for technology adoption and inter-firm
collaboration, and c) analysis of an existing database of 100 construction
projects certified by the U.S. Green Building Council's LEED process.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to advancing theory-based understanding of
technology-mediated collaboration, the project should have practical
implications for those seeking to better manage collaborations and supply-chain
communications in a number of manufacturing settings. In particular, the
research team expects to offer practical insights for architects, engineers, and
builders working on sustainable construction projects.