* 0823197
* The Globalization of Large Dams: The United States, the Third World, and the Geopolitics of Development in Asia and Africa.
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Christopher Sneddon, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 08/31/2012
* USD 59,594.00

Throughout much of the Cold War period, prominent United States dam-building
agencies promoted the idea that river basin planning and the construction of
large-scale hydroelectric dams were the most effective ways for so-called third-
world nations to develop their water resources. Guided by the U.S. State
Department as part of a broad program of foreign assistance and technology
transfer to regions labeled as "underdeveloped", large dams and river basin
planning also became important parts of the United States' geopolitical agenda
during the Cold War era. For the architects of foreign policy in the United
States in the post-WWII era, the transfer of technological and development
expertise via river basin development was an important part of solidifying
geopolitical alliances between US national security interests and newly
independent states in Asia, the Middle East and Africa in order to establish a
bulwark against what U.S. officials perceived as the global expansion of
communism. This research investigates how the numerous seemingly isolated
projects planned and constructed throughout third-world in the mid- to late-
twentieth century were inspired and in many cases actively promoted by
successive United States' administrations through the activities of America's
preeminent dam-building agencies -- the Department of Interior's Bureau of
Reclamation (USBR), the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and the Tennessee Valley
Authority (TVA). The investigator will conduct archival research in the United
States and select regions (e.g., the Mekong River basin) to examine and analyze:
the geographical extent of the dissemination of both the technology of large
dams and the notion of river basin planning throughout the third world during
the middle 20th century. The study will also analyze the tools -- geopolitical,
technological and discursive -- through which the diffusion of large dams and
river basin planning was planned and carried out. In addition to determining the
geographical extent of the international activities of U.S. water resource
development agencies, case studies of river basin approaches in Asia and Africa
will investigate the historically and geographically specific responses to the
global circulation of large dams and river basin planning on the part of both
human and nonhuman actors in those regions and rivers targeted for
transformation.

This project will expand our understanding of the globalization of water
resource infrastructure and its links to the global geopolitical ideologies and
strategies of the United States during the Cold War. At one level, the study
will offer insights into a critical yet largely obscured part of the history of
one of the most far-reaching and substantial ways that humans have intervened in
natural systems: the damming of rivers. At another level, the research will
contribute to a more refined understanding of conceptual debates over the
interconnections among social power, technological knowledge and biophysical
processes. By emphasizing that large dams and river basin planning approaches do
not reside in a technological vacuum, immune from other social and biophysical
forces, the research will offer a firmer historical foundation for assessing the
continuing efficacy of river basin development -- as traditionally conceived --
in the face of multiple economic, political and environmental interests.