* 0823046
* SBIR Phase II:  A Fundamentally New X-ray Driven Manufacturing System for Recycling Materials
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Jeffrey Webster, wTe Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 08/31/2013
* USD 923,349.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will put into
service a prototype/pilot facility to assess the technical and commercial
feasibility of unambiguously sorting small chips of super-alloys at high speeds.
Spectramet Technology is a platform optoelectronic manufacturing technology for
analyzing metals and alloys at previously unachievable accuracy and high speeds
into known alloys to meet smelter specifications. The technology platform is not
only aimed at sorting alloys into base metal groups, but can also sort the
alloys by alloy type. One part of the Spectramet Technology focuses on sorting
valuable super-alloys such as nickel-, cobalt-, and titanium based metals. This
proposal is aims at extending the existing technology with an entirely new
innovative sensor approach to process particles one-thousandth the size of prior
applications and to identifying and sorting those particles at speeds thousands
of times faster than has ever been done before.

The broader impact/commercial potential from this technology will be reducing
the amount of strategic super-alloy metal that is downgraded to inferior product
uses and applications in the U.S. so that this very valuable scrap metal can be
recycled into its highest value application, so it can be used again as super-
alloy feedstock for making new super-alloy parts. The result of recycling this
material rather than downgrading it to lower value applications will be reduced
U.S. dependence on supplies of strategic virgin metals recovered at primary
refineries from ore (most of which are purchased abroad), substantial energy
savings from use of scrap rather than ore and virgin materials, and greatly
reduced emissions because secondary smelting consumes much less energy than
primary production.