* 0823952
* Collaborative Research: GOALI: AIS gene library based real-time resource allocation on time-sensitive large-scale multi-rate systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Mo-Yuen Chow, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2013
* USD 197,984.00

The objective of this project is to investigate and develop a gene library-based
resource allocation methodology for effective and efficient time-sensitive
large-scale multi-rate system integration over communication networks. The
Impaired Driver Electronic Assistance Testbed at the North Carolina Center for
Automotive Research serves as an accident prevention demonstration project. The
approach is to use the gene library to classify and detect abnormalities in
vehicle movements in various traffic environments and to provide optimal real-
time sampling rate adaptation and emergency intervention. An artificial immune
system is used to optimize the gene library, which can then be used in real time
and can adapt to its environment to realized optimal solutions.

With respect to intellectual merit, this research pursues a vertical integration
of multiple layers of systems dynamics (from networks, to distributed agents,
and to users) with the goal to provide efficient and reliable system operation
by considering bandwidth constraints, hybrid structures, and different control
topologies for adaptive real-time optimal resource allocation for distributed
sensor, actuator, and controller agents over communication networks.

With respect to broader impacts, this project is a synergistic integration of
theoretical analyses with industrial applications. Joint research, bidirectional
education programs, and commercialization serve as a three-tiered structure for
the project. Outreach and dissemination efforts include industrial internships
for students, summer high school student experiences, inter-institutional
visits, and public seminars. Recruitment of underrepresented groups is actively
pursued. The research has the potential to reduce vehicle accident-related costs
from more than $250 billion per annum in the United States while enabling older
drivers to retain mobility and quality of life.