* 0823639
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Identity Pluralism and Social Status in Thailand
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Byungchu Kang, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2010
* USD 15,000.00

Emory University graduate student, Byungchu Dredge Kang, with the guidance of
Dr. Peter J. Brown, will undertake research on the relationship between
government policy, gender conformity, and stigma. The aims of this study include
investigation into: 1) the relationship between childhood class background and
gender conformity; and 2) the relationship between social stigma and the
strategies used to minimize social stigma. Methods to be employed include
participant observation of everyday life in work, domestic, and social
environments, extended life history interviews, and analysis of public discourse
(e.g. media, government documents). The research will be conducted in Bangkok,
Thailand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Findings of this study will improve our
understanding of social discrimination and the role of government policy in
mitigating such discrimination. The research will contribute to social science
theory by extending understanding of the cultural construction of social
categories and by incorporating class analysis into arenas of identity
construction where class is not routinely considered. Finally, the investigation
of relationship patterns and stigma is expected to provide critical information
about the social contexts of disease risks, including HIV. The research also
will contribute to the education of a social scientist.