* 0823363
*  Technology and Democracy: Surveillance and Transparency as Sociotechnical Systems of Accountability
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Deborah Johnson, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Kelly Moore
* 12/31/2011
* USD 328,276.00

This interdisciplinary research project, funded by the Science, Technology, and
Society Program, seeks to better understand the social consequences of
surveillance. The growing prevalence of surveillance, facilitated by
increasingly sophisticated information technologies, is well documented.
However, the social implications for democratic societies of so much tracking,
monitoring, and sorting of individual behavior is less well-understood. At the
same time, interest in transparency policies is growing in calls for more
transparency of government and corporate practices. Transparency is seen as a
remedy for the negative effects of surveillance. This project reframes
surveillance and transparency in viewing them both as systems of accountability.
Accountability provides a novel lens through which to view the normative
structures of these two systems and will be understood to involve: (1) an
individual or organization; (2) an account of that individual or organization,
focused on a particular domain of activity; and (3) a group, organization, or
individual that uses the account to make decisions. Further, surveillance and
transparency will be analyzed as sociotechnical systems: the social structures
and cultural meanings constitute, and are in turn constituted by, the
information technology systems in which they are realized. This framework will
guide the creation of five case studies which will provide the basis for
analysis and cross-comparison. The five cases cover government, corporate and
non-profit organizations. An interdisciplinary team of scholars will analyze the
cases and do the cross-case comparisons, yielding both new insights into
transparency and new understandings of the social implications of surveillance.
These analyses will examine how the rationales for creation of systems gets
translated into their actual workings; how IT has an impact on that translation;
and how the systems affect underrepresented groups in science and engineering.