* 0823847
* BRIGE: Online measurement of submicron aerosol composition using AC-CIMS
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* V. Faye McNeill, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
*  Ashok S. Sangani
* 08/31/2011
* USD 174,403.00

EEC-0823847 McNeill

BRIGE awards maintain global competitiveness by increasing the diversity of ENG
researchers, who are initiating research programs early in their careers. BRIGE
awards further the broaden participation of engineering researchers by
increasing the number of engineering graduates, by improving the representation
of women and minorities in engineering, and by understanding how to improve
recruitment and retention of engineering students.

This BRIGE award will investigate fast-time-response, high-sensitivity
measurements of aerosol particle composition, which are in demand for explosives
detection, bioaerosol analysis, and laboratory and field studies of atmospheric
aerosols. This project will develop Aerosol Concentrating Chemical Ionization
Mass Spectrometry (AC-CIMS), a technique for on-line, speciated measurements of
aerosol organics at low total aerosol concentrations. The primary research goal
is to design, develop, and characterize a novel concentrating inlet for
submicron aerosols that samples isothermally, has a low cutpoint, and conforms
to the operating requirements of CIMS. The inlet will be interfaced with a
volatilization flow tube and a CIMS instrument. The performance of ACCIMS will
be characterized using laboratory-generated and ambient aerosols.

AC-CIMS will be suitable for any application requiring the detection of trace
aerosol organics at low total aerosol loadings. Applications in atmospheric
research include laboratory studies of secondary organic aerosol formation at
low, realistic aerosol concentrations, as well as speciated, highly time-
resolved field measurements of aerosol organics. The aerosol concentrating inlet
design will be modular and general enough for use with any existing CIMS system
or other analytical instruments with similar pressure requirements. In line with
the goals of BRIGE, this project will set the stage for the McNeill group to
conduct future research involving applications of the AC-CIMS technique under
the purview of the NSF Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and
Transport Systems. The research team will consist of three generations of female
chemical engineers. This project will encourage the junior members of the
research team to pursue careers in chemical engineering after graduation by
providing opportunities for them to participate in cutting-edge research under
the supervision of a female mentor, publish their work in peer-reviewed
publications, and attend and present their work at scientific conferences.

This BRIGE grant will broaden the participation of and increase opportunities
for all engineers including those from groups underrepresented in the
engineering disciplines. This BRIGE grant will also encourage the PI to become
actively and competitively engaged in research as an independent investigator.