* 0823766
* National AGEP Evaluation
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Courtney Tanenbaum, American Institutes for Research in the Behavioral Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 09/30/2012
* USD 1,482,974.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;DRL-0823766&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Study Overview. AIR will
conduct a two-year, two phased evaluation of the National Science Foundation?s
Alliances for Graduate Education and the Professoriate (AGEP) grant program.
Phase One consists of a rigorous quantitative evaluation, using extant data
conscience, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) Ph.D. enrollment and
completion trends across the nation. The data sources will be the Survey of
Earned Doctorates (SED), the Integrated Postsecondary Data System (IPEDS), and
the National Student Clearinghouse?s StudentTracker Database. During Phase One,
national trends discovered in analyzing these data will be compared to trends
AGEP institutions. During Phase Two AIR will explain trends at AGEP-supported
institutions identified in Phase One and will detail the role that AGEP has
played in creating a diverse community of graduate students in pursuit of the
Ph.D. in STEM disciplines. Phase Two will draw data from site visits and from
surveys that will be administered to various stakeholder groups, i.e. faculty
supervising AGEP supported STEM dissertations, and current and former AGEP
supported students. The study will determine the value-added by AGEP and the
role the program plays in creating a diverse graduate population and,
subsequently, a racially and ethnically diverse STEM professoriate. The study
will draw on the substantial intellectual and technological resources of AIR,
one of the world?s pre-eminent educational research
firms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The proposed study is the first
national evaluation of NSF?s AGEP. AGEP is one of the most innovative national
approaches to recruiting and retaining minority students in STEM doctoral
programs and ensuring the completion of their degrees. As such, this study will
advance knowledge and understanding about how this program affects the diversity
of STEM graduate students and the diversification of the STEM professoriate. It
will broaden the field?s understanding of important recruitment, teaching and
student support strategies for getting underrepresented minority students into
faculty positions within STEM disciplines. The study will provide new data on
the efficacy of these strategies at AGEP universities and determine how the
outcomes of these strategies compare with outcomes at other institutions.
Ultimately, this knowledge can change the training of future generations of
scholars. The diverse AIR team of researchers taking on this task is recognized
for its dedication, commitment and quality of work on the issues impacting
educational achievement of minority students. The proposed mixed method design
is appropriate for understanding AGEP, for unmasking the discreet nuances that
differentiate the AGEP models on different campuses, and for identifying the
common components that lead to the Alliances? success. The conceptual
organization of the study adheres to high standards of rigor and research and
can be accomplished with the resources proposed and the research infrastructure
of the American Institutes for Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts.
As the global economy depends increasingly on the kinds of innovations and ideas
made possible by a highly educated workforce, the United States will need to
increase the number of American citizens who pursue advanced degrees in STEM
disciplines. Shifts in our demographic makeup, in turn, make on-going concerns
about educational equity for all sectors of the community increasingly
important, and getting underrepresented minorities to pursue advanced degrees in
STEM disciplines becomes an ever more important concern. AGEP is explicitly
designed to increase minority representation in STEM doctoral production and in
the STEM professoriate, but the field needs to know more about how program
components work. Lessons learned about program efficacy through this evaluation
will be disseminated to the AGEP alliances and to the broader higher education
community. In the dissemination and replication, the study will help broaden the
participation of underrepresented groups in STEM education and the
professoriate.