* 0823481
* Collaborative Research: A New Perspective on the Driving Forces of Controversial Middle Triassic Cyclostratigraphy: a Rock Magnetic Approach
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Linda Hinnov, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 09/30/2012
* USD 71,035.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project addresses an
ongoing multidisciplinary debate concerning the cyclostratigraphy of the Middle
Triassic Latemar platform Dolomites, Italy. The more than 600 meter-scale
shallow-marine carbonate cycles of the Latemar were originally interpreted as
the products of astronomically driven, 20,000 year sea-level oscillations.
Radioisotope dating of ash-beds within the platform subsequently indicated that
the individual cycles must have formed much faster, in 2,000 to 4,000 years, or
even less. This inter-calibration discrepancy constitutes the so-called "Latemar
controversy." With high-precision geochronology now available, the challenge is
to find a reasonable explanation for the origin of the strongly cyclical Latemar
facies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior research focused exclusively on facies
analysis, and the role of sea level change in cycle formation. This project
applies rock magnetic techniques to investigate a more comprehensive range of
environmental factors (e.g., aeolian processes) that could have been involved in
and/or influenced depositional cyclicity. A pilot study using magnetic
measurements of magnetic susceptibility, anhysteretic remanent magnetism and
saturation isothermal remanent magnetization of 200 samples from a 40-m transect
of the Latemar succession reveals a coherent signal indicating magnetic mineral
concentration variations in tune with the cycles. The project collects rock
magnetic data at high resolution through the main exposure of the 500 m thick
Latemar succession, for a new and objective characterization and thorough
sampling of the succession's short and long term cyclicity. This work also
expands an existing magnetic polarity stratigraphy database to a transect at a
new location in the platform, to help resolve conflicting bio-
magnetostratigraphies of the Middle Triassic
Dolomites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Resolution of the Latemar controversy is
important. The short radioisotope timescale implies accumulation rates of
subaerial caliche and massive tepee-zone cementation that are orders of
magnitude higher than known from Quaternary
analogs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Addressing the Latemar controversy contributes to
the International Commission on Stratigraphy global initiative to develop an
Astronomical Time Scale (ATS) for the Mesozoic Era. The only major gap in
coverage for the Triassic Period includes the stratigraphic interval occupied by
the Latemar platform; it is important to confirm or reject the role of
astronomical forcing in the formation of the Latemar cycles. This project brings
together three universities, including one in Italy near the field area.