* 0823541
* Collaborative Research: P2C2--Continental Response to Abrupt Climate Change Post 70 ka: An Integrated Isotopic and Trace Element Study of Sierra Nevada Speleothems
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Warren Sharp, Berkeley Geochronology Center
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 08/31/2012
* USD 61,555.00

Funding is provided to develop precisely dated, high-resolution speleothem-based
records of climate change in the Sierra Nevada. The researchers are testing two
hypotheses: (1) Sierra speleothems were precipitated in isotopic and geochemical
equilibrium with drip waters, and thus archive short-lived changes in regional
precipitation, temperature, and vegetation density; and (2) shifts in the
position of the polar jet stream and associated winter storm tracks over mid-
latitude western North America, forced by large-scale reorganization of the
climate system, are archived in Sierra speleothem isotopic and geochemical
compositions.

To test these hypotheses, the researchers will: 1) complete in situ measurements
of surface, soil and cave conditions; 2) analyze the isotopic and trace element
contents in modern drip and source waters and recent calcite precipitates to
define the natural intra- and inter-cave variability in drip-waters and
speleothem calcites and to evaluate the presence of isotopic and trace element
equilibrium precipitation of speleothem calcite; and 3) develop precisely dated
(U-series with better than 2% precision) geochemical and isotopic time series
(minimally multi-decadal-resolution) for stalagmites from three caves.

The broader impacts involve improved understanding of the sensitivity of winter
storm tracks and mean annual precipitation levels in the mid-latitudes of
western North America to changes in northern high-latitude conditions with
warming atmospheric temperatures. The project also helps support two graduate
students involved with the research.