* 0823950
* Wireless Passive Ceramic MEMS Sensors for High Temperature Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Linan An, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2012
* USD 299,826.00

Wireless Passive Ceramic MEMS Sensors for High-Temperature
Applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective:&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
research is to develop accurate and robust wireless passive high-temperature
microsensors for in situ measurement of temperature and pressure inside turbine
engines for power generation and aircraft propulsion systems. The approach is to
investigate two types of sensors using the recently-developed multifunctional
polymer-derived ceramics (PDCs). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merits:&lt;br/&gt;Research on PDCs has revealed that PDCs possess outstanding
multifunctionality including excellent thermo-electrical properties at high
temperatures (up to 1500oC) thus providing direct transduction mechanisms for
design and fabrication of high-temperature sensors. In order to sense the
temperature and pressure wirelessly with high accuracy, high-Q microwave
resonators sensitive to either temperature or pressure are necessary.
Evanescent-mode resonators will be developed to measure the pressure while
dielectric resonators will be used to measure the temperature.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will
advance the sensor technologies beyond the current state by pushing the frontier
of both materials science and microwave engineering and effectively combining
these two interdisciplinary fields. This work can substantially benefit the
turbine industries and their customers by providing sensing technology for
potential performance improvement. Ultimately, the increased efficiency of using
energy resulting from this proposed work can greatly help overcome the energy
crisis that human beings are facing now and will have long-term effects on how
to effectively utilize energy sources. This program also integrates research
with education by training students in interdisciplinary areas and providing
hands-on experience for K-12 students and underrepresented groups through the
Orlando Science Center education program and Diversity and Minority Engineering
Programs.&lt;br/&gt;