* 0823416
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Caste, Cooperation, and Irrigation Management in the Western Ghats, Tamil Nadu
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2010
* Peter Richerson, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 02/28/2010
* USD 12,222.00

Research, particularly in economics, suggests that ethnic diversity can inhibit
a society's capacity to provide public goods and services. However, most of this
research is based on cross-cultural survey data, and fails to include primary
ethnography or detailed accounts of daily cooperation. To solve this problem,
graduate student, Timothy M. Waring, under the direction of Dr. Richard
Mcelreath and Dr. Peter J. Richerson, has designed a new hybrid research
methodology. It blends traditional ethnography with new experimental economic
games, allowing him to test cross-cultural hypotheses without sacrificing
ethnographic detail. Waring will investigate whether the social boundaries found
in diverse societies damage public goods through an intensive study of
cooperative irrigation practices in villages of the Palani Hills of Tamil Nadu,
India.

To answer this question, Waring will utilize caste identity as a unique type of
cultural and ethnic diversity that has significant impact on social and economic
relations. Focusing on the traditional village governance systems that manage
local justice and irrigation, he will undertake qualitative ethnographic
research, including participant observation, focal individual follows, and
targeted focus groups. Next, a sample of farmers from six villages, stratified
by caste, will be interviewed on personal identity, caste interactions,
irrigation, and demographic variables. A subset of these survey participants
will be selected for voluntary participation in two specially tailored economic
experiments, the dictator game and the public goods game. These experiments will
provide additional, quantitative measures of the effect of caste identity on
cooperation and resource sharing, and will be analyzed using multivariate
statistical techniques.

This research will provide needed insight into how individuals in multi-ethnic
societies interact over common resources. For the Indian case, a detailed
understanding of the functioning of multi-caste cooperative irrigation
management may help to avoid future resource conflicts, such as those that have
fueled regional violence. More generally, this research linkage of ethnographic
and experimental data will enrich theoretical and practical understanding of the
role ethnic boundaries play in development and conflict wherever they occur. The
research also will contribute to the education of a graduate student.