* 0823027
* SBIR Phase II:  Automated culture and differentiation of human Embryonic Stem Cells
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2008,03/31/2011
* Veit Bergendahl, Stem Cell Products Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 03/31/2011
* USD 616,000.00

This SBIR Phase II research is focused on methods to utilize blood precursor
cells derived from human embryonic stem (HES) cells. The project uses a new
defined differentiation system which allows automation and scale-up production
of this important cells. There is a significant demand for these cells from
research and drug discovery. Increased availability and batch-to-batch
reproducibility of HES cell-derived blood cells, resulting from the defined
genetic background of the starting material and this standardized, automated
culture system, make this technology invaluable model systems for basic research
and drug development. Based on the automated pilot system for handling and
scale-up production of HES cells developed in phase I of this SBIR project we
will transfer our current culturing protocols into robust automated production
procedures to provide a reproducible quality of CD34 positive cells

The broader impacts of this research will be improving the process of drug
discovery and development and in the long term by providing revolutionary new
applications for medical treatment to improve public health. Nearly 98% of a
multi-million dollar stem cell market is currently consumed by blood and immune
system treatments. We anticipate that the proposed research will lead to the
faster integration of HES cell biology into biomedical research. It will help to
provide a variety of other blood cell types in quantities required for basic
research, drug development, high throughput screening, biochemical
characterization and potential medical treatment of blood related disease.

