* 0823506
* SGER: Neural correlates of action videogame training: An exploratory fMRI study
* SBE,SBE
* 01/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Giorgio Ganis, Massachusetts General Hospital
* Standard Grant
* Joan Straumanis
* 06/30/2010
* USD 156,540.00

Vision is the dominant sensory modality that people use to interact with the
external environment and to learn about it. There is behavioral evidence that
even relatively short periods of training with action video games can improve
performance on some kinds of visual abilities, especially those that allow
people to analyze spatial relationships among objects in the environment. For
example, after action video game training, people are able to keep track of more
objects moving around in the visual world than they could before. This
exploratory research addresses three gaps in current understanding. First, the
full range of visual abilities that can be improved by action video game
training remains unknown. Second, it is not known whether such training could
improve learning speed itself during visual tasks, such as those that involve
predicting sequences of spatial locations. Third, little is known about the
brain changes that enable such improvements. The proposed research will measure
performance and brain activation in a group of participants (using functional
magnetic resonance imaging) on a battery of visual tasks before and after a two-
week action video game training period. The pattern of performance and brain
activation changes will reveal the specific visual and learning abilities and
brain networks that are modified by video game
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study will provide preliminary data
potentially leading to training-based applications that are important for
society. Specifically, the visuospatial abilities that can be improved after
action video game practice are used in a broad range of professions. For
instance, mathematicians, engineers, architects and many other individuals
routinely engaged in tasks that require performing complex mental spatial
transformations may benefit from action video game training. This research may
be eventually lead to developing effective training video games that maximally
take advantage of adult brain plasticity. Information about the precise neural
bases of these processes may also lead to innovative educational practices that
enhance learning abilities themselves, help people with visuospatial learning
disabilities, as in attention deficit disorder, or even to future
pharmacological methods to improve performance.