* 0823472
* Neuropeptide Hormone Processing during Ecdysis and Growth Control in Drosophila
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2008,08/31/2010
* Michael Bender, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 08/31/2010
* USD 138,653.00

Peptide and neuropeptide hormones are potent signaling molecules that act in all
animals to coordinate physiology, behavior, and development. Although new
genetic techniques have identified many genes encoding peptides that may
function as hormones, much remains to be discovered about how, when, and where
peptide hormones are produced and what biological functions they serve. This
project uses molecular genetic approaches in a simple model system, the fruitfly
(Drosophila melanogaster), to determine how peptide hormones involved in
regulating growth and developmental progression are produced by specialized
processing enzymes called SPCs. The research will determine the requirements for
SPC function in specific sets of neurons and will determine how processed
peptide hormones contribute to development, growth, and the maintenance of
normal glucose levels. Defects in peptide hormone signaling in humans lead to
diseases such as diabetes and cancer. Understanding of the basic molecular
mechanisms of peptide hormone production that results from this study will be of
broad relevance and may contribute to therapies for diseases that involve
defects in hormonal signaling. The project will also contribute to the
preparation of the next generation of scientists by instructing graduate and
undergraduate students in the use of cutting edge genetic and molecular
techniques to address important research questions.