* 0823380
* Long-Term Ecological Research at the H.J. Andrews Experimental Forest (LTER6)
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2008,10/31/2015
* Sherri Johnson, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 10/31/2015
* USD 6,437,263.00

The Andrews Forest is located in the western Cascade Mountains of Oregon, one of
six original Long-Term Ecological Research projects that began in 1980. It was
built on a long research history by the Forest Service and has a record of
ground-breaking science and application to forest management and conservation.
The terrain is mountainous and with strong environmental gradients. The forest
features tall, old-growth conifer stands and high plant biomass, as well as
younger, second-growth stands as the products of watershed level experiments.
Although no ecosystem response to climate change has yet been detected, it is
predicted to occur and regional signals are beginning to emerge. Downscaling
climate change predictions from global models to predict impacts at this level
is complicated by the complex terrain and forest structure. Computer models have
been developed to help predict how terrain and forest structure mediate regional
climate signals at local scales. Climate change may have direct affects on high
elevation ecosystems, but effects lower down may be mediated indirectly by
changes in the dynamics of organisms, insect outbreaks, fire, and consequent
effects on nutrient availability. A cyber-forest will be developed to provide
new data on air-shed dynamics to parallel the historic focus on water-shed
dynamics.

Western Cascade forests are highly valued for ecosystem services, including
timber, water, recreation, biodiversity and aesthetics. Because of their value
to society, there has been a long and intense debate about the management of the
resources as represented by this site. As a result, the investigators have
developed strong relationships with local interest groups, NGOs and resource
management agencies. These partnerships have led to significant technology
transfer and outreach. A K-12 schoolyard program has numerous educational
partners, while the new cyber-forest will contribute to new education and
outreach efforts.