* 0823319
* Innovative Activity and Organizational Choice of Entrepreneurial Firms
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Vojislav Maksimovic, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Quinetta Roberson
* 07/31/2012
* USD 349,259.00

When and why do entrepreneurial firms choose particular entry or exit
strategies? Why do some go to market independently while others form joint
ventures or merge with larger firms? What is the impact of these choices on
their profitability, growth and competitiveness? In this study, researchers will
compile information from a number of dispersed sources to examine these sorts of
questions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The design of the study emphasizes (i)
entrepreneurial firms' current core technological competencies and the relation
of these competencies to industry competitors', (ii) the relative importance of
patents, secrecy, and complementary assets, and (iii) industry life cycle stages
and capital availability. In addition to examining choices about entry
structures, the research team will examine how entrepreneurial growth and
profitability are related to these types of underlying conditions. In
particular, they will examine the importance of research, and the development of
that research, in determining the boundaries of the firm.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study involves complilation of three different
measures of innovative activity: patent activity, patent citations, and research
and development expenditures. It also involves use of new measures of
organizational relatedness. The resulting new and comprehensive data set will be
available as a research resource for subsequent researchers. This data set will
enable researchers to explore a number of questions related to innovative and
commercial activities of small entrepreneurial firms and large incumbents, both
public and private.