* 0823592
* SHINE Postdoc:  The Role of Coronal Mass Ejections in Reversal the Open Magnetic Flux of the Sun
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2008,05/31/2011
* Ofer Cohen, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Bellaire
* 05/31/2011
* USD 160,000.00

This project will support the postdoctoral research of Ofer Cohen at the
Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory. Dr. Cohen will investigate the role of
coronal mass ejections (CMEs) on the long-term evolution of the solar magnetic
field and the solar cycle. Since the detailed mechanism causing solar open field
reversal is unknown, the Principal Investigator (PI) will numerically test the
hypothesis that interchange reconnection of CMEs with the ambient open magnetic
flux can lead to the destruction of coronal holes and the reversal of the Sun's
open magnetic field. Using MHD simulations, Dr. Cohen and his team will
investigate how magnetic flux emerges through the solar surface and then is
transferred by CMEs to reconnect with, and to modify, the background magnetic
field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term evolution of the solar magnetic field
and the solar cycle are important for predicting space weather. Understanding
the behavior of CMEs and their propagation is also required in order to develop
predictive tools. The PI anticipates that this research on CMEs will shed light
on the long-term effect of CMEs on the solar magnetic field and on the effect of
the ambient field on CME propagation. This work addresses SHINE objectives to
understand the processes by which energy is produced by the Sun and by which
particles are accelerated in interplanetary space, as well as to study the
mechanisms by which fields and particles are transported to the Earth through
the inner heliosphere. The PI will undertake active modeling of the solar corona
and the space environment.