* 0823715
* Dynamics of Excitons and Biexcitons in Single-Walled Carbon Nanotube p-n Diodes
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2008,02/29/2012
* Ji Ung Lee, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Anupama Kaul
* 02/29/2012
* USD 295,214.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;Direct generation of multi-excitons from single
photon absorption events promises to revolutionize a broad category of devices.
The key intellectual merit of this research is to investigate the photophysics
and transport properties of excitons and biexcitons in carbon nanotubes as the
basis for investigating multi-exciton generation. This research will be carried
out in one of the most technologically important devices: the p-n diode. The
proposed research will develop structures consisting of many p-n diodes of
varying complexity along individual carbon nanotubes to allow simultaneous
investigation of multiple parameters. This will be accomplished by developing
state-of-the-art devices, novel carbon nanotube growth techniques, and
photoconductivity measurement techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact:&lt;br/&gt;Solar technology offers clean renewable energy that could play
an integral part of meeting current and future energy needs and helps to curtail
global warming. The broader impact of the proposed research could lead to higher
efficiency solar cells based on new physics that arise from quantum confinement.
An integral part of this research is to energize the next generation of
scientists and educate those who will inspire them. This will be accomplished
through several fronts. First, this research will offer K-12 teachers summer
research experience. For training the next generation, students from several
levels will have opportunities to learn that nanotechnology offers solutions to
meet future energy needs. This research will provide experience for high school,
undergraduate and graduate students who are under-represented in science.
Finally, the results from this research will be incorporated into undergraduate
and graduate courses.&lt;br/&gt;