* 0823131
* Collaborative Research: Pleistocene-Holocene Climate Variability of the Southern Appalachian Region, Southeastern U.S.
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Steven Driese, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 09/30/2013
* USD 61,058.00

The mid-Holocene warm period (MHWP) has recently received increased attention as
an analog for near-future climate conditions expected in response to global
warming. The lack of high-resolution paleoclimate proxy records for the interior
southeastern US region has forced climate modelers to make regional
interpretations based on better-known areas of North America. However, early and
rapid warming of the Gulf of Mexico may have strongly influenced climate in the
Southeastern US, resulting in significant regional climate differences. The
present study seeks improved understanding of the Pleistocene-Holocene
paleohydrological and paleoclimatic variability of the region, with special
focus on the onset time, duration, amplitude, and seasonality characteristics of
the MHWP and the terrestrial footprints of other climate events.

The objective of this research is to extract a semi-quantitative to
quantitative, high resolution, full-season paleoclimate history using multiple,
high-quality terrestrial climate proxies that preserve records differing in
temporal resolution and in the annual seasons to which they are particularly
sensitive. The researchers will analyze three terrestrial archives from seven
locations, each preserving a record of climate with different, but
complementary, temporal resolution: speleothems; lake sediments; and lacustrine
and floodplain deposits. Localities for each type of record have been identified
and preliminary studies demonstrate the feasibility of this approach.

The results of this study will constrain regional characteristics of the climate
system in the interior SE US, especially the hydrologically-sensitive, populated
Tennessee River Valley. The research will yield insights into the hydrological
impact of climate changes, including meltwater pulses on floodplain development
and evolution. The Southeastern US is also a critical area for investigating
human-climate interaction over long time scales. Archaeological sites in the
Southeast reveal multiple periods of cultural transition and innovation,
including evidence for early cultivated plants during the MHWP. Research results
will provide an essential linkage between context and association of past
environmental conditions with Native American occupation and cultural
transformation. Paleo-climate/-environmental research projects in the
investigators' laboratories have been shared, through class activities and
independent research projects, with K-12 students and teachers through several
outreach programs, including an NSF GK-12 grant to improve Earth science
education in rural middle schools in Tennessee. The investigators will involve
school teachers in field and lab work for this research, and will continue to
develop hands-on projects based on various aspects of the research proposed
here.