* 0823115
* STTR Phase II:  Multi-Wall Carbon Nanotubes Inclusion for Thermal Conductivity Enhancement of  Microencapsulated Phase  Change Material Slurry
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2010
* Curt Thies, Thies Technology
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2010
* USD 499,783.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II project seeks to
investigate the commercial feasibility of new processes capable of incorporating
phase change materials (PCMs) and multi-wall carbon nanotubes (MWCNT) into
micro- and nano-capsules thereby producing particles with novel thermal and
fluid properties. The primary objective is to take advantage of MWCNT
exceptional thermal properties to enhance the thermal performance
nano/microencapsulated phase change material (N/MPCM) slurry. Thermally enhanced
N/MPCM slurries can provide palpable benefits in the thermal management of
commercial and industrial processes and products, from microelectronics devices
to large industrial facilities, by providing considerable additional heat
capacity and better heat transfer performance. The combined effect of
nano/microencapsulated MWCNTs and phase change materials present a unique
opportunity to improve the performance of heat transfer fluids beyond current
levels. A series of experiments will be carried out to quantify the degree
durability, heat transfer enhancements in laminar and turbulent conditions, and
in typical heat exchangers.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will have a lasting
impact on the entire heat transfer industry. Direct impacts include lower flow
rates, lower pressure drop, smaller heat transfer area and improved heat
transfer effectiveness. The project will also elucidate how the new fluid
performs in commercially available heat exchangers. The project will also
provide unique educational opportunities to undergraduate and graduate students.
The success of the project will broaden scientific and technological
understanding of enhanced heat transfer fluids in industry as well as in
academia. Indirect impacts include enhanced living standard and improved
competitiveness. Successful commercialization of the proposed concept will find
applications in biomedical, aerospace, homeland security, and energy generation.