* 0823396
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Taking Measure of Conversion Therapy Outcomes
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2010
* Thomas Waidzunas, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Kelly A. Joyce
* 07/31/2010
* USD 8,000.00

This dissertation research, supported by the Science, Technology &amp; Society
program at NSF, will examine how scientific evidence and credibility have been
interpreted in the debate over conversion therapies. This project uses
innovative research techniques and interpretive approaches to identify
"hierarchies of evidence" within debates over reparative therapies, the factors
shaping these hierarchies, and the consequences for diagnostic technologies and
subjectivities. This research will employ interviews with scientists and other
key actors in this debate over treatment efficacy in the United States from the
1950s to the present. Additional data will come from observation at scientific
conferences and content analyses of scientific literature on this issue. To more
clearly understand how contingencies have shaped evidence hierarchies, the work
employs a comparison between a "pathology era" (1950-1973) of medicalization and
a "normal era" (1973-present) following de-medicalization. Drawing on
interdisciplinary literature in science and technology studies (STS), the
sociology of social movements, and sexuality studies, the project will
historicize these research practices by carefully examining the role of various
influences on the credibility of evidence. Using a co-construction analytical
approach, the research will show how diagnostic technologies and subjectivities
have been mutually shaped in the process of research. Most notably, the work
will identify and interpret the deployment of "truthing" technologies. Through
this historical comparison, the research will show how professional struggles
and political and religious activism have affected the credibility of truthing
techniques relative to self-reports. This dissertation research stands to make
important contributions to STS literature by examining a debate that is often
coded as purely ideological, but that has significant connections to debates
within science and corresponding technical developments.