* 0823359
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvment Grant: Metrics and Democratization: The Role of Monitoring Technologies in Democratic Governance Reform in El Salvador
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2008,02/28/2011
* Jason Cross, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 02/28/2011
* USD 13,100.00

Graduate student Jason Cross, supervised by Dr. William M. O'Barr will undertake
research on the role of monitoring technologies, such as monitoring and
evaluation procedures, in the implementation of democratic governance reforms.
Although governments, non-governmental organizations (NGOs), and foreign-aid
agencies routinely use monitoring technologies to assess institutional reform,
little attention has been paid to the effects of the monitoring practices
themselves on the social process of democratic governance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be carried in El Salvador. The
researcher will focus on agencies and NGOs that have been central in the design
and implementation of democratic reforms, and local political actors in three
municipalities undergoing reform. The research objectives are to examine the
making, use, and meaning of monitoring technologies for diverse participants in
democratic governance, in order to understand how these technologies affect
local political culture and facilitate the globalization of specific forms of
governance. Therefore, the researcher will use ethnographic, historical and
legal methods to conduct a qualitative analysis of the construction,
circulation, and use of monitoring technologies in programs addressing citizen
participation, accountability, and rule of law.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Examining
closely the legacy of democratization in El Salvador is important because the
country often serves as a model for post-conflict democratization and as a
laboratory for decentralization policies with global reach. This study will
identify ways in which global discourses of governance take root and are adapted
to particular locales with diverse notions of what democracy is, or can be.
Additionally, it will provide an in-depth and systematic examination of how
legal and technological governance practices emerge together and depend on each
other for their reliability and efficacy, as they rework social relations,
historical legacies and desired futures. The research also will contribute to
the education of a social scientist.