* 0823161
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Reflection, Refraction, and Rejection: Copper Smelting Heritage and the Execution of Environmental Policy
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2009
* Terry Reynolds, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Gorman
* 07/31/2009
* USD 7,910.00

Copper smelting provides an ideal venue in which to explore the conflict between
environmental remediation and industrial-site historic documentation and
preservation. Copper smelters were key technological components in the
communication and electrification revolutions, but they have also been
responsible for some of the largest and most expensive Superfund clean-ups since
the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act was
passed in 1980. After exploring the environmental and technological histories of
copper smelting in the United States for historical context, this project funded
by the Science, Technology, & Society Program uses a comparative study of
several historic copper smelting sites to shed light on the conflict between
environmental remediation and historic preservation. This conflict generally
results in conflicting treatment recommendations and the loss of key elements of
the nation's industrial heritage.

This project's intellectual merit derives from its focus on comparative heritage
and environmental policy implementation issues at multiple sites for the
operation of an industrial process that has produced both historic value and
contamination. While previous scholars have studied the general economic,
mining, social, and environmental aspects of the copper industry's history, very
few have placed their studies in the context of the destruction of significant
elements of the nation's industrial heritage (in violation of the National
Historic Preservation Act of 1966) or conflict with environmental regulation.
This project seeks to understand the complex relationships between heritage
interests and environmental regulation and the factors that influence the
outcome when the two collide.

The project's broader impacts are significant. First, the project is
interdisciplinary in that it studies how the results of not one, but multiple
disciplines interact when conflict occurs between Federal mandates in the areas
of heritage preservation and environmental remediation. Understanding this
conflict has broad implications for future environmental remediation projects at
significant industrial heritage sites. Second, the project bridges the gap
between academic studies and professional practice in the public realm.
Essentially, it seeks to use the academic study of the history of technology and
environmental policy/history, as a foundation for understanding and analyzing
how two key areas of public concern -- heritage preservation and environmental
remediation -- have come into conflict and been addressed in multiple locations
and, perhaps, how the conflict between heritage and the environment could be
better addressed in the future.