* 0823351
* The Drive for Purity:  The Emergence of an American Icon
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Kathy Cooke, Quinnipiac University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2011
* USD 122,778.00

Ideas about purity appeared with exceptional force in the United States as
scientific and public health movements emphasized pure water, milk, and food to
fight disease. This award will support the second stage of a research project on
the "drive for purity" in late nineteenth and early twentieth century American
culture. The first stage examined the development of the cultural value of
purity in ideas about breeding, including agricultural and human, or eugenic,
realms. In the second stage, the public health origins of the movement are
examined with a focus on growing attention to nature and environment, and
agricultural breeding elements. After completing the second stage with support
of the grant, the researcher will seek other support to embark on the third
stage of the project, a study of the development of purity in religion through
Christian fundamentalism, the social purity movement aimed at containing human
sexuality, and mass culture. These three stages of research will culminate in a
scholarly book tentatively titled "The Drive for Purity: The Emergence of an
American Icon."

Research for the second part of the project will involve visits to repositories
of unpublished government documents and correspondence at the National Archives;
Library of Congress; state historical societies in Massachusetts, Rhode Island,
and Colorado; and university special collections at Yale University and the
University of Wisconsin. The researcher will also access digitized special
collections and published primary source documents. She has examined the
literature and selected sites and sources that will contribute to a better
understanding of the development of the cultural value of purity and its use in
public health, environmental, and agricultural movements. The research will
reveal the growth, development, and modern scientific manifestation of purity as
an extraordinarily powerful scientific idea in late nineteenth and early
twentieth century America.

The reinterpretation offered by this project, especially through its focus on
scientific elements of the "drive for purity," will reveal a new way to look at
science, society, and religion. Although its roots sink deeply into scientific
norms they spread into cultural areas including religion, and particularly
Christian fundamentalism. The reinterpretation may have implications for
understanding of the Cold War, immigration policies, the emergence of the
Christian right and its relationship to mainstream science, and of the
biotechnical revolution. It will have an impact on students from primary school
to college who will learn more about the research process while gaining insights
into the linkages between science and society past and present. To facilitate
that impact, the research will develop research training and learning materials,
including new seminar courses, that will be available to students from primary
school to college, including underrepresented groups, and will publicize and
disseminate the research through presentations, lectures, museums, and media
contacts.