* 0823401
* Grant for Collaborative Research: Shaping Evolutionary Biology in Berkeley's Museum of Vertebrate Zoology
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Elihu Gerson, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 09/30/2012
* USD 332,841.00

This is a collaborative research project on the shaping of ecological and
evolutionary biology at Berkeley's Museum of Vertebrate Zoology. The project
examines the organizational structures and theoretical commitments guiding MVZ's
development across the 20th century. It aims to show how MVZ's continuity in
program provided a broad platform for technical and institutional change.
Initiated by its first director, Joseph Grinnell, and guided by concerns about
ongoing changes in native fauna and their environment, MVZ's research on
vertebrates was integrated from the start with the practice of collecting
specimens with diverse associated data. MVZ built on Grinnell's vision to
achieve special strengths in biodiversity informatics and long-term comparative
bio-geographical, ecological, and evolutionary studies, while bringing new
concerns and techniques on board. The museum thus provides a window into the
reconfiguration of natural history over a century of profound change. The
project documents, analyzes, and makes public MVZ's history from the Grinnell
era forward. It characterizes the museum as an organization initially built
around a single research program. It then shows how its theories, descriptions,
and procedures proved both robust and flexible as circumstances changed. The
project treats the museum as a system of arrangements for studying the changing
spatial distributions of populations, evolution at the species and subspecies
level, and the relation of species to their varying
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses cutting-edge themes in
the history, philosophy, and sociology of science, as well as contemporary
biology, integrating organizational considerations with theory construction with
large-scale historical change. MVZ offers a window onto the simultaneous
intellectual, organizational, and material transformations in twentieth-century
American biology that are hard to grasp in the terms of a single discipline. It
provides a way to track some of the complexities of evolutionary and ecological
science with a high level of detail at a manageable scale. The research team's
core consists of an historian, a philosopher, a biologist, and a sociologist
with each having recognized expertise in the respective area of study of the
biological sciences. The team also includes a research associate, the MVZ
archivist, and graduate and undergraduate students, many of whom have worked on
early stages of the project. The primary methodology is archival research in MVZ
and other collections, with the MVZ's directors and curators forming the
backbone of the account. Other sources will also be integrated. The project will
produce a book, multiple scholarly articles, and a web
exhibit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will disseminate its research results
through print and web publication, and through conference presentations. It will
also do so by effectively leveraging MVZ's centennial celebration. In addition
to contributing to the research element of the project, the team members will
promotes teaching, training, and learning at the graduate and undergraduate
levels. Finally, the results of this project will serve to make MVZ into an
unmatched site for reflection on the significance of the past for the present
and future of university-based natural history museums. It will do so by showing
MVZ to be a place where professionals and amateurs, researchers and students,
and academic scientists and conservationists interacted. It will reveal
connections among the vision of the museum's scientific personnel and the
practices of MVZ students and staff, new ways of thinking in evolutionary
biology, and concerns about disappearing native fauna shared among scientists,
conservationists, hobbyists, policymakers, and other
actors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funds for this project were provided by a joint
venture of the BIO and SBE directorates known as "Impacts of Biology on
Society," which is administered via the STS program.