* 0823549
* Collaborative Research: Radiocarbon content of the Southwest Pacific and Southern Ocean waters in the Holocene and late Quaternary
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* Thomas Guilderson, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 08/31/2014
* USD 259,992.00

ABSTRACT (Sikes/Guilderson 0823487/0823549)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit: Because changes in ocean circulation have profoundly influenced climate
in the past, this research addressed the fundamental role that ocean circulation
plays in the regulation of CO2. The work uses radiocarbon in foraminifera tests
deposited in sediments off New Zealand to examine how global ocean circulation
affects the partitioning of the greenhouse gas CO2 between the ocean and
atmosphere. This research has two primary goals: (1) to reconstruct the
radiocarbon signature of the glacial southern Pacific to confirm or refute the
presence of a deep water mass old enough to account for the glacial?interglacial
changes in atmospheric CO2 and (2) to produce a high resolution record of
radiocarbon at various intervals the time of deglaciation to provide a Southern
Hemisphere perspective which is missing from global CO2 and radiocarbon
budgets.&lt;br/&gt; These issues can be addressed because ocean circulation can
be traced with radiocarbon (14C) because there is a quantifiable difference
between the 14C content of atmospheric CO2 gas and that in the ocean where it
exists in the form of dissolved carbonate and bicarbonate, This is because there
is an equilibrium balance between 14C in the atmosphere and the radioactive
decay of 14C in isolated water masses during thermohaline circulation. The
research takes advantage of the precise stratigraphic control afforded by
volcanic ask layers in cored off-shore sediments from different water depths.
Planktonic and benthic foraminiferal pairs will be used to construct vertical
profiles of radiocarbon at different depths in the ocean and a time series of
set of oxygen isotope data will be collected to track the evolution of changes
in shallow waters (600?2500 m) and deep waters (600-4300m) through the time of
the last period of deglaciation (17,500 to 9,500 years ago.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts Collaborations among United States and New
Zealand scientists represent significant investment outreach with international
colleagues by US investigators addressing the criteria of enhancing
infrastructure for research. The team includes a young investigator with no
prior NSF funding and the exchange of a graduate student among the
investigators' institutions, addressing criteria for advancing training and
learning.&lt;br/&gt;