* 0823576
* Processing Orthographic Structure:  Associations between Print and Fingerspelling
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,02/29/2012
* Karen Emmorey, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Maling
* 02/29/2012
* USD 389,998.00

For over a century educators and researchers have been trying to determine how
profoundly deaf children learn to read. Deaf children are in the unique position
of learning to read and write a language that they do not speak and cannot hear.
Unlike people who can hear, deaf people experience English orthography in two
forms: as printed text and as fingerspelling, in which each alphabetic letter is
represented by a distinct hand configuration.

This project investigates one possible route that deaf readers may utilize to
develop mappings between letters and sounds: the fingerspelling system of
American Sign Language (ASL). By identifying the similarities and differences
between reading print and "reading" fingerspelling, one can identify how
fingerspelling might be most effectively used in reading instruction. Another
aim of the project is to use functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) to
investigate the brain areas that support the reading of print and fingerspelling
by deaf readers. Of particular interest is whether the so-called "Visual Word
Form Area" is activated for fingerspelling and whether deaf readers use the same
neural circuits for reading as people who can hear. This project will compare
the brain areas that are activated when reading words for deaf adults, for
hearing adults who do not know ASL, and for hearing people who are bilingual in
ASL and English. Finally, a parallel aim of the project is to increase the
representation of deaf people in science by including deaf research assistants
on the project and providing an accessible environment for deaf students to gain
research experience.