* 0823763
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Post-Hurricane Participatory GIS Mapping along the Gulf Coast to Assess Community Preparedness and Social Network Connection
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2011
* Mark Nichter, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 02/28/2011
* USD 15,000.00

University of Arizona graduate student Ben McMahan, supervised by Dr. Mark
Nichter and Dr. Diane Austin, will undertake research on patterns of
communication and networks of mutual post-disaster assistance in two localities
on the U.S. gulf coast, one in Louisiana and one in Texas. Both regions were
affected by severe acute hurricane events in 2005. The regions also experience
chronic risks associated with moderate seasonal storms and long term coastal
erosion and environmental degradation. The hurricanes highlighted gaps in
national emergency management plans, across multiple scales and contexts.
However, while national preparedness capacity is a critical component of
effective management, the role that locally and regionally embedded social
networks play in community preparedness is also significant, but poorly
understood. This project is directed towards filling that
gap.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher will combine ethnography and
participant observation with participatory GIS mapping and social network
analysis to investigate local responses to perceived environmental and climatic
risks, as well as how these perceptions cohere or divide local and regional
social groupings. The data will address the role that social networks play in
mitigating immediate and long-term impacts of disruptions. The data also will
permit examination of how network connectivity and historical ties to a
community's social and physical landscape affect level of perceived risk and
responses to disaster events and the chronic conditions that precede acute
crises. Finally, the research will pioneer an integrative methodology that
incorporates participatory mapping and social network analyses into qualaitative
research, drawing on the strength of the confluence of ethnographic,
participatory spatial, and social network data to strengthen understanding of
how residents of regions facing endemic risks mobilize around these
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is important in the contribution it
will make to theorizing new uses of social network analysis across scales in
dynamic situations; to improving national disaster preparedness; and to
furthering the education of a graduate student.