* 0823177
* Conservation, Sustainability, and Poverty Alleviation in the Himalayan Region: Do Participatory Environmental Policies Work?
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,03/31/2014
* Joshua Muldavin, Sarah Lawrence College
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 03/31/2014
* USD 252,200.00

The goal of this research project is to assess and improve environmental policy
in practical and politically feasible ways, consistent with broad policy goals
of sustainable resource management, biodiversity conservation and poverty
alleviation. This is to be done by focusing on participatory policies and
projects, Community-Based Natural Resource Management (CBNRM) and other
inclusionary policy processes in China, India, and Nepal. A secondary goal is to
provide a methodology for understanding and evaluating environmental policy in
the particular circumstances of these three countries, which will then be
replicable elsewhere. The methodology involves a set of nested investigations
from international, national to local scales. These include: 1) Data collection
of policy outcomes at the project and local level, including quantitative survey
work and participatory mapping with rural civil society. Paired comparisons of
communities will be made between those included in internationally-funded
participatory CBNRM programs, and those immediately outside the boundaries of
project areas; 2) Policy analysis at the national level where political agendas
involve a wide variety of actors and interests, including established
bureaucratic structures and practices, strategic considerations, ethnic politics
and issues of control of populations in the name of environmental conservation;
3) Analysis of the practice of policy negotiation at the international-national
interface where ideas of participation and inclusionary policies meet national
agendas; 4) Outlines of regional political ecologies that shape society-
environment relations, including analysis of local institutions that mediate
access to natural resources, settlement history, the different values attributed
to the range of natural resources by various and contending potential users, and
how these are politically represented; and finally 5) Dissemination involving
participation and policy engagement at the local level, and seminars at the
regional level at international centers. A comprehensive regional seminar will
be organized at project conclusion with participants from all scales. In
addition to the provision of training materials (simulation exercises, visual
material, case studies and seminars) the project will provide a series of
publications for public dissemination including policy working papers, academic
papers, and a book with simultaneous publication in Asia and the
West.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project rests on an
innovative research methodology at different scales combining quantitative and
qualitative data with more political and discursive methods; on the claim that
it is the first time that this broad analytical vision is being attempted in the
region; and on the careful attention paid to tangible as opposed to rhetorical
outcomes of environmental policy. The broader impacts of the project are clearer
insights of opportunities and constraints for all members of international and
national negotiating teams in this field; inputs into a critical review of where
the participatory conservation movement is going in "hotspot" countries and the
circumstances which encourage or impede successful outcomes; an analytically
rigorous input into the debate over participatory versus exclusionary
conservation approaches; and an analysis of the trade-offs between
participation, poverty reduction and specific conservation goals. The audiences
include not only international policy makers, national governments and policy
makers, local project and policy implementers, but also civil society
organizations associated at one or more scales.