* 0823095
* SBIR Phase II:   Autonomous Sensor Network to Manage West Nile Virus Epidemics
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2008,05/31/2013
* Agenor Mafra-Neto, ISCA TECHNOLOGIES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 05/31/2013
* USD 880,927.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II proposal seeks to
develop an automated sensory system (AMSS) for gathering and processing of
mosquitoes vectors of West-Nile-Virus-Fever (WNV). AMSS captures mosquitoes,
macerates them with solvents, process the fluid using a sensory array, relays
wirelessly the information to a centralized internet hub where data is hosted,
managed, reports created and distributed. There are four main parts to the
proposed AMSS: 1) Design and development of the robotic device that sucks and
crushes the insect; 2) Design and development of the sensor array; 3)
Development of methods to determine presence of WNV in the circulatory fluids of
the insects; 4) Automated wireless system for transmitting data. The AMSS can
also be decoupled from the mosquito-trap providing the user with a handheld-
sensing-system to detect WNV in samples derived from vectors (e.g. mosquitoes)
or hosts (e.g. humans, vertebrates in general). The proposed system can be
potentially expanded for detecting other harmful pathogens and could be used by
homeland security and public health agencies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful detection of the WNV-pathogen at a very early stage of its occurrence
is of significant benefit to public health agencies and may allow for diversion
of future epidemics. Early detection is the only form of early epidemic
prevention. This project describes a disruptive concept to fill an enormous gap
in vector-management, which now lacks technologies for speedy and effective data
collection. WNV-detection-instruments are slow, expensive, bulky, require human
interference and laboratory conditions with plenty of consumables and energy,
and not amenable to unattended autonomous operation. Current detection
procedures invariably fail to detect introduced pathogens before disease or
epidemics become widespread. Vector-control personnel and epidemiologists rely
on manual time consuming mosquito- vector management methods that often come too
late to prevent epidemics and require expensive remedial actions, such as
blanket spraying of insecticides on entire regions. Such mosquito management is
inefficient, ecologically harmful and conducive to pesticide resistance. The
proposed AMSS system will have significant impact in the detection of WNV-
pathogens market, evaluated at $500M/yr. This will foster preventative rather
than crisis or partially effective, remedial control actions. Implications can
be made that this vector and disease management may be useful for bio-detection
in the homeland-security, health-care, agroenvironmental field and food-safety
markets, evaluated at $1.3B/yr. &lt;br/&gt;