* 0823313
* Machine learning techniques to model the impact of relational communication on distributed team effectiveness
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Stacey Connaughton, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Quinetta Roberson
* 08/31/2012
* USD 409,881.00

Social scientists are anxious to understand the relational aspects of
distributed teams, but examination of interpersonal communication in such
settings has been limited by the statistical techniques available for analysis.
This project exploits recent advances in the field of machine learning to study
relational communication flow in distributed or virtual groups, analyze the
impact of communicationon effectiveness, and, as a result, to advance
understanding of the complex interdependencies among virtual-group members. The
PIs posit that it is the dependencies among team members that hold the key to
understanding the processes that impact the success (or failure) of distributed
teams.

The project involves a two-step approach to theory formation and refinement,
combining large-scale observational data and experimental studies. The research
team will first extract and analyze publicly available data from open-source
software development projects to develop models of effectiveness based on
relational patterns of communication among members. They will use the results of
this analysis to develop targeted hypotheses for empirical evaluation and
conduct laboratory experiments testing these.

The results of this project should provide a more comprehensive understanding of
interpersonal communication and performance of virtual groups, including
insights into the dependencies among group members and the influence of these
dependencies on both communication and effectiveness. These results should have
practical implications. Further, the project will modify and extend state-of-
the-art machine learning tools in a way that should be useful for other social
science investigations.

