* 0823393
* An Open and Scalable Croquet-Based Collaboration Infrastructure for Support of 3-D Simulation-Based Research and Education
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2008,11/30/2009
* Julian Lombardi, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Susan J. Winter
* 11/30/2009
* USD 200,000.00

Research communities are increasingly turning to 3-D virtual world technologies
as a means of supporting collaborative, simulation-based scientific discovery
and education. The commercially available technologies, however, have adopted
server-based architectural approaches to virtual world creation and deployment.
These approaches significantly limit the capacity of scientific virtual
organizations to meet their 3-D modeling, dynamic simulation, and real-time
collaboration needs in a scalable fashion. This proposal adopts a unique
approach to the challenges associated with the rapid creation and broad
deployment of large scale interconnected 3-D virtual worlds and workspaces for
research and education. Investigators will leverage the peer-to-peer
communications protocols of the Croquet software development architecture to
build a reference implementation of a peer-based open source 3-D browser /
virtual world authoring toolkit. This toolkit will enable the rapid ad hoc
creation of new virtual workspaces and support multi-site meetings among
distributed research teams whose members will enjoy a sense of shared presence,
a basis for non-verbal communication, a capacity for 3-D model sharing, along
with collaborative document sharing and editing and networked telephony. The
reference implementation will also provide a robust platform for modular
interface development and a usable basis for further exploration in the area of
scalable distributed collaboration and establish a basis for future research on:
(1) optimal methods of supporting the ad hoc synchronous communication and
collaboration needs of large numbers of researchers, educators, and students;
and (2) ways of achieving large-scale, cost efficient proliferation of new
interconnected and deeply capable virtual workspaces in support of research,
education, and science outreach. Investigators will make the reference
implementation freely available within the open source to stimulate the
development and dissemination of shared cyberenvironments for the staging,
observation and evaluation of collaborative decision-making, problem finding,
and problem solving among members of distributed virtual organizations and
educational communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;