* 0823675
* Collaborative Research: Cenozoic Tectonics and Surface Uplift in North-Central Tibet
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2008,01/31/2011
* Bradley Ritts, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 01/31/2011
* USD 35,659.00

The collision between India and Asia has forcefully raised the Tibetan plateau,
the most extensive region of elevated topography and thick crust on the Earth's
surface. The uplift of the plateau may also have played a major role in
controlling global climate during Cenozic time. Understanding the uplift history
of the Tibetan plateau is one of the main challenges in earth sciences today.
Despite more than three decades of active research, there is little consensus
regarding the timing of plateau uplift and the tectonic processes by which the
plateau was raised. In this collaborative study, researchers from the University
of California at Santa Cruz and Indiana University are carrying out an
integrated research program combining paleomagnetism (magnetostratigraphy and
tectonics), sedimentology (facies descriptions, and paleocurrent and provenance
studies), isotopoic dating, and paleoaltimetry (basalt vesicularity and oxygen
isotopes) in a series of three latitudinally spaced basins in North-Central
Tibet. The primary goals are to reconstruct the Paleogene tectonic history of
north central Tibet, assess the relative contribution of upper crustal processes
to plateau growth and maintenance, and assess the relative roles of tectonic
models that predict early (e.g., approximately 40 million years ago) gradual
uplift and those that predict more recent (less than 15 million years ago)
abrupt uplift. To achieve these goals, lithostratigraphy and depositional
environments in each basin are being compared using standard basin-analysis
techniques to characterize the tectonic setting of sedimentation. The detailed
new magnetostratigraphic results and radiometric dates will clarify the age of
and correlation between these basins. The new paleomagnetic results will also
provide pole positions and paleolatitudes to constrain the calculation for the
Indo-Asian convergence rate and the amount and timing of tectonic rotation
between tectonic blocks in the region. Times series of oxygen isotopes from
these basins will provide quantitative information on their topographic
development and climatic history. Comparison with vesicularity paleoaltimetry of
the lavas may provide an independent check on elevation and remove ambiguity as
to whether low oxygen-isotope values signal high paleoelevation of the basins
themselves or of regions downwind along the vapor transport path. This research
will improve understanding of the tectonic processes of intracontinental
deformation related to the India-Asia collision. A definitive uplift history of
northern Tibet is important for understanding climate change during Cenozoic
time and will place fundamental constraints on the mechanism(s) of plateau
formation, which interests a broad scientific community. This project forms the
basis for two graduate students' PhD studies, and parts of the project are
suitable for undergraduate research theses.