* 0823272
* Travel grants to attend the XXIII International Congress of History of Science and for ongoing U.S. participation in the IUHPS
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Robert Malone, History of Science Society
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2012
* USD 47,600.00

Introduction: The PI requests funds on behalf of HSS (the History of Science
Society), of which he is the Executive Director, to underwrite the cost of
twenty-five graduate students, independent scholars, and junior scholars who are
US nationals to attend the 23rd International Congress of History of Science in
Budapest, Hungary, in July 2009; the Congress is sponsored by IUHPS (the
International Union of History and Philosophy of Science). The travel funds will
facilitate their attendance at the meeting to participate in sessions, meet
overseas colleagues, and lay the foundation for new research collaborations and
scholarly activities. Modest funds are also requested to continue membership in
IUHPS on behalf of the four principal US-based societies that sponsor and
support science studies: the History of Science Society, the Philosophy of
Science Association, the Society for the History of Technology, and the Society
for Social Studies of Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
Congress is hosted by IUHPS, one of the most significant vehicles for fostering
international opportunities and exchanges in the field. While meetings of HSS
and closely related organizations do attract foreign scholars, the international
congresses bring together a far wider range of scholars from widely dispersed
geographic regions and diverse intellectual approaches. Moreover, the Congress
tends to emphasize fields, including the history of geography, that are less
frequently addressed in North American meetings involving the history of
science. NSF has supported travel to the International Congress for many years,
and regards such funds as critical for ensuring that US-based scholars most in
need of support to have the opportunity to engage with the international
community of historians of science. The dues payment serves to facilitate the
participation of consortium members at the Congress
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The intellectual merit and
broader impacts of this proposal are intimately connected, since the relevant
activities focus on fostering intellectual collaboration and exchange in the
area of science studies in an attempt to enrich and diversify the field both
globally and in the United States. In addition, the travel grants for graduate
students, junior faculty and independent scholars, is an investment in the
future of science studies in the United States.&lt;br/&gt;