* 0823953
* Collaborative Research: Geomorphic transport laws, landscape evolution, and fractional calculus
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Colin Stark, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 08/31/2011
* USD 99,671.00

If physical models are to achieve a realistic description of transport, they
need to incorporate the breadth and richness of the multi-scale heterogeneity
present in natural landscapes, but currently they fail to do so. We will develop
the mathematical tools needed for this task by adapting and extending fractional
calculus to the modeling of sediment motion. Fractional calculus allows us to
write differential equations of particle fluxes that incorporate, simply and
directly, broad-tailed probability distributions of grain size, single particle
hops and storage times on the bed. It does so by providing differential
operators of fractional order, which means that changes in model variables are
calculated regionally or non-locally, rather than at a point in space or time as
in classical calculus. It is this non-locality that allows a concise treatment
of the multi-scale, spatiotemporal heterogeneities of particle sizes,
velocities, and transport distances seen in natural rivers and hillslopes. We
will develop the analytical treatments and numerical methods necessary to build
and solve generalized geomorphic transport laws towards improved predictions and
modeling of landscape dynamics. If physical models are to achieve a realistic
description of transport, they need to incorporate the breadth and richness of
the multi-scale heterogeneity present in natural landscapes, but currently they
fail to do so. We will develop the mathematical tools needed for this task by
adapting and extending fractional calculus to the modeling of sediment motion.
Fractional calculus allows us to write differential equations of particle fluxes
that incorporate, simply and directly, broad-tailed probability distributions of
grain size, single particle hops and storage times on the bed. It does so by
providing differential operators of fractional order, which means that changes
in model variables are calculated regionally or non-locally, rather than at a
point in space or time as in classical calculus. It is this non-locality that
allows a concise treatment of the multi-scale, spatiotemporal heterogeneities of
particle sizes, velocities, and transport distances seen in natural rivers and
hillslopes. We will develop the analytical treatments and numerical methods
necessary to build and solve generalized geomorphic transport laws towards
improved predictions and modeling of landscape dynamics.

Sediment transport is a key element of change in the natural environment, and
one whose importance is increasing under the pressure of human population
growth, land use and climate change. This project has the potential to gain new
insights into the mechanisms of sediment transport, that will enable better
predictions of the results of river flooding and aid in disaster management.