* 0823265
* Internet RFCs as Social Policy: Network Design from a Regulatory Perspective (Standard Research Grant)
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Sandra Braman, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2012
* USD 273,378.00

This research, supported by the Science, Technology &amp; Society program at
NSF, investigates a key mechanism for the technical community in designing the
Internet. It is widely agreed that the design of the Internet both restricts and
offers opportunities to the U.S. government as it makes and implements laws and
regulations. This project will analyze how designers involved in technical
decision-making for the Internet treat legal and policy issues. A comprehensive
content and policy analysis will be made of the documentary record of the
discourse method through which this decision-making has been taking place since
1969. Known as the Internet Requests for Comments (RFCs) process, this
conversation has by now produced over 5000 texts. Research results will
contribute to our understanding of the intersection of Internet and legal issues
by: (1) analyzing the extent to which, and how, specific legal issues were
treated by technical decision-makers; (2) providing insight into the process by
which the Internet has been designed, itself now a model for a number of other
policy-makers involved with technological systems; (3) helping to bring
technical and legal decision-making issues into a common conversation; (4)
advancing the development of research methods for analysis of technological
discourses that have policy consequences. This research will provide information
for scholars and policy-makers seeking to understand how technical decision-
making, global management (e.g., by Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and
Numbers), and the laws of the U.S. and other governments interact.