* 0823992
* GOALI (Industry-University Collaborative Project): Collaborative Research: Scalable Techniques for Detecting Small-Delay Defects in Nanometer Integrated Circuits
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Mark Tehranipoor, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 08/31/2012
* USD 164,659.00

Objective&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to develop new test
techniques that target small-delay defects in nanoscale integrated circuits. The
approach is based on the use of the output-deviations measure as a surrogate
"long-path" coverage metric for small-delay defects. The project will be carried
out in partnership with AMD Corporation and other industrial collaborators.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;Small-delay defects,
induced by process variations, crosstalk, power-supply noise, and resistive
opens/shorts, etc., are major quality and reliability concerns in the
semiconductor industry. Current industry practices are not only inadequate for
small-delay defects, but test costs are skyrocketing as well (estimated to be
more than 50% of manufacturing cost). This project is focused on test generation
using scalable methods that can provide comprehensive defect screening for
industrial circuits. It includes the following components: (i) a gate-delay-
defect probability measure to model delay faults; (ii) use of gate-delay-defect
probabilities for computing output deviations; (iii) layout-aware, deviation-
based test-pattern selection/generation for high defect
coverage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;This project will
lead to higher shipped-product quality, increased in-field reliability, and
reduced test cost. Benefits for society include reliable electronics for
healthcare, cheaper and dependable computing platforms for servers, weather
forecasting, financial transactions, and more, and realization of the much
sought-after zero-defects for automotive applications. Students will be trained
for the workforce through research experience, coursework, and relevant industry
internships. A concerted effort will be made to involve under-represented
groups, for example through the Semiconductor Research Corporation fellowship
programs. Tutorials will be presented and special sessions will be organized at
major conferences.