* 0823827
* GOALI:  Ultrahigh Sensitivity and Selectivity in Surface Plasmon Resonance Detection
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* william risk, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* John Zavada
* 07/31/2012
* USD 369,664.00

Objective: Surface plasmon resonance (SPR) biosensors are being developed to
detect and characterize interactions between biomolecules in their physiological
environments with sensitivity and selectivity comparable to fluorescent
biosensors, and in real time at time resolutions approaching or less than
milliseconds.

Intellectual Merit: SPR biosensors have rapidly emerged as technology of choice
because they follow biological interactions in physiological environments in
real time. Existing SPR biosensors do not operate at their limits of
sensitivity, due to technical noise and not to any fundamental limitations.
Active electronic noise suppression techniques integrated with sensor
configurations are developed to operate at the fundamental limits of system
noise. The sensitivity and selectivity are improved by using nano- and
mesoporous inorganic structured materials. Nanoporous supports provide high
surface areas for increased attachment density of receptors. The surface energy
and pore sizes (shapes) can be manipulated to provide physical selection of
target substances by size, shape and morphology, and provide a robust platform
in harsh environments.

Broader Impacts: The approach proposed is highly amenable to widespread
technological use, due to its sensitivity, stability, and simplicity. A SPR
sensor with increased sensitivity and selectivity will allow, in addition to
kinetic measurements in the aqueous phase, the detection of highly diluted
pathogens in the gas phase. It could be used to map biochemical pathways that
lead to disease states, monitor patients for clinically relevant analytes,
target the development of drugs, and detect infectious agents and environmental
toxins.