* 0823971
* Design of Energy-Efficient Programmable Signal Processing Accelerators in 3D Integrated Heterogeneous Multi-Core Processor for Mobile Multimedia Communication
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2008,12/31/2011
* James Lu, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Zhi Tian
* 12/31/2011
* USD 328,142.00

The objective of this research is to develop energy-efficient programmable
signal processing accelerators for heterogeneous multi-core mobile multimedia
communication processors utilizing three-dimensional (3D) integration
technology. The approach is to use the massive storage capacity and extremely
high logic-memory data bandwidth enabled by 3D logic-memory integration,
realized by vertically stacking high-performance logic die and high-density
memory dies together, to fully exploit the parallelism inherent in most signal
processing functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit lies in the
research theme of jointly considering signal processing algorithm, programmable
accelerator architecture, and memory modeling and optimization to most
effectively exploit the unique features, i.e., storage capacity and bandwidth,
provided by 3D logic-memory integration. Within the proposed scope, this
research addresses video coding and forward error correction coding systems,
which dominate the energy consumption of mobile multimedia communication signal
processing. Because of the high storage density of dynamic random access memory
(DRAM), this research will focus on 3D logic-DRAM integration and develop
accurate 3D DRAM modeling and performance prediction capability in a truly
technology-aware manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the
research include the potential to greatly improve the energy efficiency of
future mobile multimedia communication devices by providing energy-efficient
programmable signal processing accelerator design solutions. In addition, the
research represents a first step towards establishing a new area of 3D very
large-scale integration (VLSI) signal processing that naturally expands the
traditional VLSI signal processing area. The project also promotes the education
of a wide spectrum of students in advances in future nanoscale integrated
circuits and 3D integration.