* 0823996
* Novel Nanostructured ZnO Gas Sensors on (100) Si Wafers
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2008,01/31/2014
* Agisilaos Iliadis, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 01/31/2014
* USD 329,967.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to develop nanostructured
ZnO on Si multi-gas sensors capable of room temperature operation with high
sensitivity, responsivity, and specificity, compatible with CMOS technology. The
approach is to substantially increase the performance capabilities of the sensor
(a) by increasing sensor surface through nanostructures and thin catalytic metal
contacts, (b) by introducing a ?field assisted? sensing process through
nanojunctions, and (c) by conditioning the field assisted process.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit is high in several fundamental issues in the
physics of nanotechnology and nano-devices, in the physical and electronic
properties of the nanostructures (surface area, surface states, surface
reactivity, quantum confinement), and the field-assisted effects to gas
detection processes. It addresses for the first time the development of novel
nanosensors based on ZnO-Si nano-junctions to achieve room temperature, high
sensitivity, high responsivity, multi-gas operation monolithically integrated
with CMOS biasing and read-out circuitry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact will be in environmental safety, quality and security, in particular in
critical environments such as neonatal care, unstable explosive, toxic and
hazardous environments, where rapid, sensitive detection is needed. It will
impact the way Electrical Engineering Education is perceived and taught by
making it a truly multidisciplinary field contributing in all aspects of
developments in society, interlinked with every critical area from medical to
environmental, chemical and biological. More underrepresented groups and
minority students will be attracted as it inherently offers more hands-on
experience in an application oriented environment where the students can see
their contribution to the work in environmental quality and safety. This is
reflected by involving underrepresented group undergrad students in the sensor
and CMOS chip design, through the proposed Marquee courses and Summer Training
Programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;