* 0823404
* Toward an Integrated Plan for Digital Preservation and Access to Primary Anthropological Data (AnthroDataDPA): A Four-Field Workshop
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2012
* Carol Ember, Human Relations Area Files
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 03/31/2012
* USD 72,775.00

This award supports the creation of a comprehensive plan for digital
preservation and access for primary anthropological data, including fieldnotes,
photographs, measurements, and recordings. The goal is a strategic and
coordinated plan that includes methods and standards for digitization, long-term
preservation of digital objects, ethical standards, and inter-archive
interoperability. Without a coordinated plan, the promise of digital access will
not be achieved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first step in this project to hold a
broad-based workshop of archivists, anthropologists, and technology specialists
to decide on the basics of a strategic integrated plan for primary
anthropological data. The second step is to circulate the plan outline, flesh
out the details, and disseminate a revised plan on the web. The third step is to
liaison with major anthropological organizations and organizations engaged in or
planning digital and preservation activities to encourage them to join this
integrated effort. The workshop conferees will also discuss practical ways to
fund future efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data preservation and sharing are
central to all research. The digital age and the web have given anthropological
researchers new opportunities for sharing research materials, including unique
firsthand accounts of peoples and cultures that no longer exist, accounts
unavailable to others because they reside in anthropologists' offices, file
cabinets, computers, laboratories, or in limited access repositories. Data
sharing depends upon research data being preserved. All too often, primary
anthropological data are lost to the scholarly world with the illness or death
of the person who collected them. This is a loss of potential long-term benefit
from research investment as well as loss of irreplaceable
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preservation and access to the observations of human
life around the world are not just important for anthropology and other social
sciences. The public has a strong interest in understanding all aspects of the
human condition. The development of a coordinated plan for digital preservation
and access should be of interest to libraries, archives, repositories, and
information technology specialists and may serve as a model for preservation and
access programs in other disciplines.