* 0823489
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: If and How Many "Races"? The Application of Mixture Modeling to World-Wide Craniometric Variation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Lyle Konigsberg, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 08/31/2009
* USD 12,974.00

The classification of modern humans into categories using phenotypic traits has
experienced a lengthy and complex history in biological anthropology. While
understanding the patterns of human biological variation is essential to
revealing population structure, demographic history and the trajectory of modern
human evolution, such categorization, even if based on biological differences,
is contentious given its past association with concepts of "race" and related
ideological agendas. Within physical anthropology, criticisms of the "race
concept" and anxieties over scientific racism have generated concerns regarding
the validity of any study that uses morphological variation as a way to explore
evolutionary relationships among human groups. It is argued that any biological
information captured by concepts of "race", "ethnicity" or "geographic ancestry"
is necessarily confounded by personal beliefs and flawed methodologies and that,
in turn, it is impossible to achieve an unbiased explanation of human variation.
A tension exists, therefore, between those biological anthropologists who use
craniometric variation as a means to access past population structure in
phenotypic distance studies or to estimate individual ancestry in forensic
contexts, and those who associate any discussions of group differentiation with
racial typing. New genetic research on the interaction between culture and
biology suggests, however, that there are alternative methods that can be
explored in skeletal studies for scientifically detecting group differences and
determining the statistical and practical significance of demographic
information. Recent genomic work has successfully applied model based clustering
to autosomal microsatellite loci in large, world-wide samples, and has
identified clusters which closely corresponded to major geographic regions,
ethno-culturally identifiable groups, and even admixed populations. These
results show the feasibility of population classification by continental
ancestry as well as the importance of "race", "ethnicity" and "ancestry"
information to studies of population structure. The central question remains
therefore: can similar nested hierarchical sub-structuring, or "population
clusters", be revealed from phenotypic, and specifically, craniometric data
using modern human samples? This project applies model based clustering,
geometric morphometry, and traditional multivariate statistics to the W.W.
Howells and T. Hanihara world-wide craniometric datasets and large Medieval
Danish cemetery samples from the Anthropological Data Base Odense University
(ADBOU) collection. Traditional linear measurements, trussed inter-landmark
distance values, and three-dimensional coordinate data are used (1) to test the
efficacy of these new and potentially more powerful quantitative approaches to
understanding population-based differences in craniofacial shape and (2) to
investigate the statistical significance of among and within-group
discrimination using craniofacial measurements. This project also explores the
evidentiary relevance of estimating "geographic ancestry" and its relationship
to "race" using craniometrics in forensic and medico-legal contexts and the
practical value of the classification results produced given current Daubert
standards for expert testimony with the addition of modern American samples
drawn from the University of Tennessee's Forensic Anthropology Data Bank (FDB)
and demographics from the United States Census 2000.

The association of clusters with geographic regions, ethno-cultural groups, and
admixed populations has significant disciplinary and socio-political
implications. This research will demonstrate the potential of population
classification by continental ancestry and weigh the importance of "race",
"ethnicity" and "ancestry" information to studies of population structure. It
will also provide recommendations for improved statistical methodologies for
geographic ancestry estimation and for the evidentiary significance of
estimating ancestry in forensic anthropological and medico-legal contexts given
current Daubert standards for scientific evidence. The craniofacial measurements
obtained for this study will offer an opportunity to address questions of human
biological variation, and specifically the quantification of world-wide
craniometric diversity. In testing the statistical effects of combining mixture
modeling with traditional and geometric morphometrics and the applicability of
clustering algorithms to questions of among and within-population
classification, this research will contribute to quantitative applications in
anthropology. Moreover, in making new three-dimensional craniometric information
from the Anthropological Data Base Odense University (ADBOU) collection
available for future morphometric research, this project will not only advance
the broader study of "shape" but will also increase our knowledge of the life
history of these past Danish peoples, thus facilitating studies in areas of
concern to skeletal biologists, population geneticists, bioarchaeologists and
demographers alike and supporting additional inter-collegiate collaborations. As
the raw data and the statistical computer code written for this study will be
made freely accessible to other scholars, this project will encourage future
researchers to investigate the methodology here employed (therefore prompting
refinements to the theories addressed by this project and improvements to our
scientific methods) and bring new and different questions to bear on the
resources that made this project possible.