* 0823885
* Electronically-Actuated Coded Aperture Arrays for Millimeter and Submillimeter-Wave Imaging
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Haiyong Xu, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 08/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

The objective of this research is to investigate and demonstrate a fundamentally
new approach to millimeter and submillimeter-wave imaging based on wavefront
processing and multiplexing. The approach is to exploit state-of-the-art
millimeter/submillimeter-wave solid-state devices to realize electronically-
controlled wavefront modulators and, in conjunction, apply calibration/error-
correction techniques to remove systematic errors associated with imaging
systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this work lies in its
potential to fundamentally transform the conventional approach to
millimeter/submillimeter-wave imaging based on focal plane arrays. This research
directly addresses the central difficulty impeding the realization of large
millimeter-wave imaging arrays, the problem of processing a large number of
outputs from a dense array of receivers. In addition, the proposed
electronically-controlled coded masks will open a vast array of new wavefront
processing techniques and system architectures for research and application to
millimeter-wave imaging, techniques that have so far been impractical, but can
dramatically improve system performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of this research include significantly improved instrumentation for
scientific fields that directly rely upon millimeter-wave imaging (spectroscopy,
astronomy, and, recently, medicine). Moreover, the societal benefits of improved
millimeter-wave imaging encompass public security (e.g., screening/monitoring of
cargo) and quality assurance (e.g., manufacturing and process control), as well
as medical diagnostics. The role of millimeter-wave imaging as a fundamental
research topic relevant to public safety issues will be emphasized to introduce
service/outreach-oriented undergraduate thesis projects (for example, scanning
foods/medicines in sealed packages) into the curriculum, an approach that has
shown success in promoting diversity and attracting students from different
disciplines.