* 0824930
* Acquisition of a state-of-the-art, shallow water multibeam echo-sounding system at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC MBES)
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2011
* James Best, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 12/31/2011
* USD 456,706.00

0824930 Best

This proposal seeks funding to acquire a high-resolution, dual-frequency,
multibeam echo-sounding (MBES) system for fluid and morpho-dynamics of aquatic
systems impacted by sedimentary processes. Proposed is a Seabat 7125 system from
Reson Inc. This unit operates at 200/400 kHz and has a 128° sector allowing
0.5°X2.0° and 0.25°X1.0° beam widths. The system will be deployed on a new
22-foot aluminum workboat with twin engines, generator and power supply
conditions appropriate for supporting the MBES. The boat/MBES system will be
housed a t the USGS Water Science Center allowing rapid response deployment. 3D
data will be used to derive bottom topography, bedform characteristics and grain
size distributions. Temporal variation in these properties will be assessed.
Backscatter will be analyzed to better understand water column conditions and
track gas bubbles, fish, and other organisms. Additionally, suspended sediment
and fluid velocity will be assessed acoustically. Several studies which will
gain substantially from the new acquisition are 1) spire tower formation by
thermophilic bacteria in Yellowstone Lake, 2) ubran channel flow in Chicago, 3)
river channel confluence and bifurcation dynamics, 4) sand transport in lakes
and rivers, 5) mine tailing dispersal and sedimentation in lakes, and 6) the
temporal and spatial behavior of shear layers in natural rivers. Studies will be
completed through a combination of field study and numerical simulation. The
MBES system is perfectly suited to capturing high-resolution, temporal and
spatial data needed for multiple studies. The management plan has UIUC and USGS
forming a committee to oversee purchase, Installation and MBES usage. The PIs
will serve on the committee. The committee will arrange yearly user-group
workshop(s). The MBES system will be utilized for stated projects, but will have
broad applicability to applied and societally-relevant environmental concerns.
The MBES will serve as the foundation for a facility accessible to undergraduate
and graduate students and post-doctoral researchers. The MBES will allow direct
interfacing with the USGS and incorporation in mission-oriented projects.

***