* 0824067
* Mesoscale structures and photonic devices based on coupled spherical cavities
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2013
* Vasily Astratov, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Anupama Kaul
* 07/31/2013
* USD 302,647.00

The objective of this proposal is to use unique advantages provided by cavities
with spherical symmetry for developing technology and applications of mesoscale
coupled cavity structures. These advantages include the possibility of achieving
a supermonodispersive selection of microspheres with an unprecedented level of
uniformity (~10 &lt;-5&gt;) for their whispering gallery mode resonances. They
also include the possibility of integrating cavities in all three spatial
dimensions (3D). The focus of this project is on developing new types of
microprobes with subwavelength resolution for laser surgery and biochemical
sensing, as well as on developing tunable filters, sensors and compact
spectrometers based on 2D and 3D coupled cavity structures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The intellectual merit of the project
is in developing novel concepts related to light transport in such systems
including photonic nanojet-induced modes, percolation of whispering gallery
modes and the role of disorder and dimensionality in the optical transport
properties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The proposed program will have
a broad impact on education and outreach through inherent multidisciplinary
topics such as material science, engineering, and integrated photonics. Several
graduate and undergraduate students will be trained in interdisciplinary
research, preparing them for careers in nanotechnology and optical engineering.
The outreach activities incorporated in this project are aimed at developing a
series of educational workshops for undergraduate and graduate students where
micro-optics will be used as a way of explaining hard-to-visualize aspects of
wave physics, quantum mechanics and solid state physics.&lt;br/&gt;