* 0824185
* Polaritonics Platform for Terahertz Signal Processing, MultipleScattering, and Field Enhancement
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Kevin Webb, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* john zavada
* 07/31/2012
* USD 330,000.00

Objective &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives if this project are to
investigate: (i) Multiply-scattered terahertz signals in sensing and imaging
applications, and (ii) Terahertz field enhancement for spectroscopy. In Topic
(i), models of multiple electromagnetic wave scattering will be tested using a
terahertz polaritonics platform. Femtosecond laser machining will be used to
drill holes and carve specified structures with different dimensions and spatial
distribution properties into lithium niobate crystalline films. Terahertz waves
will be generated and detected in the films. The results will guide the
development of methods for terahertz imaging. In Topic (ii), doped semiconductor
cavities and waveguides will be developed to provide terahertz field
enhancement. The fields may be sufficient to drive highly nonlinear material
responses including structural phase transitions and dielectric breakdown. This
will permit direct time-resolved optical observation as well as extensive
control over complex material transformations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The terahertz spectrum has been underutilized,
relative to microwaves and optics, in large part because of a dearth of sources
and detectors. Recent progress in these areas presents opportunities for new
methods for controlling terahertz signals, for imaging, and for spectroscopy,
and these topics will be addressed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two Ph.D. students will be supported by this award.
At MIT, the project will dovetail with a planned expansion of a pre-college
outreach program run by the Nelson group. At Purdue, undergraduate students will
be recruited to work on this project in the Webb group. &lt;br/&gt;