* 0824475
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: History and Philosophy of Ecology
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Andrew Hamilton, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 12/31/2011
* USD 84,000.00

Introduction: This proposal is for a two-year postdoctoral fellowship at the
Center for Biology and Society in the School of Life Sciences at Arizona State
University. The purpose of the fellowship is to expand the Co-PI's dissertation
research, which is on the ecologist, environmentalist, and public figure L. C.
Birch. The plan is to encompass contemporary and historical interactions among
three central branches of modern biology - ecology, systems biology, and
ethology - including their philosophical and social dimensions, while remaining
centered on Birch and his work, influences, and impacts. The expansion beyond
the dissertation will include Birch-like research and engagement with larger
communities. The ultimate goal is to enable the Co-PI to acquire a deeper and
broader understanding of Birch's work and
vision.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: ASU is uniquely positioned to
broaden these investigations. The School has dedicated emphases in organismal,
integrative, and systems biology and in ecology, evolution, and environment. In
addition, it is organized to facilitate collaborative work pursued across
disciplines. The Co-PI's primary investigation will center on the theoretical
and methodological connections among ecology, systems biology, and ethology not
only in current research programs but also historically, tracing back the
intertwined development of these three fields to their emergence in the early
part of the 20th century. Using ASU's resources in science-society relations,
the Co-PI will also investigate the social and cultural contexts in which these
closely related fields were shaped. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
Beyond the primary research phase, the Co-PI will also work with the NSF-funded
Embryo Project to examine current and past embryo studies, the use of embryos in
experiments, and the social and cultural ramifications of the embryo as
technology for improving life. In both the Embryo Project seminars and several
team-teaching opportunities in the School's courses on Science and Society, the
Co-PI plans to further develop historical and contemporary connections between
biological research and the social sphere, addressing topics such as government
policy, institutional support, public perception, and interface with
religion/culture.