* 0824237
* Fault-Tolerant Cooperative Communication in Large-Scale Wireless Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Sang Kim, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2012
* USD 242,713.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sang Wu Kim&lt;br/&gt;Iowa State
University&lt;br/&gt;Fault-Tolerant Cooperative Communication in Large-Scale
Wireless Networks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to
develop a fundamentally new cooperative communication architecture that is
inherently self-scalable, robust in the presence of transmission errors and
malicious attacks, and allows decentralized network operation with flexibility
for topology changes in large-scale wireless networks with noisy channels. The
approach is to concatenate the parities of previous hops with those of the next
hop such that the error correction capability grows with the number of hops in a
multiplicative manner, generate parities randomly independent of other relay
nodes, and exploit node cooperation using cross-layer design to obtain mutual
benefits beyond those of traditional cross-layer cooperation within individual
nodes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to intellectual merit, this work
considers practical cooperative communication methodologies that promote
efficient and secure data transmission in noisy, large-scale wireless networks.
Because of analytical challenges, much of the prior research in this area has
been limited to capacity bounds for small-scale networks. Thus, the existing
body of knowledge is limited with respect to delivering the benefits of
cooperative communication, providing error probability results, and accounting
for the complexity of large-scale networks. This research attempts to address
this limit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to broader impacts, the research
has the potential to improve the design and operation of many types of wireless
networks, including embedded networks, wireless sensor networks, ad-hoc
networks, mesh networks, and cellular networks. These networks have a wide range
of applications, including surveillance, health and environmental monitoring,
public safety, and emergency response. Research outcomes are integrated with
undergraduate and graduate education. Research outcomes will also be used in a
demonstration program for local high school students with the goal of broadening
participation in engineering.