* 0824832
* Collaborative Research: Turbulent fluxes and boundary layer structure due to near-shore internal tides
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Eugene Pawlak, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 12/31/2012
* USD 404,581.00

Internal tides are a generic feature of near shore flows, playing a fundamental
role in the ecology, biogeochemistry, and sedimentary environment of the near
shore. For example, on coral reefs, turbulent mixing, as modified by
stratification, can determine the strength of coupling between the water column
and the reef. In a like fashion, internal waves can also be important to such
environments as kelp forests where they may be a critical means of cross-shore
transport of larval organisms. Thus, understanding the behavior of internal
waves and the mixing they produce in shallow water is a fundamental problem in
coastal oceanography. More generally, the high spatial and temporal resolution
of physical measurements will result in a unique data set capable of linking
large and small-scale physical processes on the continental slope and shelf.
This data will be useful in developing more accurate parameterizations of
boundary layer turbulence and mixing. In particular, it will be able to
determine simple empirical relations like those found in lab experiments and
computations but valid at field scales, that can be used in a wide range of
circulation models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will measure Reynolds
stresses, turbulent buoyancy fluxes, and turbulence dissipation rates in the
near shore bottom boundary layer in the presence of shoaling internal tides and
surface waves. Taking advantage of the capabilities of the Kilo Nalu Observatory
operated by the University of Hawaii, these measurements will be made in 20
meters of water on the south shore of Oahu. Like many inner shelf regions, the
proposed field site provides an environment in which both internal tides and
surface waves are common. All the turbulence instruments will be cabled to
shore, allowing acquisition of the data at high rates not limited by power or
memory. Leveraging ongoing observations of surface waves and internal tides, the
turbulence measurements will be supplemented by mean flow measurements made with
ADCPs, thermistor and salinity sensor chains, and wave/tide gauges. The field
measurements will yield a high quality turbulence data set, made in a setting
for which we will have a fairly complete overall description of the mean flow.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field program will involve graduate and undergraduate
students from University of Hawaii and Stanford University. These will be
involved in all phases of the work, in particular, the scientific diving
operations needed to install and recover the instrument suite. This group will
include several women Ph. D. students and postdocs at both institutions.