* 0824683
* Upgrade of ICP-MS Facilities at the University of Southern Mississippi
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2008,10/31/2009
* Alan Shiller, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 10/31/2009
* USD 49,130.00

0824683&lt;br/&gt;Schiller&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This proposal seeks
funding to upgrade an existing Thermo Element 2 ICP-MS with an Apex-Q high-
sensitivity inlet system, a membrane desolvation system, an SC-Fast autosampler,
an Apex-FAST inlet system and an additional mass flow controller/regulator for
methane introduction in the nebulizer gas mixture. These upgrades will increase
system sensitivity, reduce oxide isobaric interferences, improve sample
throughput, allow saline sample analysis, and improve overall performance. The
ICP-MS upgrades will have a significant impact on several existing projects: 1)
elemental analysis will help elucidate the sources, fate and transport of trace
metals and colloidal material in the Yukon River system in Alaska, offering
insights into watershed changes resulting from Arctic warming. 2) Trace elements
will be used in conjunction with nutrient data to determine water movements and
sources within the Louisiana Shelf system. The methane introduction system will
reduce sample prep. And, 3) Trace element distributions will be assessed in
oceanic systems to better understand Al, Ga and Mn cycling and their impact on
oceanic primary productivity. Users at SM, outside universities, government
agencies and commercial entities are also identified in the proposal Shiller
will be responsible for interfacing the new instrument upgrades. The facility
works as a fee-for-service laboratory, charging different analysis rates for
university, government and commercial users. A full-time technician is employed
to operate the instrument. Researchers are also allowed to visit the facility to
aid in sample preparation and analysis. The USM ICP-MS facility serves an array
of users both inside and outside the USM community. Greater sensitivity, sample
throughput and more robust, less time-consuming analyses will allow the facility
to serve more customers and obtain higher quality data. The PI has three PhD and
one MS student who use the instrument for their education and research. The lab
has sponsored an REU summer student and a high school
volunteer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;