* 0824708
* Collaborative Research: The Persistence of Biodiversity in Southern California Under Future Land-use Scenarios
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2008,01/31/2012
* Helen Regan, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 01/31/2012
* USD 324,167.00

Habitat loss and fragmentation are the most serious threats to biodiversity
worldwide. Furthermore, habitat loss due to urbanization brings with it myriad
other threats that exacerbate impacts on biodiversity. In the United States,
habitat loss due to urbanization is more widespread and endangers more species
than any other human activity. Consequently, the identification of traits that
deem some species more vulnerable to extinction than others has become the Holy
Grail of conservation biology because of the potential for such traits to serve
as measurable surrogates for extinction risk. This project will identify the
life history traits of plants that are predictive of extinction risk in the face
of the top three threats to plant species in the United States - habitat loss,
altered fire regimes and competition with invasive species. This identification
will be achieved by connecting population and landscape models to extensive
plant demographic data, realistic land-use change projections and the effects of
the major processes threatening plants in the Californian floristic region, a
global biodiversity hotspot.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this work will
be communicated to an existing network of public and private land managers,
conservation specialists, and policy makers in southern California. Existing
collaborations will assure direct communication of scientific results to those
agencies responsible for regulating conservation plans in the study area and
elsewhere. &lt;br/&gt;