* 0824906
* Large eddy simulation of turbulent wind over realistic seas with frequent wave breaking events
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Tetsu Hara, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2013
* USD 259,587.00

Air-sea interaction under high wind and sea state conditions is one of the most
important, yet least understood research areas of physical oceanography and
marine meteorology. Breaking waves, which support a significant fraction of air-
sea momentum flux, alters the turbulence field inside the atmospheric boundary
layer. This variation results in insufficient estimations of (Reynolds) numbers
which are used in boundary layer models and predictions. The Large Eddy
Simulation (LES) is a promising new model that will take the effects of ocean
surface waves into account when modeling turbulence dynamics inside the
atmospheric boundary layer. Through this research, oceanographers and
atmospheric scientists from the University of Rhode Island, the National Center
for Atmospheric Research, and the University of Reading will develop a new
atmospheric boundary layer LES methodology that accounts for intermittent
breaking wave events. This simulation will allow for a detailed investigation of
the effects of breaking waves on boundary layer turbulence and air-sea momentum
flux and will provide the framework to investigate sea spray generation,
evolution, and its impact on air-sea heat flux. The results from this research
will provide a basis for understanding how surface breaking waves affect and
air-sea interactions, which could be used in more accurately forecasting extreme
winds and waves during natural hazard events.