* 0824186
* GOALI: Enhanced Nonradiative Energy Coupling between Quantum Dot Phosphors and InGaN Emitters - Towards High-Efficiency White LEDs
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2008,12/31/2012
* Yongqiang Wang, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* john zavada
* 12/31/2012
* USD 348,000.00

Objective: &lt;br/&gt;This project aims to explore the application of colloidal
compound quantum dots (QDs) for the development of high-efficiency white light
emitting diodes (LEDs) for solid state lighting. The conventional, multistep,
absorption-¬reemission color-conversion scheme in phosphor-based white LEDs will
be replaced by non-resonant cavity-enhanced direct energy coupling between
colloidal CdSe/(Cd,Zn)S QD-phosphors and electrically-pumped InGaN quantum
wells/dots. The goal of this work will be to design and fabricate a new
generation of white light sources featuring significantly improved radiation
efficiency, high brightness and high color rendering index as well as low
manufacturing costs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;This
project offers a synergistic approach to advance the science and technology of
nonradiative energy transfer between epitaxially-grown quantum structures with
chemically-synthesized colloidal nanocrystal quantum dots. In addition, it
provides a platform whereupon emerging QD technologies, including QD-assembled
microcavities, engineered core-shell QDs, and mist-patterning of multicolor QDs,
will be integrated for the first time for the implementation of a functional
photonic system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The results
from this project will find application in next-generation white light sources
that will provide great energy savings. Participation by industrial
investigators will facilitate the integration of results from this project into
commercial products. The project will offer focused research and learning
experiences to the graduate and undergraduate student participants, and findings
will be integrated into classroom instruction, providing opportunities for
students to connect fundamental nanoscience to real-world applications of
nanotechnology. New activities will also be created for high school
campers.&lt;br/&gt;