* 0824856
* A Geospatial Semantic Web Framework for Feature-Level Data Search, Access, Retrieval, Integration and Visualization: A Case of Transportation Network Data
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/2007,02/28/2010
* Zhong-ren Peng, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2010
* USD 174,209.00

The objective of the research is to design, prototype, and assess a Geospatial
Semantic Web framework to search, access, retrieve, integrate, and visualize
geographic information at the feature level, using transportation network data
as a case study. This research intends to advance the state of art of data-
sharing from the current file level to feature level, which involves data
elements represented by points, lines, or polygons at particular locations.
Geospatial data sharing and exchange are essential to increase the efficiency of
data-intensive applications and to reduce the redundancy of data acquisition.
Yet current methods of sharing data at the file level make data sharing and
exchange difficult because of the incompatibility of the variety of semantics,
data models, structures and formats used at different systems. Data sharing at
the file level is not necessary for many applications such as emergency
responses and location based services, in which only information at or
surrounding a particular location are needed. Therefore it is useful and
necessary to build a feature-level data sharing system to meet the demand of
many time critical applications that need real-time access and exchange of the
most up-to-date spatial data. This research will design and prototype an
interoperable Geospatial Semantic Web using standard technologies such as web
services, semantic web, and ontology. The basic approach is to serve geospatial
data as individual web services, and then enable these services in a Geospatial
Semantic Web. Each web service is described and published in a service broker,
which keeps a list of available services and the data items each service
contains through ontologies. The end user can search for geospatial data
elements from the service broker through services and ontologies. Based on the
research, two transportation domain ontologies will be created and integrated
using the Web Ontology Language. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The resulting system will
fundamentally change traditional ways of data sharing, search and access. It
will enable users or applications to semantically search and automatically
discover and access feature level data. Furthermore, it may have important
impacts on time-critical and data-intensive applications such as those used in
homeland security, emergency response, location based services, urban planning,
and decision-support systems. This research wishes to promote and advance
research interests in the integration of Web services, ontology, and Geospatial
Semantic Web. It attempts to show that the developed Geospatial Semantic Web can
become a vendor-neutral, interoperable Web that allows geospatial data providers
to advertise their data, allows end users such as the emergency response
dispatchers to search, access, retrieve, and integrate different spatial
information surrounding a particular location from multiple sources through Web
Services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is supported in part by the
Methodology, Measurement and Statistics program.