* 0824981
* Collaborative Proposal: Are abundant bacteria more active than rare bacteria in the Sargasso Sea?
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2013
* John Heidelberg, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 09/30/2013
* USD 337,367.00

Marine prokaryotic communities are now known to be highly diverse and may be
carrying out new types of metabolisms that, if confirmed, could fundamentally
alter models of energy and material flow through the oceans. These metabolisms
include photoheterotrophic and chemolithotrophic pathways that are entirely
novel or were not thought to be occurring in the surface layer of the oceans.
The problem is, we do not know which fraction of this diverse community is
actually active in biogeochemical processes and whether the metabolic functions,
especially the new ones suggested by genomic data, are actually being carried
out by marine prokaryotic communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
address the following questions and hypotheses: &lt;br/&gt;1. What bacteria are
most active in open oceanic environments like the Sargasso Sea? The
investigators hypothesize that the most abundant bacterioplankton groups are
also the most active whereas the rare groups will be less active. This
hypothesis will be explored using four indices of ?activity?: i) levels of 16S
rRNA vs. 16S rRNA genes; ii) replicating cells as measured by the incorporation
of the thymidine analog, BrdU; iii) incorporation of key dissolved compounds by
abundant bacterial groups as revealed by microautoradiography combined with
fluorescence in situ hybridization (Micro-FISH), and iv) transcript levels of
growth-dependent phylogenetic markers other than 16S rRNA (e.g. tuf, rpoB and
dnaE). The investigators are especially interested in whether rare bacteria are
inactive and are potentially part of a ?seed bank? that serves as the inoculum
for future communities. &lt;br/&gt;2. What metabolic processes are represented
by the most commonly expressed genes? The investigators hypothesize that the
most commonly expressed genes will be those associated with the processing of
dissolved organic matter rather than other energy generating mechanisms,
including photoheterotrophy and chemolithotrophy. Expression will be examined by
pyrosequencing mRNA (?metatranscriptome?) from the Sargasso Sea. We will map the
metatranscriptome onto metagenomic assemblies from the Sargasso Sea and explore
which genes called in metagenomic studies are real rather than bioinformatic
artifacts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use a combination of
pyrosequencing and QPCR approaches to examine rRNA:rDNA ratios, BrdU
incorporating cells, and transcript types and amounts in the metatranscriptome
of Sargasso Sea surface water. Pyrosequencing (454) avoids amplification and
cloning artifacts and it is cost effective. Preliminary analyses indicate that
the sequence length of 454 reads and the proposed number of sequences are ideal
for addressing the questions raised here. The investigators will also use Micro-
FISH to examine incorporation of thymidine, leucine, and PO4. Samples will be
collected twice yearly during the spring phytoplankton bloom when heterotrophic
bacterial production is lowest and during the peak of bacterial production in
summer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will do much to alter our perception
of microbial processes in the oligotrophic ocean by providing answers to long-
standing questions about activity and standing stocks of bacterial populations
and by linking metabolic processes to the extensive environmental genomic data
now becoming available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will support a graduate
student and involve underrepresented undergraduates in summer research projects,
including at sea field work. The results from this project will be incorporated
into an environmental genomics web site and used in courses taught by Kirchman.
The Kirchman and Heidelberg labs are featured in lab tours open to the public (~
1000 visitors per year) and Campbell and Kirchman are also involved in Coast
Day, an annual open house that attracts about 10,000 visitors. Finally, the PIs
will be involved in K-12 teacher training workshops and other Delaware Center
for Critical Zone Research outreach activities.