* 0824908
* Acquisition of a Triaxial Deformation Apparatus
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2008,11/30/2010
* Wen-Lu Zhu, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 11/30/2010
* USD 235,000.00

0824908&lt;br/&gt;Zhu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This proposal seeks
funding to purchase a triaxial testing device for measuring rock ultrasonic
velocity, permeability, electrical resistivity and acoustic emission activity at
crustal pressures and temperatures. The requested apparatus will be optimized
for moderate pressure (up to 150 MPa) and temperature (up to 150 °C)
performance. Requested is a New England Research AutoLab 1500 which is the least
expensive commercial option (given their academic discount). Many fundamental
Geoscience questions rely on a thorough understanding of origin, composition,
deformation mechanisms, physical properties, and frictional behavior of fluid-
saturated rocks under crustal temperatures and pressures. Deep drilling projects
have heightened the need for laboratory studies into sedimentary rock transport
(seismic velocity, permeability, conductivity, and porosity) and mechanical
(friction, strength) properties. Specific projects to be supported by the
proposed apparatus are 1) NanTroSEIZE ? a Southwest Japan subduction zone
interdisciplinary study directed by the IODP, 2) SAFOD ? a component of study in
which geophysical and geochemical properties of fault rocks will be determined,
and 3) The Taiwan Chelungpu-fault Drilling Project ? a component of which will
provide samples for geophysical analysis of rocks in country, damage and fault
core zones. The PI has considerable research funding through NSF-EAR, other NSF
divisions and other federal agencies. The apparatus will be housed in a 500 ft2
room already allocated. The Department of Geology has pledged support (machine
shop service, electricity, water and compressed air). The PI will install and
operate the device. The PI will train graduate and undergraduate students,
postdocs and other users. Outside users will fund materials and expendables for
experiments performed on the apparatus. The triaxial testing device will support
research and training at UMd. Graduate students from UMd and other institutions
will be hosted as well other outside researchers with which the PI has numerous
collaborations. The device will be incorporated into undergraduate senior
theses. An industry partner will be incorporated to expose students to potential
employment opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;