* 0824233
* MYRES III: Dynamic Interactions of Life and its Landscape Workshop in New Orleans, LA
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Karen Campbell, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 06/30/2009
* USD 82,568.00

This award supports the MYRES III meeting of Young Researchers in Earth
Sciences: Dynamic Interactions of Life and its Landscape. The goal of this four-
day workshop will be to identify the spatial and temporal scales over which
various physical, chemical, and biological processes act. The first three days?
discussion will focus on increasing spatial scales, from the grain-scale on day
1 to continental and global dynamics on day 3, and will cover topics such as
soil formation/transport, co-evolution of life and landforms, and feedbacks
between biology and climate. The fourth day will use the formalisms developed in
the previous days to address human beings as geologic agents, including
human/landscape and human/climate interactions. The unifying theme throughout is
the interaction between life and its landscape.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Greater and
more interdisciplinary understanding of the feedbacks between physical and
biological processes on Earth?s surface is pressing as an increasingly urbanized
world responds to global change. By bringing together an international group of
early career researchers, MYRES III will provide a forum to freely discuss
emerging ideas to address these challenges. The conference organizing committee,
composed primarily of young researchers from disparate disciplines who are
already collaborating on the questions MYRES III will address, is well prepared
to provide effective facilitation of conference discussions. Guidance and
material support will be provided in part by both the National Center for Earth-
surface Dynamics, an NSF Science and Technology Center, and the University of
Illinois Hydrologic Synthesis Initiative, thus ensuring that ideas and results
generated during MYRES III continue to inform and be informed by the larger
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. Interdisciplinary approaches
will soon be the norm for researchers across surface process science, and yet
there are few opportunities for young researchers to receive truly
interdisciplinary training. Specifically soliciting attendance by researchers
from around the globe, MYRES III will facilitate the formation of a world-wide
network of young scientists who together can tackle issues at the interface of
physical and biological sciences. The workshop will be held in New Orleans to
highlight the delicate and multifaceted nature of human-climate-landscape
interactions: day 1 of the post-conference fieldtrip will include a visit to
those sites most affected by Hurricane Katrina and a discussion of remediation
efforts. Opportunities will be available to members of the broader New Orleans
community to interact with conference attendees and to learn from the physical
models and experiments included in the Earthscapes Exposition. Finally, a major
goal of the workshop will be to generate results in one discipline that can be
understood and applied in another, hence making even discipline-specific work
available and relevant to a wider audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop is
jointly supported by three programs within the NSF: Geomorphology and Land-Use
Dynamics, Hydrological Sciences, and the Ecosystem Science Cluster.