* 0824182
* BRIGE: Engineering Spheroidal Particles for Drug Delivery - A Novel Approach to Vascular Targeted Therapies
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Omolola Eniola-Adefeso, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2010
* USD 175,000.00

The objective of this award is to evaluate the hydrodynamic behavior and binding
efficiency of biodegradable, non-spherical drug carriers designed for targeting
the vascular wall in medium to large vessels. It is hypothesized that due to
their unique hydrodynamic interactions ellipsoidal particles will possess a
superior ability to bind the wall in medium to large blood vessels often
associated with cardiovascular diseases over typically proposed spherical
particles while maintaining the ability to traverse human capillaries. The
specific aims of the proposed work are: (1) to fabricate biodegradable
ellipsoids from poly(lactide-co-glycolic acid) polymer using the simple oil-in-
water solvent evaporation fabrication method; (2) to investigate the rotational
state of these biodegradable ellipsoids in physiological flow and their ability
to navigate complex microvessel geometry without obstructing flow using in vitro
flow assays; and (3) to evaluate their effectiveness in targeting inflamed
endothelium (cell lining of the blood vessel wall) in vitro and in the presence
of human blood cells. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the proposed work
will significantly impact the design of injectible vascular-targeted drug
carriers for highly localized and efficient delivery of therapeutics in many
human diseases. The ability to target therapeutics to specific sites in the body
can allow for the administration of highly potent therapeutic agents to diseased
cells/tissues without affecting healthy ones; thereby, enhancing drug efficacy
with no deleterious side effects. Achieving this feat can lead to a significant
decrease in the high mortality rate attributed to diseases like CAD, lowered
healthcare cost and improved quality of life for individuals affected with
chronic inflammatory diseases. &lt;br/&gt;