* 0824133
* The Educability of Experience: Value, Theory and the Problem of Objectivity
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Marianne Janack, Hamilton College
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2010
* USD 93,348.00

The objective is to conduct research to develop an account of experience that is
based on a model of mind and action drawn from the following: empirical work in
psychology, William James's philosophical work on the nature of the mind, and
studies in moral philosophy and science studies that exploit the concept of
practice. The PI will argue that the non-cognitive aspects of mind and an
agent's enmeshment in practices set the stage for meaningfulness without fully
determining the meaning of perceptual experience, and give human beings access
to a world that is not merely a reflection of our going theories or belief
systems.

The underlying motive of the project is to resolve the impasse presented in
debates about realism in scientific theory choice and moral knowledge In both
the debate about scientific objectivity and the debate about moral objectivity,
the fact that perception and observation are taken to be theory-laden is often
assumed to undermine the objectivity of scientific claims and moral judgments
alike. This "learned" aspect of perception is commonly referred to as "cognitive
penetrability" to capture the ways that beliefs (i.e., cognitive states) may be
said to strongly influence or determine the content of our experiences. The PI
proposes that an alternative model of mind and experience, drawn from James's
radical empiricism and focusing less on experience as private subjective mental
or brain states, but rather as agency-centered interactions with the world, can
defuse the dilemma posed by experience's educability and its revelatory function
in science and in moral perception. Using James's humanistic psychology as a
basis, the PI will try to extend this alternative model of mind and experience
by drawing on literature on embodied cognition and child development studies.
Contrary to some of the conclusions drawn by representatives of the embodied
cognition school, the PI will show that we can understand how experience can be
meaningful to subjects without thereby giving up on the idea of experience as
giving us access to a theory-independent world.

If this project is funded, the PI will conduct research that will eventually
result in an eight chapter monograph that will be of interest to philosophers,
anthropologists, feminist theorists, science studies scholars, cognitive
scientists, and psychologists. The PI will also develop a class that brings
together moral philosophy and philosophy of science and thereby integrate
research and education. Thus the project contributes to society by modeling
interdisciplinary research, by contributing to broader debates in gender
studies, by contributing to the broader social debates about the relationship
between values and science, and by contributing to discussions about best
practices in education.