* 0824215
* GOALI: Phase Separated Ferromagnetic Metal - Metal Oxide/Hydroxide Nanomaterials as a Transformative Concept for Magnetic Field Sensors
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Ray Carpenter, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* john zavada
* 08/31/2012
* USD 461,793.00

The objective of this research is to study the magnetoresistance of the
nanocontacts made of the novel phase-separated ferromagnetic metal-metal
oxide/hydroxide nanomaterials. The approach is to build, test and study
prototype nanocontact devices having different and well characterized material
structures. These devices will be built using bottom-up fabrication scheme with
nanocontact structures varying from single crystal nickel or iron to the
nanocontact having ferromagnetic matrix with certain fraction of metal-
oxide/hydroxide phase. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit The proposed
research addresses the feasibility of ferromagnetic metal-metal oxide/hydroxide
nanomaterials synthesized in the nanoelectrode geometry configuration as novel
approach for fabrication of magnetic field sensors. This project will establish
the fundamental relationship between the size and material structure of
ferromagnetic nanocontacts and their magnetoresistance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact The proposed research program represents a
multidisciplinary effort which has a large transformative potential for
development of future magnetic field sensors for magnetic recording, magnetic
imaging, spintronics and magnetic biosensor technologies. The new knowledge
created in this project will be incorporated into undergraduate and graduate
curriculum of nanotechnology and nanofabrication courses at the University of
Houston and it will become a part of the broad educational outreach through the
Electrochemical Society's short course instructed by PI. This work will provide
the training for three doctoral students and for several high school teachers
and undergraduate students involved in the summer research programs sponsored by
the National Science Foundation. The students involved in this project will have
a chance to get the training and to work in industrial research environment
through the internships provided by the Seagate Technology.