* 0824025
* Waveguide Emitters and Coherent Detectors for a Compact, Robust Terahertz Spectroscopy System
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Ajay Nahata, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* john zavada
* 08/31/2011
* USD 300,000.00

Objective: &lt;br/&gt;We propose to develop novel waveguide-based emitters and
detectors that allow for broadband THz operation over extended interaction
lengths. This extended interaction is expected to allow for small form factor,
low power ultrafast fiber lasers to replace current tabletop systems. The goal
of the proposed research is to explore the use these waveguide devices to build
a compact THz time-domain spectroscopy system. The proposed devices employ a
single mode dielectric optical waveguide embedded within a single mode THz
waveguide. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merits: &lt;br/&gt;We intend to
explore a fundamentally new approach for achieving broadband operation of THz
emitters and detectors with significantly increased conversion efficiency. While
there is a reasonable body of knowledge regarding the use of free-space
nonlinear optical processes for broadband THz applications, very little is known
about the use of waveguides for such capabilities. We hope to be able to
directly address this issue within this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impact: &lt;br/&gt;The primary impact is on the education of graduate student
education, which will be fulfilled in two distinct, yet parallel, ways. First,
graduate students will obtain significant hands-on experience during the course
of this project. Second, the PI has developed two new graduate level courses in
Ultrafast Optics and Nonlinear Optics. In addition, this project is expected to
have significant impact on society through the development of fundamentally new
technology, which we believe will be beneficial to a broad range of scientific
communities.&lt;br/&gt;