* 0824153
* Tunneling MOSFETs Implemented with III-V Semiconductors
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Yuan Taur, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2011
* USD 329,999.00

Tunneling MOSFETs Implemented with III-V Semiconductors&lt;br/&gt;Abstract of
Research&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to develop novel
transistors which can provide high output currents with very low input voltage
swings. The "subthreshold swing" of the transistors will be less than
20mV/decade, substantially below the 60 mV/decade limit for current transistors.
The proposed transistors will overcome a significant problem for the continued
progress of Moore's Law, the rapidly increasing power dissipation in CMOS
circuits when they are scaled to small dimensions. &lt;br/&gt;The approach is to
use source-channel heterojunctions based on III-V materials with staggered band
offsets. The transistors operate by tunneling rather than by thermionic
injection of carriers into the channel. Tunneling transistors employing Si have
been previously proposed. With InGaAs/AlGaSb materials, staggered
heterojunctions can be engineered with higher tunneling probability than with
Si. At the same time, the excellent transport characteristics of III-V's can
maintain high current and high speed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of this proposal is based on the fact it explores a rich new area of
semiconductor science, with new physical principles for FET operation based on
control over the current by heterojunction engineering. The payoff of the
project can be of immense importance for CMOS technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this program derives from its
importance for the training of next generation semiconductor device physicists;
from research training of undergraduates through lectures as part of a Freshman
seminar series and mentoring of an undergraduate student engaged in the
research; and through interaction with secondary students at UCSD's Preuss
School. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;