* 0824288
* BRIGE Proposal: Nano-pattern modified microelectrodes for the improvement of continuous in vitro glucose monitoring detection.
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2010
* Gymama Slaughter, Virginia State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2010
* USD 85,000.00

0824288&lt;br/&gt;Gymama Slaughter, Virginia State University&lt;br/&gt;BRIGE:
Nano-Pattern Modified Microelectrodes for the Improvement of Continuous in Vitro
Glucose Monitoring
Detection&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was
received in response to the Broadening Participation Research Initiation Grants
in Engineering (BRIGE) solicitation, NSF 07-589. The intellectual merit lies in
the integration of successful pedagogical techniques from K-16 education into
the Virginia State University, Department of Engineering &amp; Technology
environment of research. The project is based on an interdisciplinary research
and development plan focusing on the design, fabrication, and in-vitro
characterization of an amperometric biosensor for therapeutic drug monitoring.
The biosensor design integrates soft-condensed, bio-smart hydrogels with solid-
state microfabricated electrodes, and coupling of enzymes and nano-pattern
microelectrodes. Furthermore, empirical experimentation and research experience
for undergraduates, high school students, and teachers will be coalesce in the
proposed work. The research will introduce emerging biosensor technology, expose
undergraduates, high school students, and teachers to research experiences and
practical instrumentation methods, hence providing the opportunity to create and
incorporate effective modern teaching methods (team-based and experience-based
learning, etc.) into the proposed research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts lie in the current disconnect between engineering research and
education, which may be bridged by the development of a flexible curriculum
through outreach programs, such as the Richmond Area Program for Minorities in
Engineering. In this ongoing project, the high school teachers will be equipped
to build on their research experience to develop even more effective Life
Science Engineering efforts in their home school. Every effort has already been
made to recruit students from under-represented groups to ensure a diverse range
of talents. The research developed by utilizing Richmond Area Program for
Minorities in Engineering will be made readily available on the PI's web site,
so that it may be utilized (and modified) by other institutions, thus fostering
collaboration. The proposed work will enhance infrastructure through the
generated research materials that are easily portable to many institutions.
Findings of the research will be disseminated at national societal conferences
as well as on the PI's web site. Additionally, results will be published in
traditional peer-reviewed journals.&lt;br/&gt;