* 0824759
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Overreporting of Socially Desirable Behavior in Surveys
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2009
* Philip Brenner, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2009
* USD 4,926.00

SES-0824759 John Delamater Philip Brenner University of Wisconsin-Madison

This project studies the overreporting of socially desirable behavior in
traditional sample surveys. Often ignored or simply assumed away, measurement
errors -- like overreporting -- can lead to inaccurate and misleading findings.
However, when directly investigated, they can provide researchers with an
opportunity to better understand human behavior. Estimating overreporting as the
difference between measures from two different survey modes, this study examines
the survey artifact using religious service attendance as a sample case. Recent
work has challenged the validity of common survey measures of church attendance
and raised questions about how US citizens compare to rest of the developed
world: are Americans alone in their overreporting of church attendance, or do
Canadians and Europeans exaggerate the frequency of these behaviors as well?
Using multiple datasets spanning five decades and fourteen countries, this study
compares trends in attendance to shed light on these questions. More
importantly, it will pursue the cause of differential overreporting between
countries in light of three related hypotheses: (1) the nature of traditional
survey questions lead to identity priming during the survey interview, which (2)
allows overreporting to be explained as a function of the importance of socially
desirable identities that (3) explains the variation in overreporting between
nations as the difference in religious identity importance from country to
country. American religious exceptionalism will then be redefined not in terms
of actual behavior, but rather in terms of continuing high levels of religious
identity importance. These high levels of importance will be argued to be the
cause of exceptionally high levels of American overreporting. This approach also
contributes to the development of sociological methodology by: (1) using time
diary data in a novel way, thereby highlighting the time diary as a flexible and
powerful, although underutilized, resource; and (2) applying matching methods in
an innovative way to allow analysis at the individual level, combining estimates
from the two modes.

Broader impacts. This study's focus on measurement error will illuminate one
corner of an oft-ignored but potentially critical problem. Invalid measures can
lead not only to faulty statistical inferences, but also poor policy decisions.
Therefore, improvements in survey measurements, like those investigated in this
study, benefit not only socialscientists, but also policy makers and
stakeholders by improving the quality of data being used in decision making.
Research findings from this dissertation will be disseminated using multiple
venues and formats. Findings will be of potential interest to academic and non-
academic audiences across the spectrum of social science disciplines.