* 0824212
* A New Strategy for Multifunctional Polymer-based Substrates and Flexible Electronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Angus Kingon, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* john zavada
* 08/31/2012
* USD 299,435.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to develop and
demonstrate a new approach to introduce increased functionality into high
density printed wiring boards that are the primary (and ubiquitous) substrates
for electronic systems. The approach is a hybrid processing scheme in which
traditional low temperature processing is supplemented by processing of key
components on fugitive metal foils and integration with the polymer substrates.
The approach will be demonstrated by integrating an oxide thermoelectric
material with the polymer substrate. The thermoelectric device will provide
thermal management for a module. A second demonstration will be the integration
of switching transistors on a flexible array of thermistor-based sensors. The
demonstration vehicles are also designed to allow critical, basic processing and
materials issues to be addressed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
the project lies in the novel and elegant processing strategy for low cost
substrates, while addressing a critical problem facing the electronics industry,
namely that of thermal management. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is expected
to have broad impact in the electronics industry, through the dramatically
increased functionality that can be achieved with the common high density
printed wiring boards, and flexible electronic systems. Low cost, integrated
active thermal management is also expected to impact microelectronic modules.
New sensor arrays will also be enabled. Furthermore, the project will educate
one female PhD student, and will be used to excite high school students into
pursuing STEM careers, alert them to energy issues, and entice undergraduates
into graduate engineering research programs. The project will also foster
international collaboration. &lt;br/&gt;