* 0824583
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement:  Extant Island Dwarf Mammals as Models for Insular Dwarfing in Pleistocene Hominids
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2011
* Brenda Frazier, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 07/31/2011
* USD 15,000.00

Derived, species-level reduction in body size (dwarfing) of isolated populations
has occurred in many mammals and may have even affected some of our hominid
relatives. Common postcranial correlates of island dwarfing have been
documented, yet there are few detailed studies of how the form of the skull and
its many integrated components are affected. This project will examine museum
specimens of several island species that have reduced body size compared to
their ancestors in order to characterize differences in size and shape of the
skull. Craniofacial morphology of several endemic primate species will be
quantified using multiple size and shape metrics, including methods from 3D
geometric morphometrics, and compared to closely-related mainland primates.
Regression analyses will account for phylogeny when appropriate. In addition, an
example of island dwarfing in carnivores will provide a non-primate comparative
case. The aims of these interspecies comparisons are threefold. First, the study
will define the changes in craniofacial form associated with island dwarfing in
a sample of extant primate species. Second, it will identify any commonalities
among the island dwarf populations relative to their mainland counterparts by
testing for differences in shape, size, and degree of encephalization. The null
hypothesis in each case will be the allometrically-predicted condition (for a
given body size) based on previous studies of the taxonomic group in question.
Finally, the project will use the findings of aims 1 and 2 to shed light on the
interpretation of the Flores hominid remains exhibiting apparently unexpected
craniofacial proportions. The quantitative characterization of skull shape in
known cases of island dwarfing will lend needed insight into the mechanisms of
this process and its possible effects on an extinct member of the hominid
lineage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although evolutionary oddities such as dwarf
mammoths and giant rodents have always interested researchers, they have
recently risen to prominence since the remains of a small-bodied, small-brained
human were recovered on the island of Flores in Indonesia. The suggestion that
an isolated population of the ancient humans may have been subject to island
dwarfing has renewed scientific interest in this curious evolutionary process.
This project addresses one of the many unanswered questions related to dwarfing:
How does skull shape respond to a significant reduction in body size,
particularly in an animal for which brain size is presumably so important? This
research will contribute to our understanding of basic mechanisms of evolution,
with implications for human history and for the conservation ecology of
endangered island species today.&lt;br/&gt;