* 0824982
* Collaborative Research: A 3D Seismic Study of the Pacific-North American Plate Boundary in Southern California
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Dayanthie Weeraratne, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 09/30/2013
* USD 222,618.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The Pacific-North
America plate boundary in southern California is one of the only examples of
recorded subduction of an oceanic spreading center in geological history, but
this process is likely to be a common component of Earth history. Almost half of
the Pacific-North America plate boundary in southern California lies offshore,
but little is known about the physical properties of the oceanic plate, its mode
of deformation, or its influence on western North America. This project will
deploy 24 long-duration, broadband Ocean Bottom Seismometers (OBS) in a passive
seismic experiment off the coast of southern California that spans the oceanic
half of the Pacific-North America plate boundary. The OBS data will be combined
with same-event data recorded on the permanent California Integrated Seismic
Network for coverage across the onshore basins, San Andreas fault, and into the
North America plate. The objective is to understand the tectonic interaction at
this boundary by identifying the physical properties and deformation styles of
the Pacific plate and near-shore microplates, as well as distinguish among
contrasting upper mantle geodynamic scenarios which predict large-scale mantle
flow patterns beneath western North America. The seismic studies aim to
characterize the driving plate motion consequences of collision between the rift
system, a fragmented subducted plate, the lengthening of the San Andreas
transform fault system, and block rotations. Of particular relevance is
understanding the source of the forces and rheology that affect the stress state
of the elastic crust to generate earthquakes. The boundaries for the seismic
array overlap the region of complex breakup and fracture of the Pacific plate
near-shore where several microplates are observed, and extends far to the west
to provide comparison with oceanic lithosphere that is not fractured and has
formed at a uniform rate. The results will aid in understanding the boundary
forces due to relative plate motions, the driving forces and characteristics of
oceanic and continental scale deformation, and how the continental margin
accretionary process is influenced by offshore tectonics. An additional goal is
to examine the local earthquake data and their focal mechanisms for seismicity
patterns. The local seismicity recorded by the proposed OBS network is expected
to produce a more accurate offshore hypocenter catalog that can be used to
identify spatial relationships between background seismic activity with mapped
offshore faults&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The broader impacts will
be carried out through activities that include a partnership with the Southern
California Marine Institute to create hands-on scientific opportunities and
educational materials. These materials will incorporate the OBS data and general
offshore seismology into programs for high school and college students.
Undergraduate and graduate students will participate in the research cruises,
scientific analysis, and related teaching activities. Masters and undergraduate
level students from Cal State Northridge, a designated Minority Serving
Institution, will include women and minority students through the Catalyst
program which recruits actively for minorities in geology and geophysics. Data
from the experiment will be archived at the IRIS Data Management Center and the
Southern California Earthquake Data Center, both of which are multi-user data
archival facilities that are open to data requests from other scientists,
students, and non-scientists. The local earthquake data collection portion of
this experiment will enhance the understanding of hazardous offshore seismic
structures in applications that can directly benefit society. The offshore
background seismicity catalog will elucidate the activity of offshore faults.
Local earthquake phase data will contribute to an updated 3D crustal seismic
velocity model that extends offshore to be used by researchers to carry out 3D
wave propagation simulations to estimate the amount and effects of shaking on
nearby coastal communities for use in mitigation efforts.