* 0824656
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Impacts of Rural-to-Urban Labor Migration on the Rural Environment in Chongqing, China
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2010
* Hua Qin, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 07/31/2010
* USD 11,991.00

The relationship between population and the environment holds an important role
in research on the linkage between human society and ecological systems. Recent
studies on population and the environment have turned research focus toward the
more dynamic factor of population processes -- migration. However, few studies
have been conducted on the environmental impacts of migration particularly
circular labor migration in the rural communities from which migrants originate.
The increasing rural-to-urban labor migration in China since the early 1980's
has formed the largest population flow in world history. The primary objective
of this doctoral dissertation research project is to obtain a better
understanding of how this large-scale circular labor migration movement impacts
the rural environment through its influence on rural household livelihoods and
community interaction processes. The analysis will mainly be based on empirical
data collected from Chongqing Municipality, where the rural-to-urban labor
migration rate is currently the highest in China (51.7 percent in 2006). This
project will use a mixed-methods approach to combine both quantitative and
qualitative methods. Specifically, three different methods of data collection
and analysis will be employed: secondary data, household surveys, and key
informant interviews. The findings will show the differences between labor-
migrant and non-labor-migrant households with respect to rural livelihood
processes including agricultural practices, daily consumption and natural
resource use, and will explore the subsequent environmental outcomes in terms of
farmland fertility, soil erosion, and environmental conservation. The study will
also demonstrate the role of community in modifying the influence of labor out-
migration on the local ecological conditions in areas of origin.

This doctoral dissertation research project addresses an understudied question
in the relationship between migration and environment in an under-examined
region. The potential contribution of this project to the extant literature is
twofold. Theoretically, this study will integrate the concept of community as an
important mediating factor into the migration and environment framework based on
a synthesis of literature. Empirically, this study will assess the efficacy of
this conceptual framework in the setting of rural Chongqing in Southwest China.
This project will be the first in-depth research on the impacts of rural-to-
urban labor migration on the rural environment in China. The research findings
of this study have the potential to provide policy implications for China and
other developing countries to enhance the ecological and socioeconomic
sustainability of the rural areas that are increasingly involved in labor
migration and urbanization development. The collaborative relations with Chinese
universities and researchers cultivated in this project may also lead to
productive and long-term impacts on international scholarship in the migration-
environment research area.