* 0824599
* Are mountains "higher" in the tropics? A comparative analysis of population genetic structure and ecophysiological divergence in montane salamanders
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Kenneth Kozak, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 08/31/2010
* USD 50,000.00

Why tropical mountains harbor so many more species than other mountainous areas
of the world has puzzled biologists for more than two centuries. A long-held,
but poorly studied idea is that greater elevational climatic stratification in
the tropics leads to natural selection for organisms with narrower climatic
tolerances in tropical than temperate mountains. As a result, it is hypothesized
that organisms might encounter more climatic barriers to dispersal along
tropical elevational gradients. Dispersal limitation and isolation of
populations are key steps in the process by which a single species splits into
two species. Consequently, more opportunities for new species to originate might
exist in tropical mountains, thereby promoting their high species richness. The
work proposed here will compare the population genetic structure and physiology
of tropical and temperate salamanders and will test two key questions regarding
the evolution of high biodiversity in tropical mountains: (i) Does lower
dispersal occur between elevationally separated populations in the tropics
compared to the temperate zone? and (ii) Is there a relationship between the
degree of physiological specialization for different climatic conditions and the
rate at which dispersal occurs between populations?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Understanding why species diversity is distributed unevenly across the earth is
critical for preserving biodiversity in the face of rapid global change. The
proposed research will be valuable for understanding how organisms and
evolutionary processes in some of the world?s most species-rich ecosystems might
be impacted by global climate change. The principal investigator will also work
with the University of Minnesota?s Bell Museum of Natural History to educate
non-specialists on the biological impacts of climate change on delicate montane
faunas.&lt;br/&gt;