* 0824739
* Specific Interactions of the Ribosome with the Nascent Peptide
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2008,02/28/2013
* Nora Vazquez-Laslop, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Roy Welch
* 02/28/2013
* USD 540,001.00

The specific interaction of the ribosome with the nascent peptide plays an
important role in the regulation of expression of bacterial and eukaryotic
genes. The molecular mechanisms of sensing the sequence of the nascent peptides
and the mechanics of the ribosome response are poorly understood. Furthermore,
the generality of the nascent peptide-mediated regulation of gene expression is
unknown. The main aim of the project is to identify new bacterial genes
regulated by ribosome stalling and to better understand the stalling mechanisms.
In the first aim of the proposal, ribosomal elements which are universally
involved in the stalling response will be identified. The mutants deficient in
stalling will be then used in a whole-cell proteomics screen for genes whose
expression is affected by altered ribosome stalling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
results of the study are expected to illuminate one of the basic aspects of
protein synthesis. The anticipated findings may also have important practical
implications and can open new venues for regulating gene expression in bacterial
and eukaryotic cells for biotechnological and medical purposes. The study will
be closely integrated with teaching activities. Undergraduate, professional and
graduate students will be involved in research. All efforts will be made to
continue engaging underrepresented minorities in experimental research. The
results of the study will be disseminated to the general public through press
releases, UIC podcasts, and public lectures.&lt;br/&gt;