* 0824085
* Control Theory for  Quantum Walks on Graphs and its Applications to Quantum Algorithms
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2013
* Domenico D'Alessandro, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2013
* USD 246,109.00

The last decade has seen an intense research activity worldwide aiming at the
use of quantum mechanical systems as computational tools. This has concerned
both experiments and the theory. Quantum information theory was developed and
one of its goals was to devise efficient computational algorithms which can be
performed with quantum systems. These are called quantum
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The important classes of quantum systems that
can be used to perform algorithms are quantum walks. These systems may be
physically implemented in various ways, for example by coupling an atom and an
electromagnetic field. Their behavior resembles that of a random walk, the
system consisting of a walker that moves among different positions according to
the result of a coin tossing. It has been shown that, when used as computational
tools, quantum walks give fast and efficient algorithms that perform better than
algorithms implemented on a classical
computer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a
recent work, the PI has shown how quantum walks can be considered as control
systems after introducing some degree of freedom in the evolution at each step.
With this modification, quantum walks may achieve new states that are of
interest in practical applications. This richer, potentially useful, dynamical
behavior comes at the expense of only minor modifications in existing
experimental proposals. This motivates the development of a control theory for
quantum walks which studies their dynamics and designs suitable control laws to
obtain the desired behavior. The main objective of this project is to develop
such a theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will apply and enhance the general
tools for control and analysis of quantum systems he has developed in the last
few years. This methodology mainly uses geometric ideas of Lie algebra and Lie
group theory but several concepts from other areas of mathematics will be
introduced. Preliminary studies and results have shown that this is the correct
approach to investigate these models. In the process, the PI will tackle some
related issues which have stood as fundamental open problems in quantum
information for several years. It is in fact expected that some of the analysis
developed here will impact these long standing problems as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a more general perspective, this project will
introduce a new point of view in the design of quantum algorithms. Such
algorithms are, in many cases, methods to control the state of a quantum system
in a desired fashion. Therefore algorithms themselves can be seen as controlled
processes and issues concerning their efficiency and performance can be studied
from a control theoretic perspective. A control theory for quantum algorithms
will link them to their physical implementation and provide new insight and
analysis. By looking at the important class of algorithms using quantum walks,
the PI will take the first steps in this new
direction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Algorithmic
applications of quantum walks in computer science will benefit from this
research, which will have therefore indirect beneficial impact on many more
areas of science and technology. For example, a large class of computational
algorithms called, randomized algorithms, requires sampling at random with a
prescribed probability distribution. Achieving such a probability distribution
with a quantum system can be seen as a problem of control theory and will be
treated in this research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A significant impact of this
project is the synergy it will create among the physics, the control and the
computer science communities. The strong interdisciplinary nature of the
proposed research will require communication among people from different areas.
Moreover this study has strong educational value. It combines ideas from
different fields in the analysis of a class of systems which is relatively
simple, and therefore approachable with analytic tools, but at the same time of
great importance in many different applications. Graduate and undergraduate
students will be directly involved in the planned research and will benefit from
the interaction with a culturally diverse scientific environment.&lt;br/&gt;