* 0824692
* International Conference on Nanoscience and Technology (ICN+T); Keystone, Colorado; July 20-25, 2008
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2008,01/31/2009
* James Murday, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Jorn Larsen-Basse
* 01/31/2009
* USD 15,000.00

The objective of this award is to support the travel and registration expenses
of student and postdoctoral researchers to the International Conference on
Nanoscience and Technology (ICN+T 2008) to be held in Keystone, Colorado from
July 20-25, 2008. &lt;br/&gt;This major international meeting provides a
singular forum for discussion of the recent advances in scanning probe and
related techniques and the latest developments in nanoscale science and
technology. The ICN+T combines two former longstanding (since the 1980s), and
highly successful international meetings - the International conference on
Scanning Tunneling Microscopy/Spectroscopy and Related Techniques (STM) and Nano
- into a single meeting. The first combined meeting was held in Basel,
Switzerland in 2006 with over 1500 international participants. ICN+T 2008 will
be held in the USA, giving USA scientists and students a chance to interact with
leading nanoscientists from all over the world. The requested support is
critical to assuring a high level of student participation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As pointed out in the 2007 revised NNI Strategic Plan,
there are several applications where the nanoscale will provide important
innovations medicine/health, environmental remediation and sensing,
safe/affordable water, continued improvements in information devices, and
increased energy efficiency/security. The transition from laboratory discovery
to those technologies will be accelerated by the availability of improved
measurement/manipulation tools. Further those tools will provide the basis for
the standards/metrology needed by industry to manufacture quality technological
devices. This conference has an effective marriage between instrument developers
and those who use those instruments for state-of-art investigations. The
conference will provide the US research community especially its younger members
with the opportunity to establish personal relationships with the researchers in
instrumentation from around the world. In addition, the proceedings will be
published in the Journal of Vacuum Science and Technology.