* 0824762
* NSF Workshop on Art, Creativity and Learning, to be held at the National Science Foundation and at the Philips Collection, Washington, D.C., June 11-13, 2008
* SBE,SBE
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2009
* Christopher Tyler, Smith-Kettlewell Eye Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 04/30/2009
* USD 68,757.00

Can learning to play the piano enhance your mathematical skills? Can exposure to
great works of art enhance creativity and learning in engineering? People have
often wondered about links between artistic training and education on the one
hand, and ostensibly non-artistic cognitive abilities on the other hand. Early
evidence suggests that education in the arts may facilitate creative thinking
and effective problem solving across a broad range of intellectual domains.
Neuroimaging studies reveal differences in the brains of artists vs. non-
artists, which are stronger in those who started arts training early.
Illuminating links between the arts and other intellectual domains, and the
effects of artistic training on the brain, would both broaden and deepen our
basic understanding of human learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from
the National Science Foundation, Dr. Christopher Tyler is organizing a workshop
on art and creativity as they relate to the Science of Learning. A diverse group
of scientists, educators, and historians will come together to discuss the
effects of artistic training as a function of a variety of factors, including
timing over the lifespan, artistic medium and modality, and emotional sequelae.
A primary aim of these discussions is to explore new approaches to the
enhancement of academic learning. The workshop will bring together distinguished
researchers from a diverse array of interrelated fields, including visual art,
music, dance, auditory pattern recognition, developmental psychology,
neuroscience, education, and philosophy.