* 0824748
* Assessing Bridge Performance to Extreme Winds with Consideration of Non-Gaussian Features and System Uncertainties
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Xinzhong Chen, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 08/31/2013
* USD 149,934.00

The research objective of this project is to develop advanced methods for
performance assessment and reliability-based risk consistent designs of long
span bridges subjected to damaging winds. The research will define improved wind
force models, which reduce the complexity of current linear force model but
adequately describe the nonlinear unsteady force characteristics. The modeling
and simulations of stochastic non-Gaussian wind loads that associated with
complex urban and mountainous terrains will be considered to examine their
effects on bridge structures. To validate and refine the proposed analysis
frameworks, wind tunnel testing data and full-scale monitoring of bridge
responses to strong winds will be utilized. The field data will be provided by
international collaborators. The project deliverables include a new wind load
effects model, approach for modeling of parameter uncertainties, a methodology
for assessing uncertainty of bridge response, analysis tools for the design of
wind-excited bridges, documentation and dissemination of research results, and
engineering student education and training. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project
will have broad impacts on the design of flexible bridge structures against
damaging winds. The research findings will contribute to narrowing the gap
between predictions and actual bridge response, and enhance our ability to
design safe and economical bridges against damaging winds. The project will
greatly help in synthesizing wind load criteria to develop national wind
resistant design guidelines for the design of flexible bridge structures. It
will involve under represented groups of students, enrich the wind engineering
education at both graduate and undergraduate levels, and further strengthen the
newly established multidisciplinary wind science and engineering Ph. D program
at Texas Tech University. &lt;br/&gt;