* 0824304
* GEOTRACES: Intercalibration for Aerosol Preservation and Analysis
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2010
* Adina Paytan, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2010
* USD 83,575.00

The international GEOTRACES program is pursuing a series of enabling activities
to ensure the accuracy and precision of analytical methodology before sampling
transects across ocean basins are started. The importance of measuring trace
element and isotope (TEI) concentrations and deposition to the oceans for
aerosols is described in the GEOTRACES Science Plan (2006). NSF has already
funded several US scientists involved in GEOTRACES intercalibration experiments
to establish protocols for sample collection and analysis. These protocols will
be developed in collaboration with international scientists so that the
GEOTRACES research cruises will yield a data set that is accurate, precise and
internally-consistent.

In this project, researchers at the University of California at Santa Cruz will
augment a previously funded project at the Florida State University to acquire,
test, and intercalibrate equipment and methods for the collection of aerosols
and rainwater on the GEOTRACES cruises. The FSU funded work does not stress
intercomparison of analytical methods for measuring aerosol TEI solubility, the
impact of filter type on solubility and analytical accuracy (blanks), or the
effect of sample storage on solubility. In addition, the range in solubility
that may depend on sample source and composition is not addressed. This project
will enhance the FSU project by adding these important aspects.

The Santa Cruz team will use a unique set of aerosol filters collected using
trace-metal clean methods since 2004 and ongoing to 2010 to achieve five
objectives: (1) test several different leaching protocols on parallel samples
(collected simultaneously thus of the same composition); (2) evaluate the effect
of storage time on samples using our archived samples and ongoing collection;
(3) test the effect of different filter types on solubility, blank and
collection efficiency (four different filter types could be tested
simultaneously);(4) measure the impacts of different aerosol chemistries,
mineralogy, particle sizes, and trajectories on TEI solubility; and (5) prepare
'handbooks' describing the analytical protocols for use on GEOTRACES cruises; to
be shared with our US and international GEOTRACES colleagues.

Broader Impacts: Education and training of a young researcher is an essential
components of this research. Additional graduate and undergraduate students will
be involved in this work but will be funded separately (REU supplements and
Honors thesis). The data will be submitted in a timely manner according to the
requirements of the GEOTRACES program.