* 0824220
* New approaches to injection and detection of spin polarized electrons into semiconductor structures
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Athos Petrou, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Anupama Kaul
* 08/31/2012
* USD 374,413.00

Objectives: The objectives of this research program are: 1) to obtain efficient
spin injection into InAs at elevated temperatures by exploiting favorable
structural, magnetic and electrical properties of ferromagnetic MnAs contacts
grown in the zinc-blende structure on InAs-based materials; 2) to develop a
usable all semiconductor spin injector by exploiting the Rashba effect in InAs
and employing resonant tunneling from an InAs quantum well into an (InGa)As
detector under a bias-created electric field; 3) to improve the efficiency and
temperature robustness of spin injection from recently developed Fe/GaAs spin
light emitting diodes (LEDs) which incorporate ultrathin InAs layers embedded in
the GaAs Quantum wells. The approach is to measure the circular polarization of
the electroluminescence emitted by these devices from which the injected
electron spin polarization and therefore the device efficiency will be
determined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: There are considerable
challenges in the design and growth of suitable structures for each of the
projects to be undertaken. These challenges include the growth of the necessary
structures, and understanding how the various growth parameters affect the
outcome and how they can be controlled. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact :
If this research is successful, it will have a significant impact on the field
of spintronics, and thus possible future generations of information technology,
by providing suitable efficient injection structures for both GaAs-based and
InAs-based devices. An outreach program directed at high school students with
the objective of providing them with exposure on the principles of wave-
mechanics and its applications in nanostructures will be offered.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;