* 0824274
* Genetic Analysis of Methanogenesis by Methanosarcina species
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* William Metcalf, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 08/31/2009
* USD 160,000.00

The long-term goal of the proposed research is to understand fully the
physiology, metabolism and evolutionary adaptation of Methanosarcina species.
The primary emphasis of this proposal is the identification and characterization
of genes that directly and indirectly affect the use of one-carbon compounds as
substrate for growth and methane production. The research will (1) examine how
genes are regulated by methanol, (2) examine which genes are regulated by
methanol, and (3) develop preliminary data to support the existence of a novel
mechanism to regulate production of proteins in Methanosarcina. The proposed
experiments will primarily utilize recently developed methods for genetic
analysis of Methanosarcina; however, physiological, biochemical and molecular
approaches will complement the genetic approach. The intellectual merit of the
proposed research is based on the central role of methanogenic microorganisms in
a number of human-related problems including the production of alternative fuels
from biological materials, agriculture, waste treatment, and global warming. The
proposed studies are expected to reveal novel aspects of the methylotrophic
pathway by lending insight into the integration of methanogenesis into the
global metabolism of the organism. Moreover, a clearer understanding of archaeal
transcriptional and translational control should result from examination of the
highly regulated methylotrophic genes.

The broader impacts of the proposed research include the training of future
scientists and academics. Two students will be directly supported by the
requested funds. This study is likely to produce new genetic tools and methods
that will be useful, and freely available, to the wider microbial research
community. Finally, students from other universities may be trained in the
methods developed during this research. Facilities, resources and advice will
also be provided to local elementary and secondary school teachers who wish to
expose their students to the excitement of the microbial world.