* 0824674
* Alleviating Travel Delay Uncertainties in Traffic Assignment and Traffic Equilibrium
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Georgia Perakis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Edwin Romeijn
* 07/31/2012
* USD 315,000.00

This grant provides funding in order to tackle traffic equilibrium, traffic
assignment and route guidance problems when travel costs/delays are uncertain.
The main goals are to alleviate congestion and better manage traffic in the face
of ?uncertain conditions?. Our goal is to utilize ideas from three fields:
stochastic optimization/ stochastic variational inequalities, robust (and
adjustable robust) optimization and finally, learning theory from Statistics.
These approaches will allow us to address the aspect of uncertainty in data
parameters in a tractable way. Our research contributions will be to (i) design
and study a variety of formulations - involving stochastic optimization, robust
optimization and learning - of key traffic flow planning and management models,
(ii) understand how to incorporate effectively the inherent element of
stochasticity in the nature of traffic delays in a way that does not depend on
distributional assumptions on the data, (iii) examine efficient solution methods
of these problems and finally, and (iv) validate our results computationally. If
successful, the results of this project will provide solutions to key traffic
planning and management problems that are robust to uncertainty in terms of
travel delays. The potential applications and hence impact of this research to a
variety of logistical networks are very significant. In the area of
transportation, this research will impact both the fields of Advanced Traveler
Management Systems (ATMS) and Advanced Traveler Information Systems (ATIS). This
research aims at using methodologies from a variety of fields with the long term
goal to not only advance knowledge and deepen our understanding of issues in
transportation and as they relate to ATMS and ATIS, but also to contribute to
these fields by developing creative and innovative concepts. The goal is to
build an integrated framework, models and solution techniques for the
application of stochastic optimization and robust optimization to key traffic
planning and management problems and related areas that are accessible to all,
in order to help transportation academics and practitioners. From an educational
perspective, the results of this project will serve as components in teaching
modules at MIT. These include modules in core courses the PI has already been
one of the key contributors. This project lends itself ideally to mentoring
undergraduate and graduate students.