* 0824484
* BRIGE: Nanostructured Transition Metal Dichalcogenides for the Solar Production of Hydrogen
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2010
* Thomas Jaramillo, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 09/30/2010
* USD 175,000.00

EEC-0824484&lt;br/&gt;Jaramillo&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BRIGE awards maintain
global competitiveness by increasing the diversity of ENG researchers, who are
initiating research programs early in their careers. BRIGE awards further the
broaden participation of engineering researchers by increasing the number of
engineering graduates, by improving the representation of women and minorities
in engineering, and by understanding how to improve recruitment and retention of
engineering students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Human beings consume the energy
equivalent of 200 million barrels of oil per day. Each day, the sun deposits on
the earth an energy equivalent of 1.7 trillion barrels. Since the sun provides
nearly 10,000 times more energy than humans consume, this necessitates a need to
find a cost-effective way to harness it. Despite decades of research in solar
utilization, we are still far from a cost-effective solution that can provide
the ~10 TW of clean power that we will soon need. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
BRIGE award will investigate engineering layered semiconductors, such as MoS2
and WS2, at the nanoscale level to tune their properties for the direct
conversion of solar photons to H2 and O2 by photoelectrochemical (PEC) water-
splitting. The PI aims to transform solar energy research by using nanostructure
to control critical PEC properties-namely, the semiconductor bandgap, band edge
alignment with H2 and O2 redox potentials, charge transport within the
semiconductor, durability, and surface kinetics for the hydrogen evolution
reaction (HER). Previously, the PI has been able to synthesize nanoparticulate
MoS2 and that, unlike the case of bulk MoS2, these particles exhibit excellent
electrocatalytic properties for the HER due to their nanostructure. The research
activities are fundamental in nature and aim to understand the physico-chemical
phenomena occurring on and within these nanostructured dichalcogenide
semiconductors in order to exploit this knowledge for the development of new,
nanoscale semiconductors. The PI's ultimate goal is to develop efficient solar-
to-fuels devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will broadly impact three general
areas: societal, scientific, and educational. The grand energy challenge is to
improve utilization of solar energy, which will have global and societal
impacts. From a scientific perspective, the knowledge gained regarding the
chemical, catalytic, optical, and electronic phenomena within these nanoscale
dichalcogenide semiconductors will contribute broadly to a number of different
scientific fields. Regarding education, the PI will conduct a number of outreach
activities involving K-12, undergraduate, and graduate students. Additionally,
the PI, native of Puerto Rico, has established outreach opportunities to Puerto
Rican students in two locations: (1) the University of Puerto Rico (UPR), where
the PI intends to recruit undergraduates to apply to the Ph.D. program at
Stanford University, and (2) at the high school alma mater of the PI, Saint
John's School, where he will interact with K-12 students and inspire them to
pursue science and engineering disciplines. Closer to Stanford University, the
PI also plans to be a role model for local juvenile wards of the court, most of
whom are underrepresented minorities. The PI will also participate in Stanford
University School of Engineering programs to attract incoming first year
undergraduates into science and engineering, with directed attention to women
and underrepresented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This BRIGE grant will
broaden the participation of and increase opportunities for all engineers
including those from groups underrepresented in the engineering disciplines.
This BRIGE grant will also encourage the PI to become actively and competitively
engaged in research as an independent investigator.