* 0824694
* Facility Support: The Global CMT Project
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2008,12/31/2012
* Goran Ekstrom, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 12/31/2012
* USD 411,269.00

0824694&lt;br/&gt;Ekstrom&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks
funding to continue the Centroid-Moment-Tensor (CMT) Project. This facility
represents a 25-year-long endeavor to catalog, analyze, and maintain data on
global earthquake activity and focal mechanisms. Global, comprehensive seismic
strain relief records are maintained and made available through the CMT project.
The cataloging began in 1976 with the initial goal of analyzing moment tensor
and centroid location for all earthquakes with a magnitude greater or equal to
5.0. Currently, data are distributed within one day of occurrence. Current
funding is solicited to maintain and upgrade to better and more modern methods
of information dissemination. Global and regional tectonic activity and
associated processes can be modeled, interpreted, constrained, and better
understood thought CMT analysis. Tomographic research also benefits from CMT
analysis. Overall, five specific activities are identified, 1) determine and
archive moment tensors for greater than magnitude 5.0 earthquakes with global
coverage, 2) rapidly identify and determine moment tensors for earthquakes with
M&gt;5.5 and quickly disseminate results, 3) curate and maintain the CMT catalog
and develop improvements to distribute data more effectively, 4) event detection
for seismic sources from surface waves and cataloging/distributing the data, and
5) determining waveform quality from the GSN and other seismic networks. The PIs
each request one month salary and funding is sought for two half-time research
assistants. PIs will maintain and monitor software, data acquisition protocols
and data workflow and supervise research assistants. The CMT data archive and
rapid CMT results from major seismic events have been highly recognized
throughout the community. CMT magnitude estimates are distributed and considered
?authoritative? by the USGS. The catalog is considered the standard and
localized earthquake studies rely on these data as a starting point. CMT data is
widely used by tomographers needing to create synthetic seismograms. CMT data,
besides uses in research, is widely applied for educational
purposes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;