* 0824116
* GaN-based quantum-structure devices for THz light emission and photodetection
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Theodore Moustakas, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* John Zavada
* 08/31/2012
* USD 399,967.00

Objectives: The development of terahertz sources and detectors is the subject of
extensive research efforts, as these devices could enable numerous high-impact
applications in the areas of sensing, spectroscopy, and imaging. GaAs-based THz
devices have made substantial progress recently; however they can only provide
incomplete spectral coverage and remain limited to cryogenic temperatures due to
an intrinsic property of GaAs, namely the presence of LO phonons with THz-range
frequencies. To overcome these limitations, the PIs propose to develop
intersubband THz sources and photodetectors using GaN/AlGaN quantum wells, which
feature LO-phonon frequencies well outside of the THz region.

Intellectual merit: The argument of using nitride quantum wells for THz device
development is very compelling and has been substantiated by detailed
theoretical studies. The research objectives will be pursued with a combination
of material development efforts, Monte Carlobased design studies, and device
processing optimization, and all the required resources and expertise are
available. This work will also advance the general state of knowledge in the
area of nitride heterostructures and related devices.

Broader impacts: The proposed activities will promote education through the
training of students in a variety of disciplines, ranging from epitaxial growth,
to quantum engineering, computational electronics, and THz photonics. To
increase the program effectiveness and scope, the involvement of undergraduates,
high-school interns, and students from disadvantaged backgrounds is also
emphasized. Finally, the proposed devices have the potential for a revolutionary
impact in several technology areas of high relevance, such as security
screening,manufacturing quality control, and medical diagnostics.