* 0824923
* U.S.-Germany Dissertation Enhancement:   Supramolecular Structures Based on Photo-Reactive Cationic Surfactants and Polyelectrolytes
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Timothy Long, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 08/31/2010
* USD 13,175.00

U.S-Germany Dissertation Enhancement: Supramolecular Structures Based on Photo-
Reactive Cationic Surfactants and
Polyelectrolytes&lt;br/&gt;0824923&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The transformative
impact of ionic liquids has evolved from simple ?green? solvents as replacements
for volatile organic solvents to commercially viable technologies ranging from
electro-active devices to efficient catalysts. Ionic liquids have emerged as a
platform for future technologies, and ionic liquids are now integral components
in electromechanical transducers and high-performance membranes for alternate
energy. Macromolecules that are derived from ionic liquid precursors enable the
introduction of unprecedented charged units and counterions into a myriad of
electro-active devices. A multidisciplinary research team is critical to
fundamentally understand the structure-property-performance relationships for
future technologies containing ionic liquids. The diverse chemical structure of
ionic liquids offers an expanded toolbox of building blocks for novel
macromolecular architecture. Structural characterization will reside at the
boundaries of traditional academic disciplines and requires expertise in diverse
strategies ranging from aqueous size-exclusion chromatography and solution
rheology to solid state morphology. Collaboration among Professor Timothy E.
Long and Mr. Matthew Hunley at Virginia Tech with the research group of
Professor Axel H.E. M체ller at Universit채t Bayreuth in Germany will uniquely
assemble the synthetic and characterization expertise required to answer these
fundamental questions. The proposed Doctoral Dissertation Enhancement Project
will focus on the synthesis and preliminary characterization of photo-reactive
cationic polyelectrolytes and polymerizable cationic amphiphiles. Photo-reactive
cationic polyelectrolytes and amphiphiles are proposed to form tailored
supramolecular assemblies for functional applications, such as cylindrical
?tubular? micelles and ion channels. The influence of macromolecular topology on
the ability of polyelectrolytes and amphiphilic ionic liquid polymers to form
functional nanometer-scale scaffolds will also be
investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaboration between Virginia Tech and
the Universit채t Bayreuth connects internationally-renowned scientists and world-
class characterization facilities and expertise not found at a single
university. It will fund Matthew Hunley, a U.S. graduate student, to spend one
semester in Bayreuth conducting research with the team led by Axel M체ller. The
collaboration bridges the two international groups to enable cross-cultural
interaction and idea exchange, as well as fosters long-term research
collaborations between the two groups. The studies will provide fundamental
scientific knowledge, and integrated societal impact will focus on smarter,
?greener? electromechanical devices and high-performance membranes for
electronic and biomedical applications.