* 0824008
* Novel Tunable Microwave Magnetoelectric Composite Materials and Devices with Metallic Magnetic Thin Film Materials
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Nian Sun, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* john zavada
* 08/31/2011
* USD 286,600.00

Intellectual Merit: The strong magnetoelectric coupling and the many recent
breakthroughs in magnetoelectric composites comprising both ferri/ferromagnetic
and ferroelectric phases have made this area extremely exciting. However, the
magnetoelectric coupling is far from strong enough, particularly for the
microwave magnetoelectric composites used in RF/microwave signal processing
devices. This is due to the lack of a suitable microwave magnetic material with
combined properties of low loss tangent at microwave frequencies, large
magnetostriction constant and high permeability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
purposes of this project are: (1) to investigate novel FeGaB microwave magnetic
films with large magnetostriction constant and narrow ferromagnetic resonance
linewidth; and (2) to explore novel tunable microwave magnetoelectric composite
materials and devices with these FeGaB microwave magnetic films. This project
will lead to a whole new class of highly magnetostrictive FeGaB microwave
magnetic films and magnetoelectric composite materials, which will enable novel
electrostatically tunable magnetoelectric signal processing devices critical for
RF/microwave integrated circuits. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
novel FeGaB films and FeGaB films based magnetoelectric composite materials and
devices will lead to new functionalities on RF/microwave integrated circuits
that ferroelectric or magnetic materials alone do not possess, and will have
great impacts on many industries and on society. The education plan includes
establishing the Magic of Magnetism program for the Museum of Science, Boston
for informally educating the general public; and an extensive K ~ graduate
education plan including graduate and undergraduate education, research
experiences for undergraduates, high school students and teachers, emphasizing
participation of underrepresented groups, particularly women and minorities.
&lt;br/&gt;