* 0824311
* BRIGE:Triple-Wavelength White Light Emitters using Nitride/Oxide Heterostructure
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Gon Namkoong, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2011
* USD 170,000.00

0824311&lt;br/&gt;Gon Namkoong, Old Dominion University&lt;br/&gt;BRIGE: Triple-
Wavelength White Light Emitters using Nitride/Oxide
Heterostructure&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The objective of this
research is to develop white light emitting diodes for high light output power,
excellent heat dissipation capabilities, super-brightness and long lifespan.
Novel concepts are to integrate optically promising semiconductor materials,
III-nitrides and ZnO. The proposed approaches are: (1) to functionalize the very
effective optical properties of nitride/ZnO heterostructure to emit triple
colors, including blue, green, and red emissions; (2) to use nanostructured ZnO
for enhanced external light extraction; (3) to use highly conductive n-type ZnO
substrates for vertical design which allows for the high injection currents for
super-brightness emission at larger chip sizes. The proposed research will
develop the integrated devices with III-nitrides and ZnO to create new level of
high efficiency white LEDs. This research involves the advanced growth
technologies, including dynamic control of hetero-interface layer, defects,
enhanced hole concentrations of p-type GaN, and the investigation of
luminescence efficiency of nanostructured ZnO. The expected thrusts are the
novel white emitters which promise very cheap, reliable, and high efficiency
LEDs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The successful devices will produce
huge energy-saving sources by replacing current fluorescent-based general
lighting sources. This research requires the understanding of intensive
characterizations of heterojunction system of ZnO and III-nitrides. Thus, the
research program provides an opportunity for undergraduate and graduate students
actively to involve material characterization, growth, device simulation, and
scientific activities in the engineering communities. Furthermore, the
educational strategies for minorities and women will be steadily conducted
through undergraduate "senior research projects" where a small group composed of
diverse senior students, including minorities and female students, will be
exposed to interesting research fields. The principal investigator will
participate in this project as "Mentor and Advisor" and will raise their
interest in scientific and engineering topics and let them continue their
careers in continued academic fields or in the industrial engineering and
scientific fields&lt;br/&gt;