* 0824075
* Semiconductor spintronics devices and circuits
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Hanan Dery, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 09/30/2012
* USD 455,826.00

Proposal Number: ECCS-0824075&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Semiconductor
spintronics devices and circuits&lt;br/&gt;PI Name: Dery, Hanan&lt;br/&gt;PI
Institution: University of
Rochester&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Semiconductor spintronics devices and
circuits&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;H. Dery, M. Huang, &amp; R.
Sobolewski&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to
study properties of the electron?s quantum mechanical spin that can be used in
the design of logic circuitry in the future. This study will explore innovative
high-performance computer architectures that capitalize on the electrical and
magnetic control of lateral spin-based devices. The approach is to design,
fabricate, characterize, and model hybrid semiconductor/ferromagnet lateral
devices that are based on spin-accumulation. The use of advanced, ultrafast
magneto-optical spectroscopy techniques will be used to characterize the spin
transport and to probe the physics in these devices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;Virtually all of today's
digital electronics use voltage levels to process data. This choice of
information coding has provided tremendous scaling and growth in the
semiconductor industry. Voltage, however, is not the only representation
available. Commercial storage devices encode information using the electron's
quantum mechanical spin. The proposed research studies the tradeoffs between
advanced digital devices that rely on the charge of electrons and devices that
rely on the quantum mechanical spin of
electrons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed program holds the potential to improve the architecture of high-
performance computers. It may affect a variety of everyday applications by
allowing lower power consumption and additional programmability of electronic
circuits. The educational activities in this program involve (I) training of
both undergraduate and graduate students, (II) encourage students from under-
represented groups to join our team by using the on-going McNair program, and
(III) the establishment of a new course about spin-based electronics.