* 0824042
* Standard Research Grant:  Deliberating Nanotechnologies in the US: Gendered Beliefs about Benefits and Risks as Factors in Emerging Public Perception and Participation
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Barbara Harthorn, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 09/30/2011
* USD 249,996.00

This interdisciplinary research project co-funded by the Science, Technology,
and Society Program; Nanoscale Exploratory Research; and the Division of Civil,
Mechanical, and Manufacturing Innovation analyzes how factors of gender and
ethnicity shape emergent views of nanoscience, nanoscale materials, and
nanotechnologies by the US public in a deliberative setting. As a new and little
known class of synthesized materials and devices, nanotechnologies pose an
unprecedented case for examining technological beliefs-in-the-making. In the
context of federally mandated public participation in nanotech research and
development, this project asks how public participants respond to deliberative
workshops concerning science and emerging technologies, and in particular, it
focuses on the intersecting roles of gender and ethnicity in shaping
participants? views and participation in such public forums. The research
systematically explores gendered responses in group discussion to issues of
technological benefit and risk, governance and responsibility, and societal
issues such as equity, privacy, security, job gain and loss, and globalization,
from both individual and societal perspectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
comparative set of 6 public deliberation workshops on emerging nanotechnologies
in the US are conducted. The project convenes 3 groups each on 2 specific
science and technology applications: nano health technologies and nano energy
technologies. The 3 groups are composed of mixed gender, women-only, and men-
only participants, with careful attention to ethnicity composition within each
group. The mixed group sessions will provide direct longitudinal comparative
data with comparable 2007 workshops and hence the ability to track changing
public views. The main purpose is to examine the ways that gender operates as a
factor to enable or inhibit full participation in such public forums, and how
specific workshop design features such as group size, gender and race/ethnicity
composition interact. Data analysis methods are qualitative, with systematic
content analysis using qualitative data analysis software. &lt;br/&gt;