* 0824954
* Collaborative Research: Experiment on Internal Tide Scattering
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Thomas Johnston, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2013
* USD 579,480.00

Tides rival winds as an energy source for mixing in the deep ocean, yet the
pathways of energy transfer from basin-scale tidal flows to turbulent mixing
scales are not well understood. Over the past decade, many observations have
shown barotropic tidal flow over steep, tall mid-ocean topography generates low-
mode (large-scale) internal tides. Most of the energy lost from barotropic tides
at these sites is carried away by internal tides with decay scales of O(1000
km). With few in situ observations away from internal tide generation sites, the
ultimate fate of these low-mode internal tides and their energy is uncertain.
This project will examine how topographic scattering of internal tides from
large to small scales dissipates their energy via micro-scale mixing.
Topographic scattering may also be a sink for wind-driven near-inertial internal
waves. Hutchinson Seamount in the Line Islands Ridge will serve as an ideal test
site, which lies in the path of energetic mode-1 internal tides emanating
southward from the Hawaiian Ridge. Numerical models show the conversion of
energy from a low-mode structure to a localized beam of energy with enhanced
vertical shear and mixing. Altimetry provides unambiguous support for the model
predictions of energy transfer from mode 1 to 2 downstream of the seamount. This
project will observe the internal tide scattering process, quantify the
associated mixing relative to the temporal and spatial structures of the
scattered waves, verify model predictions, and improve model capabilities.
Moorings will be deployed upstream (with respect to the incoming internal
tides), on top, and downstream of the seamount for 150 days. A survey on R/V
Revelle will provide spatial coverage at 19 stations with lowered acoustic
Doppler current profiling/CTD/micro-structure to map 1) the incident and
scattered wave fields near the seamount and 2) mixing via direct measurements,
Thorpe scales, and fine-scale parameterizations. The mooring time series will
isolate the tidal signal from background variability. A new numerical modeling
study of the scattering will help refine the sampling plan and interpret the
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Internal tides impact the magnitude and inhomogeneity
(in time and space- vertically and laterally) of diapycnal mixing. The
meridional overturning circulation is likely not a heat engine, but is driven
energetically by deep-ocean mixing. The relevance of global models, most with
uniform mixing, of past or future climate is at issue if they are tuned to
reproduce present observations, but do not include spatially and temporally
inhomogeneous diapycnal mixing. Internal tide scattering is important where
baroclinic tides are large and topography is tall and steep, such as in the
Western Pacific and at mid-ocean ridges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investogators
will validate their numerical models against their experimental results for 2D
and 3D topography in linear and nonlinear regimes. Graduate students and interns
will gain experience with state-of-the-art instrumentation. Results will be
broadly disseminated to the public by developing in cooperation with other
researchers a Wikipedia entry on internal tides, their importance in mixing, and
relevance to global circulation and climate. This website is often top ranked in
internet searches and has the potential to reach millions of interested people
in the general public as well as students. Publication of results in popular
science magazines and websites will be sought via a press release from the
Scripps Communications Office. Results will be disseminated in the oceanographic
community by presentations at the International Union of Geophysics and Geodesy
meeting in 2011 and the Ocean Sciences meeting in 2012 and by publishing in
peer-reviewed journals.