* 0824171
* GOALI: Side gated ultra narrow channel silicon MOSFETs and transport studies at nanometer scale
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2013
* Ali Gokirmak, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2013
* USD 307,075.00

Side Gated Ultra Narrow Channel Silicon MOSFETs and Transport Studies at
Nanometer Scale&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is
experimental evaluation of side-gated small scale field effect transistors for
extremely low leakage currents and electrostatic tuning, and electronic
transport studies at nanometer scale using these devices. The approach is based
on accumulation of holes driven from the substrate for electrostatic control of
the channel potential and side interfaces, while an inversion layer is formed at
the top-gate interface for current flow. This approach also enables additional
functionality through multi-input operation. Electronic transport in ultra-small
scale and quasi-1D structures will be studied. High resolution capacitance-
voltage characterization will be performed utilizing non-linear characteristics
of field effect transistors and ambient noise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit: Knowledge gained through this project will contribute to the
understanding of electronic transport in small scale devices and restricted
geometries which may lead to new device concepts for logic and memory. Very
narrow devices with the possibility of side charge trapping for further
confinement will enable basic studies of transport in electrostatically formed
nanowires and quantum dots. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: This research
will focus on a promising alternative structure to conventional transistors for
certain applications. One graduate student will be supported through the
project. Undergraduate students will also be involved in the electrical
characterization of the devices. The results will be made available through
publications and conference presentations. The project will be integrated in
ongoing outreach programs in the School of Engineering for K-12 students and
teachers to promote math and science education. &lt;br/&gt;