* 0824328
* BRIGE: Dynamically Tunable Nanostructured Surfaces for Multiphase Microfluidics
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2008,01/31/2011
* Evelyn Wang, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mary M. Toney
* 01/31/2011
* USD 175,000.00

The research objective of this award is to investigate dynamically tunable
nanostructured surfaces to manipulate multi-phase microfluidics for lab-on-a-
chip, energy, and thermal management applications. The nanostructures will be
fabricated in silicon with ferromagnetic tips, such that the inclination of the
nanostructures will change upon the application of a magnetic field.
Experimental investigations will be performed to understand how geometrically
tunable nanostructures affect interfacial phenomena, apparent contact angles,
and surface tension forces. Techniques used for these studies will include
diffraction limited microscopy, scanning electron microscopy, and goniometry.
The characterizations will be aimed to develop a correlation between
nanostructure inclination angle and droplet/bubble contact angles. Experimental
studies will subsequently be performed to examine the ability to modulate
surface tension and to promote droplet/bubble departure in microchannels on
demand.

The research will provide new methods to develop tunable nanostructures and
fundamental understanding of the interactions of the liquid-air/vapor interface
with these structures. Design guidelines for tunable nanostructured surfaces
will be attained to achieve controlled droplet/bubble departure processes, which
is one of the main challenges in many microfluidic systems. In addition, the
results from these studies will provide the necessary framework, experimental
techniques, and knowledge to allow investigations of related interfacial
phenomena such as tunable surfaces for drag reduction, directional liquid
spreading and draining, droplet manipulation, and liquid confinement.