* 0824793
* SGER: Predation in evolution: paleobiological consequences of cidaroid predation on crinoids
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2010
* Tomasz Baumiller, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Boush
* 06/30/2010
* USD 25,000.00

Predation in evolution: paleobiological consequences of cidaroid predation on
crinoids.&lt;br/&gt;Evidence from Lizard Island, Australia and the Oligocene of
New Zealand&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;T. K. Baumiller&lt;br/&gt;Predation is
generally recognized as an important agent of natural selection and the study of
predator-prey interactions in the fossil record allows us to evaluate its
evolutionary impact. A large body of work has been devoted to exploring the role
of predation in crinoid ecology and evolution. For example, it has been argued
that the displacement of stalked crinoids to deep water over the past ~100my
(Bottjer &amp; Jablonski 1988) was the result of increased predation pressure,
especially from shell-crushing fish (Meyer &amp; Macurda 1977; Meyer 1985; Oji
1996). In contrast, it has been suggested that the success of the stalkless
comatulid crinoids that today thrive in shallow water is due to their ability to
deal with predation pressure (Meyer &amp; Macurda 1977). The differences in
handling predation pressure by stalked crinoids and comatulids have generally
been attributed to the ability to shed and regenerate body parts and locomotory
abilities of the latter. However, recently it has been discovered that today?s
dominant group of stalked crinoids, the isocrinids, are also capable of rapid
crawling (Baumiller &amp; Messing 2007), a trait generally associated with
stalkless comatulid crinoids. It also has been shown that these isocrinids are
subject to predation by cidaroid sea urchins (Baumiller et al. 2008). In
response to the interaction with a cidaroid, isocrinids shed the anchored end of
the stalk and crawl away from the cidaroid which is preoccupied with the shed
stalk portion. This ?lizard?s tail? strategy of escape not only links a set of
behavioral traits (stalk shedding and crawling) to predation, but suggests that
benthic predators, such as cidaroids, need to be considered in assessing the
ecological and evolutionary history of crinoids. The major goal of this study is
to confirm the robustness of a direct proxy for cidaroid predation on crinoids
(bite marks and fracture patterns). This will involve studying how living
cidaroids process crinoid material with their teeth and in their gut. This will
be done experimentally at the Lizard Island Research Station (LIRS), Australia.
Also at LIRS, the processing of crinoid material by other potential predators,
such as fish and crustaceans, will be explored to see whether these different
predators leave unique signatures on the skeletons of their crinoid prey. The
experimental portion of the study will be followed by exploring the fossil
record for historical evidence of this predator-prey interaction. Specifically,
stalked crinoids of the Kokoamu Sandstone (Oligocene; South Island, New Zealand)
will be studied for evidence of cidaroid damage. The Kokoamu Sandstone was
chosen because it contains abundant crinoid columnals as well as remains of the
cidaroid, Histocidaris, the very taxon which in the Recent was found with
crinoid elements in its gut. If successful, the results of this study will serve
as the basis for pursuing larger goals: (1) to explore the history of this
interaction through geologic time by examining remains of crinoid stalks from
localities where they are known to co-occur with cidaroid echinoids, (2) analyze
the morphology of crinoids for traits associated with stalk shedding and
crawling, and (3) examine diversity trends of crinoids in the context of these
?escapability? traits and the frequency of interaction. &lt;br/&gt;