* 0824717
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Human Predation Pressure and the Late Quaternary Extinctions in the Cape Ecozone, South Africa
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* John Faith, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Kaye E. Reed
* 08/31/2010
* USD 15,000.00

Humans have impacted global biodiversity via habitat degradation and
destruction, the introduction of invasive species, and direct harvesting of
plant and animal populations. The archaeological record provides abundant
evidence that modern humans living in small-scale societies are capable of
substantial impacts on past ecosystems. The antiquity of human impacts on past
environments is much debated, especially concerning the extent to which humans
contributed to mass extinctions of megafauna during the past 100,000 years. In
this project the coPI will evaluate the hypothesis that human foragers
contributed to large mammal extinctions along the southern coast of South Africa
during the Pleistocene/Holocene environmental transition, between 12-10 thousand
years ago. It is generally agreed that environmental change played an important
role in these extinctions, although possible human contributions to the southern
African extinctions remain unclear. The research will involve an analysis of
faunal remains from southern African archaeological sites spanning the past 125
thousand years. A primary objective is to determine whether Later Stone Age
humans (&lt;40 thousand years ago) exerted greater predation pressure on large
mammal populations than their Middle Stone Age (~250-40 thousand years ago)
predecessors. The coPI will examine dental remains of fossil ungulates to
reconstruct the age structures of animal populations and to examine the effects
of human predation pressure on wildlife populations through time. In addition,
the coPI will determine whether there is evidence for anthropogenic resource
depression, a decline in wildlife population densities resulting from human
predation pressure, at the time of the southern African extinctions. This will
involve an investigation of human subsistence change across the
Pleistocene/Holocene transition at Boomplaas Cave, located in the Cango River
Valley. The Boomplaas Cave faunal remains will be studied to determine how
changes in prehistoric human diet reflect environmental shifts and/or
anthropogenic resource depression. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Debate over the
possible role of prehistoric human foragers on large mammal extinctions has been
underway for over 150 years. While much research has focused on extinctions in
North America, Australia, and Eurasia, the extinctions in Africa remain poorly
understood. The results of this research will provide new insight into how the
combined effects of human activities and environmental change have structured
the ecosystems of southern Africa, particularly through their impact on large
mammal populations. This project will also establish the time depth of human
impacts on animal populations in southern Africa. In turn, this has implications
concerning the hunting rights of indigenous peoples and wildlife conservation
decisions, especially with respect to the fate of contemporary biodiversity and
our attempts to understand and moderate the effects of global climate change.