* 0824188
* Novel molecular engineering and processing approaches for high-performance organic transistor devices:  the role of polymer structure and morphology
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2008,02/29/2012
* Tomasz Kowalewski, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Anupama Kaul
* 02/29/2012
* USD 506,000.00

Research and development of organic semiconductors for electronic applications
have shown intense growth in the last few years. Versatile attributes, such as
solution processability and low cost, render these materials particularly
attractive for applications such as electronic displays on flexible substrates,
organic field effect transistors (OFETs) and large-area photovoltaics. However,
carrier mobilities in organic semiconductors are much lower than their inorganic
homologues. Evidence now indicates that carrier mobility in these systems
depends on molecular structure and organization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: Our objective is to achieve better
understanding of structural ordering effects on carrier mobility in polymer-
based electronic devices. We propose to focus on optimizing the performance of
OFETs based on polymers using novel synthesis and processing techniques that
will achieve both amorphous and highly crystalline polymer morphologies. Our
approach will include correlations of materials structural changes and device
architecture with device performance. While the device applications will be
focused on OFETs, the conclusions will pertain to a wide range of conducting
polymer technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: It is the aim in
this project to train two graduate students and three undergraduate researchers
in the area of structure-property-performance relationships needed for
breakthrough technologies in electronic polymer-based devices. The students will
have opportunities to interact with Plextronics, a local company and a
technology leader in commercialization of organic light-emitting diodes and
photovoltaics. The investigators will also collaborate with teachers in the
Pittsburgh Public Schools (~60% minority students) on projects to experiment
with conducting polymers.&lt;br/&gt;