* 0824742
* International:    Student Participation in a Unique Meteor Radar for Atmospheric Studies in Argentina
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2011
* David Fritts, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Jessica Robin
* 07/31/2011
* USD 110,128.00

0824742&lt;br/&gt;Janches&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support Dr. Diego
Janches of Northwest Research Association, Incorporated in a research and
education collaboration with Drs. Claudio Brunini and Jose L. Hornaechea of
Universidad Nacional de la Plata in La Plata (UNLP), Argentina. The proposed
activity will involve students in an ongoing international research project that
is potentially transformative. The research involves a new meteor radar that has
not been possible (or attempted) with such a system to date and is positioned in
a region of the world that is lacking instrumentation. This radar system is
currently being deployed at the Astronomical Station Rio Grande (EARG), Tierra
del Fuego, Argentina, and was specifically designed to pursue a number of
synergetic research efforts including the characterization of the meteoroid
population and large-scale atmospheric dynamics. The proposed measurements are
magnetically conjugate to a number of northern-hemisphere radars and will
further our understanding of global upper atmospheric systems. The participants
will work closely with the Argentine collaborators in the analysis and
interpretation of the radar data with the end goal of finding correlations
between the radar data and small-scale gravity waves signatures in GPS
measurements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed activity will actively involve
U.S. students and Argentine researchers in the development, deployment, and
maintenance of a radar system. Additionally, the award will provide an
international research experience to four U.S. students and they will be
mentored by highly-qualified researchers in the U.S. and Argentina. Furthermore,
the project will promote atmospheric and space science in Argentina with the
goal to develop the first graduate curriculum in this field in Argentina. The
PIs, with their Argentine collaborators, will offer seminars to students and
faculty at UNLP on atmospheric sciences and aeronomy. &lt;br/&gt;