* 0824652
* Collaborative Research:  Export Pathways from the Subpolar North Atlantic:  Phase Two
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Amy Bower, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2011
* USD 461,653.00

Intellectual Merit: Profiling float observations in the western subpolar North
Atlantic made in the 1990s appeared to contradict the current understanding of
the Deep Western Boundary Current (DWBC) as the dominant export pathway for
Labrador Sea Water (LSW) from subpolar to subtropical latitudes. All of the
profiling floats that exited the Labrador Sea in the DWBC left the boundary well
north of the Tail of the Grand Banks, turning eastward into the ocean interior
along the path of the North Atlantic Current (NAC) at about 50°N. This
unexpected observation motivated a long-term observational effort to obtain a
better understanding of LSW pathways and their variability with new float
observations and historical hydrographic data analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
field component of this project, which began in 2003, is nearly complete. For
three years, groups of six acoustically tracked RAFOS floats were released
nominally every three months in the DWBC near 50ºN at Upper LSW and Classical
LSW levels. When the last floats surface in November 2008, two-year high-
resolution trajectories from about 62 RAFOS floats will be available for
analysis. Two important results have emerged to date from a study of RAFOS
floats that have already surfaced and "e-floats" generated from an ocean eddy-
resolving general circulation model. First, there is little evidence for a
"fast-track" from the subpolar to the subtropical basin along the DWBC. Second,
a significant number of RAFOS and e-floats trace an interior pathway for LSW
southward from the Newfoundland Basin to the eastern subtropical gyre, a pathway
that was not observed at all by the profiling floats. These results raise
critical questions about the importance of the DWBC as an export pathway for
newly-ventilated waters, and hence its role in the Atlantic Meridional
Overturning Circulation (AMOC) which is a near-term priority of the Ocean
Research Priorities Plan (ORPP).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the conclusion of the
RAFOS field work in sight, and the capability to generate e-float trajectories
in hand, the investigators are now poised to make significant advances in the
understanding of the export pathways of LSW and their impact on the AMOC. The
specific objectives of this analysis are to:&lt;br/&gt;1. Complete the
statistical analysis of the full RAFOS float data set and compare to a similar
study using e-floats generated from an ocean general circulation
model.&lt;br/&gt;2. Reconcile the apparent contradiction between the rapid loss
of floats from the DWBC in the Newfoundland Basin and the concept of the DWBC as
a direct LSW export pathway from the subpolar to subtropical
region.&lt;br/&gt;3. Elucidate the impact of mesoscale, interannual and decadal
variability on LSW pathways.&lt;br/&gt;4. Assess the importance of the interior
pathway of LSW, relative to the DWBC, to the volume and property transport of
the AMOC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: By providing an improved
understanding of subpolar-to-subtropical ocean pathways, this proposed research
will contribute to an unraveling of the ocean's role in global climate. The
Lagrangian perspective will provide valuable information on the continuity of
the lower limb of the AMOC and as such will aid in the design of monitoring
programs. This project will also have a broader impact in that it will
contribute to the training and education of a graduate student at Duke
University and a postdoctoral investigator at Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution.