* 0824991
* U.S.-Australia Dissertation Enhancement:  Cytonuclear Interactions in a Hybrid Parthenogenetic Gecko (Heteronotia binoei)
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2010
* Craig Moritz, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* R.  Clive Woods
* 07/31/2010
* USD 11,200.00

&lt;br/&gt;0824991&lt;br/&gt;Moritz&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: U.S.-Australia
Dissertation Enhancement: Cytonuclear Interactions in a Hybrid Parthenogenetic
Gecko (Heteronotia binoei)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a doctoral
dissertation enhancement project between Dr. Craig Moritz and his student
Matthew Fujita in the Museum of Vertebrate Zoology at the University of
California, Berkeley and Dr. Michael Kearney in the Zoology Department at the
University of Melbourne in Australia. Parthenogenetic organisms, which reproduce
clonally without sex, are often hybrids with mismatched mitochondrial and
nuclear genomes. This perpetual cytonuclear mismatch can have important
phenotypic consequences which may alter our view of the paradox of sex. Compared
to sexual forms, parthenogenetic geckos of the Heteronotia binoei complex
exhibit altered physiological performance and developmental stability,
phenotypic traits potentially associated with cytonuclear interactions in the
electron transport chain of aerobic respiration. The researchers will
investigate disrupted epistatic interactions in the coevolved cytonuclear
complexes in parthenogenetic Heteronotia that may have resulted from their
hybrid origin and/or subsequent genetic changes. Variation in cytochrome c
oxidase activity among four clonal lineages of Heteronotia will be used to
examine the interactions of two distinct mitochondrial lineages in different
nuclear backgrounds. The data will contribute to an international collaboration
integrating genomics, biochemical assays, and physiological data to understand
the origin, evolution and phenotypic consequences of hybrid parthenogenesis in
Heteronotia binoei, with broader implications on identifying genomic processes
in allopolyploid organisms and understanding and resolving the paradox of sex.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is sufficient overlap of interests between the
University of California and the University of Melbourne to indicate that they
can successfully pursue the activities proposed and that the interaction will
benefit both sides. Results from this research are relevant to genome evolution,
diversification, speciation (genomic incompatibilities), phenotypic variation
(physiology), the evolution and maintenance of sex and the identification of
genomic processes in allopolyploid organisms. This research will provide the US
graduate student an excellent opportunity to receive a global research
experience. It is anticipated that he will maintain contacts and collaborations
with the Australian researchers and students throughout his career&lt;br/&gt;