* 0824468
* Scholar's Award: Science and Improvement in South Asia: Empire, Nation, and Colonial Modernity, 1860-1922
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Prakash Kumar, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2011
* USD 148,324.00

The proposed project is a political history of agricultural science in late
nineteenth and early twentieth century in colonial south Asia. It builds on the
PI's doctoral research "Facing competition: The history of indigo experiments in
colonial India, 1897-1920," which was funded in part by the National Science
Foundation in 2004. The doctoral dissertation developed a case study of efforts
in six laboratories and agricultural stations to improve natural indigo (the
blue dyestuff extracted from the leaves of the indigo plant) to highlight the
resistance of "plantation science" to the transition towards synthetic
dyestuffs. The proposed project incorporates a focus on the science surrounding
indigo within a broader study of agricultural science and modern science in late
colonial India. It discusses the insertion of new technologies into South Asian
agriculture by the moving diasporas of European planters, targeted effort by
European entrepreneurs to organize "private" science and their wider impact, the
creation of public institutions of science by the colonial state, and colonial
cultural reforms in the field of education (particularly the efforts to promote
curricula based on western sciences).

The research problematizes the transmission of science in the imperial-colonial
continuum, maintaining that several earlier studies of technological imperialism
failed to engage with the thick local politics in the colony and the context of
power at the level of the colony and globally. The scrutiny of documents is
planned to proceed on two planes. The analysis consistently emphasizes the
engagement of Indians with the passage of western agricultural science and
education into the colonial order. In this regard the work probes the political
actions of aristocratic landlords in the mid nineteenth century, the vernacular
public in Bengal in the late nineteenth and early twentieth century who wrote in
the regional press, and nationalists. Science in this work thus becomes a
surrogate for aspirations to nationhood just as much as a tool for making claims
to modernity on behalf of the civic society constituted by the people. The
research plan expends an equal amount of effort towards understanding the nature
of agricultural change with reference to the role played by global actors and
ideologues such as the American philanthropist Henry Phipps, the famous
Pittsburgh based industrialist and conservationist whose financial contribution
was instrumental in the establishment of the Imperial Agricultural Institute at
Pusa in India in 1905, and the impact of German state models of agricultural
change, in particular the economic model of Friedrich List. This inter-
continental research examines the documents of the Agriculture Department and
the Education Department of the colonial government in Bengal, popular writings,
records at institutions in England, technical publications of the scientists,
trade journals, and the archives of printers and dyers in the Yorkshire region
of England. Seeking inspiration from postcolonial theory the work plan includes
an analysis of the imaginations of a "local" modernity in the multiple spaces of
the colonial order and their correspondence with influences emanating from
extraterritorial nodes.

The international and interdisciplinary scope of this research activity will
enable forging of various partnerships. Benefits are likely to accrue across
research, teaching, and policy-making. The work fundamentally expands the
analysis of western science in the under-analyzed non-western context. It will
thus provide useful insights to policymakers and technologists invested in the
task of transfer of science and technology from the industrialized West. The
firm grounding of this research in the two separate fields of Science and
Technology Studies and South Asian history opens possibilities for enlarging the
infrastructure for research and teaching. The output from this work will expand
the frontiers of knowledge and offer possibilities of collaboration to
specialists working on European and Asian history. The resulting monograph will
prove to be an important resource for teaching new courses melding the
theoretical and empirical contents of history of science and South Asian history
like the actor network theory, social construction of technology, frontier
science, sociology of scientific knowledge, nationalism, postcolonial theory,
and critical studies of modernity and globalization.