* 0824630
* Collaborative Research: Seismic Reflection Data System for Marine Geosciences II
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* Suzanne Carbotte, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 08/31/2014
* USD 615,183.00

Intellectual Merit: Over the past three decades, digital seismic reflection
techniques have played a major role in advancing our understanding of a wide
range of Earth problems, from the history of sea level rise and earth's past
climate, to oceanic crust formation, to the structure of tsunamogenic faults
zones at subduction boundaries. Seismic reflection data, while of high value for
a broad range of studies, are also costly to acquire. Preservation of these data
is essential to maximize their utility and ensure they remain available for
future uses beyond those envisioned by the originally funded NSF project. Two
linked marine seismic data centers have been developed that serve digital
collections of NSF-sponsored projects going back to the first acquisition
projects in 1974. These centers contain field and processed data that currently
exceeds 10 TB, along with data access, discovery and visualization tools. New
developments in geoinformatics hold great promise for expanding access to these
digital collections and broadening participation in geoscience research.

In this project seismic reflection field data and subsequently processed data
will be captured and preserved, including data from the new National Marine
Seismic Facility, the R/V Langseth, the only dedicated academic seismic ship.
Aggregation and preservation of newly generated seismic data will continue,
including processed data from single channel projects from any UNOLS ship, and
for some others where field seismic data not being systematically archived.
Older field and processed data will also be captured and preserved from more
than 50 programs of which ~30 are dispersed mostly among scientists. A mechanism
will be developed to track data submissions, which should help the scientific
community and NSF evaluate compliance with data sharing guidelines. Seamless
metadata interoperability will be developed across the two data centers to
demonstrate the ability of distributed data centers to provide the underlying
metadata and services aligned for modern discovery, analysis and sharing. The
key legacy of this project is to enable more complete discovery of and access to
seismic reflection data in the public domain, some directly, through the
holdings in these two data centers, and much more from promoting a shared
metadata framework with other resources for seismic data in the U.S.

Broader Impacts: This system provides a simple way for scientists to share data
thereby promoting academic research and education and meeting NSF expectations
for sharing the data, samples, physical collections, and other supporting
materials created or gathered in the course of the work. The impact from the
ongoing seismic archiving and distribution projects within the two data centers
is significant and widespread; over 37,000 seismic files have been amassed,
representing much of the legacy of modern academic marine seismic reflection
exploration, and over 16,000 files have been distributed to a wide variety of
users from academic, government and commercial enterprises. These digital data
collections will be usable for more advanced research tools (e.g., GeoMapApp) as
well as new tools as they are developed.