* 0824790
* Collaborative Research: Manufacturing Deformable Energy Storage Devices from Carbon Nanotube Macro-Films
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Bingqing Wei, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2012
* USD 211,679.00

This research project aims at investigating a new concept of manufacturing
carbon nanotube macro-film-based deformable supercapacitors, versatile energy
storage devices that are light-weight, deformable and at the same time exhibit
very high energy and power density. Fundamentals on fabrication of the free-
standing carbon nanotube macro-films with controllable alignment and on
mechanical-electrical-electrochemical coupling of the two-dimensional carbon
nanotube macro-films are expectedly understood. Mechanical buckling processes
will be employed to make buckled carbon nanotube macro-films as supercapacitor
electrodes which will have extreme deformability and high electronic
conductivity that may allow the elimination of current collectors in a
supercapacitor, therefore greatly reducing the cell weight and hence improving
the energy density. The buckled carbon nanotube macro-films will be utilized to
assemble deformable supercapacitors which will be thoroughly investigated. The
combined approach of experimental and theoretical studies will enable an
improved understanding of the manufacturing-structure-property-function of the
deformable carbon nanotube supercapacitors and a general understanding of
principles of materials processing engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project will provide a new methodology and technique for the design and
fabrication of carbon nanotube macro-film on compliant substrates, as well as
lead to breakthroughs in state-of-the-art processing and fabrication of
supercapacitor with extremely high deformability. Integrated, interactive and
collaborative research and educational programs in two research institutions
(Univ. Delaware and Arizona State Univ.) will be established. The graduate and
undergraduate students involved in the proposed research will be trained through
a multidisciplinary and multi-university environment. The research achievement
will be used to develop/enhance both undergraduate and graduate courses. An
innovative ?Stretchable Library? will be established to reach out to K-16
students.&lt;br/&gt;