* 0824279
* Dithering Techniques for Delta-Sigma Modulator Based Digital-to-Analog Converters
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2008,03/31/2013
* Sudhakar Pamarti, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 03/31/2013
* USD 329,999.00

The objective of this research is to develop signal processing theories and
techniques to combat circuit impairments such as sizing errors and nonlinear
device behavior in practical, integrated, delta-sigma modulator based digital-
to-analog converters (DACs). These DACs are vital components in many electronic
systems including radio transceivers and audio and video equipment. The proposed
approach is to use random dithering of the delta-sigma modulator input signal to
condition the statistics of its quantization noise; such conditioning will
reduce the DAC's sensitivity to the aforementioned circuit errors. The expected
outcome of the research is high performance DACs that are easy to design and
sufficiently robust to offer high fabrication yields, unlike traditional DACs
that are designed using extensive simulation-based optimization strategies.

The intellectual merit of the research is that it presents a fundamentally
different approach to combating circuit errors in DACs: an approach that does
not depend on circuit optimization but applies signal processing techniques to
improve circuit performance. Furthermore, the research aims at realigning
theoretical data converter research to address relevant problems faced by
practical circuit designers.

The broader impacts of the project are two-fold. First, it addresses the problem
of building high performance digital-to-analog converters that are crucial to
the growth of the electronics industry. Second, it will encourage students from
underrepresented groups to take up advanced engineering careers by providing
graduate students and summer interns recruited specifically from such groups to
work on the proposed project under close supervision of the PI.