* 0824393
* Neurabin and inhibitor-1 Compete for PP1 Binding in LTD and LTP Expression
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Houhui Xia, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center
* Standard Grant
* James Deshler
* 08/31/2011
* USD 383,915.00

Neurons communicate with each other through a structure called the synapse, and
neuronal communication is critical for our brain function. Neuronal
communication can be strengthened (called long term potentiation [LTP]) or
weakened (called long term depression [LTD]) in response to experience-induced
electrical activity in synapses. LTP and LTD are manifestations of synaptic
plasticity, the cellular correlate for learning and memory. It is known that an
enzyme called protein phosphatase-1 (PP1) needs to be inhibited by inhibitor-1
for the strengthening (LTP) to occur, while PP1 needs to be fully activated for
the weakening (LTD) to occur. Moreover, Dr. Xia has discovered that PP1 needs to
be "delivered" to the right place in the synapse by the protein neurabin for its
action. The exact mechanism underlying the competition for PP1 by neurabin and
inhibitor-1 in LTD and LTP is not known. This project will test the hypothesis
that the phosphorylation state of these proteins modulates their ability to
interact with each other and function. It characterizes the underlying mechanism
controlling the strength of PP1 binding to inhibitor-1 and neurabin. The project
addresses a very important topic, that phosphatases and their interacting
proteins may have a role in modulating synaptic transmission and LTD/LTP. Dr.
Xia will use multidisciplinary approaches - fluorescence resonance energy
transfer (FRET) imaging technique, in combination with molecular
biology/biochemistry and cellular electrophysiology techniques - to test his
hypotheses. Funding will also be used to train graduate students on dissertation
research as well as to train minority high-school/undergraduate students in
summer research. Local universities, such as Xavier University and Southern
University, have provided LSU with many enthusiastic students who want to pursue
basic research in biology. Their interest will be nurtured and promoted.
Successful completion of the proposed study will shed light on the underlying
molecular mechanism of PP1 function in neural circuitry formation as well as
higher level cognition, such as learning and memory