* 0824077
* Approximate Dynamic Programming Using Random Sampling
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Christopher Atkeson, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 08/31/2012
* USD 348,199.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
ECCS-0824077&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Approximate Dynamic
Programming Using Random Sampling &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI Name: Atkeson,
Christopher G. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI Institution: Carnegie-Mellon
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to develop
approximate dynamic&lt;br/&gt;programming methods for the control of high
performance nonlinear&lt;br/&gt;systems. The approach is to use spatially local
models of key&lt;br/&gt;functions such as a function that represents future
costs over an&lt;br/&gt;entire task or mission (the value function), and a
function that tells&lt;br/&gt;the system what to do in each situation (the
policy). Humanoid robots&lt;br/&gt;will be used to evaluate the nonlinear
control design techniques and&lt;br/&gt;compare them with other approximate
dynamic programming approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key contributions of this work will be: 1) Developing
an integrated&lt;br/&gt;approach for dynamic planning based on approximate
dynamic programming&lt;br/&gt;for high performance systems. 2) Showing how to
combine many fast&lt;br/&gt;greedy local planners to produce globally optimal
solutions. 3)&lt;br/&gt;Showing how to represent knowledge along explicit
trajectories, which&lt;br/&gt;increases the feasible sparseness of this
approximate dynamic&lt;br/&gt;programming method. 4) Showing how to create an
adaptive&lt;br/&gt;representation using random sampling of states. 5) Showing
how to use&lt;br/&gt;local models, and compare them to global parametric
function&lt;br/&gt;approximators. 6) Showing how to use fast trajectory
optimization to&lt;br/&gt;speed up approximate dynamic
programming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
specific impact of this work will be to enable high performance&lt;br/&gt;(near
optimal) control in areas like robotics, transportation, and&lt;br/&gt;energy. A
more general societal payoff is industrial processes,&lt;br/&gt;machines, and
robots that are easier to program, perform better and&lt;br/&gt;waste fewer
resources.&lt;br/&gt;