* 0824512
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Predicting Intergroup Relationships in Primates (Two Case Studies)
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,01/31/2010
* Marina Cords, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 01/31/2010
* USD 14,714.00

Interactions between groups are an important aspect of social life because they
can affect an individual's access to critical resources and thus its
reproductive success. Primates, more than most other vertebrates, exhibit many
kinds of group-level interactions yet the factors that give rise to this
diversity are not well understood. For example, groups may interact aggressively
or peacefully; males and/or females may participate; and an individual may
defend access to food, mates, infants, and/or other resources. This study will
field-test a predictive framework designed to explain the different group-level
interaction patterns seen in social primates. This framework consists of two
pre-existing hypotheses (one slightly modified) concerning food defense by
females and males, and one novel hypothesis concerning male defense of fertile
female mates. Each hypothesis proposes a set of ecological and social conditions
under which a resource is economically defendable; that is, when the costs of
defense are outweighed by the benefits associated with access to the resource in
question. To test these hypotheses, the group-level interactions of grey-cheeked
mangabeys and redtail monkeys will be examined in Kibale National Park, Uganda.
The nature of group-level interactions in these two species has yet to be
studied in populations that are near the environmental carrying capacity, where
groups compete over limited resources. These two species are ideal for testing
the hypotheses because they share certain key characteristics (and thus some
predictions are the same for the two species) while differing in other key
characteristics (leading to contrasting predictions). The study consists of
behavioral observations of three groups of each species and playback
experiments, in which calls from neighboring groups are played to the study
groups to mimic the presence of competing neighbors. Behavioral responses of
males and females during both naturally-occurring and simulated group encounters
will be documented. The research will also monitor spatial and temporal
variation in food availability to determine whether differences in food defense
patterns stem from differences in food availability.

Like competition between individuals, competition between social groups is a
pervasive and important aspect of animal life, yet the factors that determine
who competes, and under what conditions, are poorly understood. This research
will clarify how social and ecological factors shape behavioral strategies
during group-level conflicts. Although the immediate research is focused on non-
human primates, the findings may have relevance for other group-living
vertebrates.