* 0824552
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Shoulder Functional Anatomy and Development-Implications for Interpreting Early Hominin Locomotion
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2010
* David Green, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 07/31/2010
* USD 15,000.00

Upright walking is the defining feature of modern humans and their extinct
fossil relatives (hominins) and understanding the transition to this unique form
of locomotion is a central problem in paleoanthropology. Considerable
disagreement surrounds how the functional significance of hominin fossil anatomy
is interpreted, especially with regard to characteristics retained from a
primitive, apelike ancestor. Some researchers reject primitive traits when
reconstructing behavior from fossil hominins, considering only derived features
(such as those adapted for bipedalism), while others consider both primitive and
derived traits in asserting that early hominins practiced both arboreal
(climbing) and bipedal behaviors. Several characteristics of the shoulder have
been cited as primitive and therefore potentially indicative of climbing in
members of the genus Australopithecus. This study will focus on shoulder anatomy
because previous work has highlighted morphological convergence of this region
based on locomotor similarities and also because several new fossils preserving
the shoulder fill key gaps in the hominin fossil record. To investigate the
relationship between shoulder function and anatomy, this project will use 1) an
experimental approach with wild-type mice exercised under two conditions
(vertical climbing and horizontal running) and a consideration of transgenic,
hypermuscular mice to examine the morphological effects of different locomotor
styles and increased musculature, 2) a comparative analysis of primates to
examine how the development of shoulder anatomy varies with changes in function
during growth, and 3) a reanalysis of early hominin fossils to develop
hypotheses about the functional significance of primitive features in light of
the experimental and ontogenetic results. These approaches will evaluate the
relationship between locomotor activity, muscular anatomy, and shoulder skeletal
development to test long-standing hypotheses about interpreting primitive
features in early hominin fossil anatomy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to
the doctoral student's training, this project will provide research experience
to an undergraduate student assistant. This research has broader implications
beyond physical anthropology in that experimentally testing the influence of
different styles of locomotion on muscle development and bone shape in mice will
contribute to our understanding of skeletal health and biology. Moreover,
exploring the influence of locomotor differences in a model organism and
morphological development in primates has the potential to transform our ability
to make functional interpretations of early hominin skeletal anatomy. By
examining whether or not primitive features in hominin shoulders are directly
related to locomotor style, this project will shed light on developmental
anatomy of the shoulder and will evaluate different theories about the origin
and evolution of human bipedalism.