* 0824322
* BRIGE: Energy-Efficient Communication with Combined Decoding/Inference
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Sheryl Howard, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2011
* USD 162,938.00

0824922&lt;br/&gt;Sheryl Howard, Northern Arizona University&lt;br/&gt;BRIGE:
Energy-Efficient Communication with Combined Decoding/Inference&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br
/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This research
project develops a network cross-layer inference framework that combines
source/application-level modeling with channel coding and probabilistic
decoding/inference. The goal is reduction of network energy consumption while
maintaining good performance. Selective transmission censoring further reduces
network energy consumption. The main research objectives include: developing
source-channel decoding algorithms that incorporate a correlated source model,
channel coding, probabilistic decoding and source inference; developing
transmission censoring algorithms that predict via inference the result of
censoring selected data, and censor to maximize overall network performance and
energy reduction; examining unequal error protection of bits and/or messages;
and comparing energy consumption and implementation feasibility of the best
source-channel decoding/inference and censoring algorithms in an existing
wireless environmental sensing network. The approaches to attaining and
evaluating these objectives include: initial software development of all
algorithms; performance evaluation of algorithms via Monte Carlo computer
simulation; hardware implementation of best algorithms in functioning wireless
sensor network; and measurement of actual performance and energy consumption in
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Reducing energy consumption in
battery-powered wireless networks makes environmental monitoring more practical,
potentially increasing knowledge of ecosystem dynamics and early detection of
ecosystem degradation. Hazardous waste from depleted batteries is reduced, as
well as environmental interference due to battery replacement. This work could
easily extend to security, safety or health monitoring networks as well as the
environmental sensing network application presented here. This project broadens
participation of under-represented groups in engineering by supporting research
for a beginning investigator who, as a member of two under-represented groups in
electrical engineering at a minority-serving institution, can serve as a mentor
and role model to under-represented groups in engineering. Both educational
outreach and research opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students in
this project promote minority participation in electrical engineering. Results
and foundational material from this research will be incorporated into
collaborative class projects in several courses, further increasing
undergraduate student participation in research. &lt;br/&gt;