* 0824340
* NSF-BRIGE: An Integrated Research and Educational Approach to High Efficiency Nanocomposite Thermoelectric Materials and Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Jeremiah Abiade, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2011
* USD 174,530.00

0824340&lt;br/&gt;Jeremiah T. Abiade, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University&lt;br/&gt;BRIGE: An Integrated Research and Educational Approach to
High Efficiency Nanocomposite Thermoelectric Materials and Devices&lt;br/&gt;&lt
;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The demands
for efficient and clean energy are driving the intense search for nonpolluting,
renewable energy sources to replace dwindling supplies of oil, coal, and gas.
Thermoelectric devices can harvest waste energy and directly convert it into
electrical energy, which is crucial as approximately 70% of our total primary
energy is lost as waste heat. To date, thermoelectric materials and devices have
been relegated to niche applications because of the low efficiency of the energy
conversion process. Significant improvements in the thermoelectric materials?
properties are required to realize the full potential of thermoelectric energy
conversion devices. In this research we will focus on a class of promising
thermoelectric materials called oxides. We will use pulsed laser deposition to
deposit oxide thin/thick film thermoelectric materials with self-assembled
nanoparticles embedded in the bulk of the films. Oxides are attractive because
of their stability in high-temperature, high-humidity environments. The unique
features of our proposed research are: 1) Emphasis on oxide thermoelectrics, a
relatively new research field; 2) Use of self-assembled nanoinclusions to
minimize thermal conductivity in oxide thermoelectrics through pulsed laser
deposition; and 3) Integration of optimized structures into thermoelectric
devices for waste heat recovery and low-power applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This NSF-BRIGE project will be used as a
platform to launch our program, Success Through Enthusiasm and Awareness of
Materials Engineering Research (STEAMER). Project STEAMER is a summer research
program for women and ethnic minority students. The outreach component of this
project will prepare students from underrepresented groups for careers in
engineering research. We believe that the mentoring and skills the students
receive during this project will encourage them to pursue doctoral degrees and
eventually develop research programs worthy of NSF support.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;