* 0824420
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Endurance Performance in Peruvian Quechua
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Tom Brutsaert, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 08/31/2009
* USD 15,000.00

High altitude studies have contributed to the understanding of human variation.
At high altitude (>2500m or 8000 ft) there is a reduction in oxygen availability
(hypoxia) because of decreased pressure in the atmosphere or barometric
pressure. In spite of that challenge, indigenous high altitude populations have
resided in the Andes, Himalayas and Semien Mountains of Ethiopia for hundreds of
generations. Studies of high altitude natives, specifically in Tibetans and
Andeans, suggest that such individuals exhibit a superior work capacity compared
to lowlanders. The majority of performance research on highlanders has focused
on maximal oxygen consumption (VO2max), which is a measure of cardiovascular
fitness and represents a peak value of physical performance measured in a short
period. A more informative aspect from an evolutionary and energetic perspective
is the ability to sustain long periods of work (endurance). However, our
understanding of the endurance performance and the relative contribution of
developmental effects on work capacity of Andeans is very limited. Therefore,
the aim of this study is to test the effects of development in hypoxia as this
relates to endurance performance of Peruvian Quechua at high altitude. This
study will use a novel version of the migrant approach, with the addition of
ancestry evaluation via genetic markers to assess the individual ancestry
proportion of the subjects. The research will be conducted in Lima (500m) and
Cerro de Pasco (4,338m), Peru. Two groups will be recruited at sea-level and
participate in a 2-month endurance training period. This step is important to
control for initial differences in cardiovascular fitness. The two groups will
have Quechua ancestry but will differ in their place of birth (highlands versus
lowlands). Group 1 will consist of individuals who were born and raised at sea-
level, while Group 2 will consist of individuals who were born and raised in the
Peruvian highlands and who migrated to the lowlands as adults. This study will
assess developmental effects on endurance performance by comparing the two
groups that differ in place of birth, first at sea level, and again after
transport to high altitude (4,338 m), while controlling for possible confounders
(different Native American ancestry proportions and different levels of
cardiorespiratory fitness).

This project is the first research that directly addresses the question of
endurance performance in high altitude natives, including females, which is
lacking in previous literature. Also, by addressing developmental effects on
exercise performance, this study will contribute to a better understanding on
the mechanism of adaptation to high altitude. The international collaboration of
this project will help to create a bridge between complementary disciplines,
such as physiology and physical anthropology, and the strengthening academic and
research partnerships, which will lead to opportunities for training of Peruvian
students and physicians, in a country where physical anthropology is
underrepresented. In sum, this study will broaden the understanding in human
variation and evolutionary physiology in Peruvian Quechua natives and due to the
incorporation of physiological outcomes, results of this research could be of
interest to other high altitude researchers who work in health care and to the
millions of people who live at altitude.

