* 0824271
* Acoustic Transducers for Automatic Speech Recognition
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Eun Kim, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 07/31/2012
* USD 330,631.00

Acoustic Transducers for Automatic Speech
Recognition&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective&lt;br/&gt;The research objective is
to transform automatic speech recognition in noisy environments by active noise
cancellation. The approach is integrate into one package (1) a bank of
acoustically filtered microphones that are based on a high quality-factor
resonance of a microphone diaphragm and (2) a microspeaker on a silicon chip to
improve the signal-to-noise ratio through active noise cancellation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;This research will lead to a
microspeaker on a silicon chip for sound generation next to a microphone to
actively cancel noise, and thus to discriminate noise from speech. One approach
for the microspeaker will be to use an elastically compliant polymer layer to
form a cantilever-like diaphragm. This research will also develop a resonant
microphone with quality factor of about 40 with resonant frequencies that can
electrically be tuned. A bank of the resonant microphones with extremely low
noise floor will render bandpass-filtered signals at the microphone level, which
will be accurate representations of acoustic powers at those specific
frequencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;The research will
greatly impact voice command systems (as well as cellular phones) in subways,
airports, running automobiles, battlefields, etc. The tunable resonant
microphone and the microspeaker will find broad applications to human-machine
interfaces. The proposed activity will also include (1) incorporation of the
research results into a lab course on acoustic microelectromechanical systems
and (2) research involvement of students from underrepresented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;