* 0824829
* Acquisition of a Fiber-Optic Distributed Temperature Sensing for Ecohydrology Education and Research
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Matthew Becker, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 12/31/2011
* USD 130,599.00

0824829&lt;br/&gt;Becker&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This proposal seeks
funding to acquire a fiber optic temperature sensing distributed network for
hydrological research and education. The distributed temperature sensing (DTC)
system acquires data by tracking the time-of-flight and backscatter from a light
pulse sent through a fiber optic cable. These characteristics allow the system
to calculate temperature. Different scattering mechanisms are available, but a
Raman scattering device is requested. The instrument uses the ratio of anti-
Stokes/Stokes backscatter to differentiate the temperature of the cable, which
is known to the unknown ?outside? temperature. Two point calibrations are
performed before each deployment. Understanding elemental, carbon and
contaminant flow in the Great Lakes system requires a better understanding of
ground-water and surface water flow regimes and interactions. Understanding non-
point-source loadings to the Great Lakes requires better estimates of
groundwater recharge. In addition, water use issues (like diversion for other
purposes) will have unknown impacts on the Great Lakes hydrology, ecology and
environment. By using DTS employments, temperature differentials can be measured
as a proxy for stream recharge rates in representative basins of the Great
Lakes. These measurements will be higher resolution both in terms of spatial and
temporal scales relative to a gauging station approach. The PIs will also
perform studies to enhance DTS technology by investigating the relationship
between fiber optic cable temperature and groundwater fluid velocity. A cable
buried within a permeable reactive barrier at a contaminated site will be used
for this investigation. A current will be induced across the cable such that
stagnant waters will offer less heat flux ? a proxy for flow. Another
application for the fiber optic cable will be to assess the flow regime adjacent
to and brought about by large woody debris in riverine and stream systems.
Preliminary experiments using artificially-cooled water were able to delineate
water masses of differing temperatures. Additionally, the cable will be moored
in a ?serpentine? fashion in a near-shore region of Lake Ontario in order to
study the development of thermal bars in spring and fall. Thermal bars are
important for nutrient and contaminant cycling, yet are understudied in high-
resolution. Finally, the cable instrument will be used for understanding wetland
restoration and hydroelectric discharge studies. The instrument will be
incorporated into an existing group of equipment managed and prioritized by the
IGERT steering committee. It will be housed in the Department of Civil,
Structural, and Environmental Engineering. Outside IGERT users will be required
to pay a usage fee. Cables are fragile and require frequent replacement.
Researchers using the system will be required to budget for replacement cabling.
Course fees will also help offset cable replacement costs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;