* 0824305
* CAREER:  Catalytic Aldimine Coupling:  A Versatile Carbon-Carbon Bond Forming Reaction
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2007,12/31/2011
* Stephen Miller, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 12/31/2011
* USD 437,232.00

This research project addresses the development of a cyanide-catalyzed aldimine
coupling reaction, targeting a number of molecular structures, including
carbocycles, heterocycles, macrocycles, dimers, ligands, oligomers, and
conjugated as well as non-conjugated polymers. The potential replacement of
cyanide by alternate catalysts will be explored, providing a link to the
sustainability (green chemistry) focus of the environmental and molecular
chemistry modules and courses planned for development.

With the support of this CAREER award from the Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program, Professor Stephen A. Miller, of the Department of Chemistry
at Texas A&M University, is exploring a unique set of reactions catalyzed by
cyanide. This reaction chemistry offers promise for the generation of many novel
organic products, with potential applications including the areas of
pharmaceuticals, organic dyes, and homogeneous catalysis. In the context of
efficiency and catalysis, the simple, two-atom cyanide anion is remarkable,
especially when compared to highly engineered and expensive precious metal
catalysts. The concepts of efficiency and catalysis are also integral to the
educational activities of Professor Miller. Through a course on a Molecular View
of the Environment, high school teachers and students across the state of Texas
are exposed to environmental chemistry topics, including the principles,
ramifications, and ubiquity of catalysis, one of the 12 Principles of Green
Chemistry. A writing course on Environmental Chemistry provides additional
experience for students in the interdisciplinary nature of science and
sustainability.