* 0824035
* Multifunctional Biomedical Nanosensors Based on Single Nanocomposite Nanowires
* ENG,ECCS
* 12/01/2008,11/30/2011
* Minhee Yun, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 11/30/2011
* USD 263,258.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proposal is to develop multifunctional
nanosensors for biomedical applications based on single nanocomposite nanowires
(NWs) (nanomaterial-embedded single-conducting polymer NWs). The approach is to
build highly efficient biomarker sensors using electrochemically grown NWs that
are easily constructed and reproducible because of the unique nature of the
proposed NW fabrication with process controllability and site-specific method.
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: NW sensor technology will be developed using
single nanocomposite NWs in the proposed work. In order to demonstrate a single
nanocomposite NW biomedical sensor, a cardiac sensor is selected to detect
myoglobin, one of the very commonly used biomarkers for cardiovascular diseases
(CVD). During the proposed work, the relationship between single NW lengths and
diameters will be studied both theoretically and experimentally for optimizing
sensor performances. The proposed research will provide information about the
coupling effects of conducting polymers with carbon nanotubes or nanoparticles
in addition to the properties of the individual components with synergistic
effects such as mechanical stability, easy fabrication, and conductivity
controllability.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The proposed research will find
applications of nanocomposite NWs for biomedical industries, which will benefit
our society and advance future technology. The proposed single nanocomposite NW
technique could lead to the possibility of diagnosing biomarkers that cannot be
diagnosed with conventional technology. For educational efforts, participation
in an existing outreach program such as Pittsburgh Junior Academy of Science
(PJAS) in connection with course development will be incorporated.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;