* 0824667
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Integrating Geographic Information Science and Community Engagement to Evaluate Colorectal Cancer Spatial Patterns
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2008,01/31/2010
* Kirsten Beyer, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Ezekiel Kalipeni
* 01/31/2010
* USD 11,634.00

This research explores ways in which communities can connect their knowledge of
space and place with observed spatial patterns of disease to increase their
abilities to both understand underlying processes that create these patterns and
to implement effective interventions. Overall, there is surprisingly little
research on the intersection of GIScience, community engagement, and health.
This research focuses on colorectal cancer, a focus of cancer prevention and
control efforts because early diagnosis greatly improves prognosis. However,
screening rates remain low and differences in screening rates are associated
with race, ethnicity and geography, among other factors. Using colorectal cancer
incidences reported to the Iowa Health Registry, the research will create maps
of colorectal cancer incidence, late-stage, mortality and screening as
continuously varying surfaces using the method of adaptive spatial filtering,
whereby a grid is laid over the study area and rates are computed for each grid
point using overlapping circular filters that expand until they have pulled in
enough information to calculate a stable rate. Statistical analyses will confirm
the locations of higher than expected rates. These maps will provide context for
community discussions of colorectal cancer. Community residents will be invited
to generate information about the community's colorectal cancer experiences and
barriers to screening and treatment. Participants and researchers will determine
focal questions, such as "why are late-stage colorectal cancer rates high in
Storm Lake?" and then generate responses to this question, sort the responses
into categories, and rate them according to importance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this study will contribute to a better
understanding of health disparities. In addition, the researchers will engage
communities in discussions of why local differences in cancer burdens are
occurring and what they can do to lower the burden in their local areas. This
research can contribute to a long-standing debate in geography about the
relative merits, and the potential for integration, of quantitative and
qualitative data, exploring the value of different types of space and place
knowledge and the potential for integrating these types of knowledge to tell
more of the story that contributes to health disparities. This research also
will be important to the developing research area of translational research,
which is just in its infancy in the discipline of geography, and will thereby
contribute to increasing the relevance of health geography as a sub-discipline
in the years to come. By improving the quality of geographic information through
integration of empirical, quantitative spatial data and qualitative, community-
generated knowledge, this research will move society toward not only a more
nuanced understanding of the roots of disparity, but also toward more effective
strategies to combat disparity. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement
award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to
establish a strong independent research career.