* 0824636
* Interdisciplinary Research and Training at the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Program
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* Charles Doering, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2014
* USD 817,574.00

The Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Summer Program (GFD) is a ten-week program of
interdisciplinary research and graduate training. The Program began in 1959 and
has been held for all 49 years of its lifetime at the Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution, with the purpose of creating an atmosphere to foster the transfer
of ideas between a wide range of subjects including applied mathematics,
astrophysics, fluid dynamics, geology, geophysics, meteorology, oceanography,
planetary science, engineering, and physics. The central focus of the program is
the training in research of a small group of graduate students (typically nine
or ten), who are charged with conducting an advanced research project for the
bulk of the summer, and presenting their results in both oral and written
reports at the end of the summer program. The research projects are individually
or jointly supervised by members of the GFD staff, a group of summer-long
participants in the Program who are established academics from the diverse
fields represented at GFD. Each year, the Program runs with a theme on a
particular topic relevant to geophysical fluid dynamics. The summer opens with
two weeks of principal lectures on the theme. Invited visitors continue to give
seminars throughout the remainder of the Program, both on work related to the
theme, but also on topics from geophysical fluid dynamics in general. The idea
is to expose the participants to a new subject, with its particular
phenomenology and techniques, while simultaneously maintaining a broader
perspective, thus setting the stage for interdisciplinary interactions. In the
coming five years, the following themes might be explored: Nonlinear Waves,
Fluid Mechanics and Ecosystems, Coherent Structures, Buoyancy Currents, and
Turbulent Transitions.