* 0824990
* Collaborative Research: In situ measurements of oxygen and nitrate with profiling floats deployed at ocean time-series stations
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Stephen Riser, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2012
* USD 932,305.00

In this project, researchers at the Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute and
the University of Washington will construct and deploy Apex profiling floats
equipped with ISUS optical nitrate sensors, Aanderaa oxygen optodes and Wet Labs
ECO fluorometers. Two floats per year will be deployed at the HOT (Hawaii Ocean
Time series) station, BATS (Bermuda Atlantic Time Series) station and at Ocean
Station Papa in the Gulf of Alaska. Two additional float will be deployed each
year in the Southern Ocean. These floats will provide time series observations
of biogeochemical processes at these sites with temporal resolution that cannot
be sustained by the current shipboard observations. With life spans for each
float of four years, the float network will also provide significantly improved
spatial resolution around each of the deployment sites near the end of this
project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These float-based sensors provide the potential
to study a variety of processes. The project leaders recently demonstrated that
profiling floats can provide time series observations of Net Community
Production below the mixed layer based on dissolved oxygen measurements. The
continuous measurements of NCP demonstrate that the euphotic zone of the
subtropical ocean produces oxygen (net autotrophic) and that episodic events of
high NCP are not required to sustain a positive autotrophic balance. These
measurements thus may resolve a fundamental controversy as to whether the
oligotrophic ocean is net heterotrophic or net autotrophic. Near the BATS site
the floats will likely provide significantly improved understanding of the role
of eddies in sustaining elevated primary production rates. At high latitudes,
the floats will provide an unparalled view of the interaction of vertical mixing
with timing of the spring bloom. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two types of Broader
Impacts will result from this work. The project will "stimulate and support the
development and dissemination of next-generation instrumentation, multi-user
facilities, and other shared research and education platforms." And secondly, by
making the data from this research directly available in real time to the
research and education, it will "advance discovery and understanding while
promoting teaching, training and learning." Information about the project and
the data stream it produces will also be made available on a dedicated web site.