* 0824347
* BRIGE: Protein-surfactant nanostructures for enhanced electrophoretic separations
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Lilo Pozzo, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 08/31/2011
* USD 174,995.00

0824347&lt;br/&gt;Pozzo&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of electrophoretic separation is
to use electric fields to separate proteins out of complex biological mixtures
(e.g. serum, saliva or cell lysates). The proposed work uses the principles of
nanoscience to rationally improve reproducibility, resolution, and sensitivity..
It focuses on the structure of the protein-surfactant complex and employs a
multi-scale experimental approach based on the fundamentals of colloid and
polymer science to decipher the intricate relationship between the nano-
structure of protein-surfactant complexes, the mechanism of electrophoretic
transport (e.g. reptation) and the effectiveness of the macroscopic
separation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Light, x-ray and neutron scattering experiments
will systematically evaluate the structure of protein complexes that are made
from "non traditional" anionic surfactants. These experiments will probe
nanometer scale structural transitions occurring in the protein-surfactant
complex. The changes are triggered by specific alterations in the hydrophobic
moiety of the surfactant (e.g. linear and branched alkyl chains) or through the
use of mixed surfactant and co-surfactant formulations. In addition, the
structure and conformation of the proteins will be monitored in-situ, using on-
line neutron scattering experiments carried out in polymeric gels and with the
application of electric fields. This should lead to the development of an
accurate physical understanding of the true structural parameters that govern
electrophoretic transport. The long term goal is to extend these studies into
other areas, such as the use of nano-structured sieving matrices, so that we can
develop a complete understanding of the separation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educationally the results of this work will be
incorporated into existing courses to demonstrate the use of surfactants in
high-technology applications. It will immediately impact the research experience
of graduate and undergraduate students from under-represented groups. This will
help to increase their participation in STEM graduate programs. Finally, the
proposal will allow the PI to continue serving as a liaison between the NIST
Center for Neutron Research and faculty and students from under-represented
groups. This will increase awareness of these and other valuable resources among
groups that have historically been unable to take advantage of their
availability.