* 0824827
* The Mechanics of Debonding of Foam Core Sandwich Structure Under Cyclic Loading
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2013
* Michael Santare, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Siegmund
* 07/31/2013
* USD 299,968.00

The mechanics of debonding of foam core sandwich structure &lt;br/&gt;under
cyclic loading&lt;br/&gt;Anette M. Karlsson, University of Delaware, Newark,
DE&lt;br/&gt;Leif A. Carlsson, Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton,
FL&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work aims to increase the understanding of fatigue
in foam core sandwich structures. Foam core sandwich structures are composite
structures consisting of two face sheets (typically aluminum or fiber reinforced
polymer) and a cellular foamed polymer. Since sandwich structures are composed
of widely dissimilar materials, they display peculiar and sometimes unexpected
failure modes. Traditionally, the rate in which the cracks grow during cyclic
(fatigue) loading is established by extensive (and therefore expensive) material
testing. Theories describing damage (e.g., plastically dissipated energy) at the
crack tip and the ensuing crack growth rate are developed in this research.
These theories are quantified in numerical computer simulations. Only limited
experimental investigations for determining important materials parameters will
be needed as input to the computer code. The fatigue life predicted from the
numerical simulations will be verified by full scale fatigue testing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Composite sandwich structures are light-weight structures
with high strength, high impact resistance, and high resistance to corrosion
along with low radar and acoustics signals. Current applications range from
aircraft structures, to wind turbine blades, to ship hulls. Successful outcome
of the research will result in a life prediction methodology relying on limited
experimental input. This in turn will lead to reliable light-weight, and
therefore more energy efficient, engineering structures. The research includes a
significant educational component, including involving undergraduate students ?
in particular from underrepresented groups ? in the research. The results will
also be disseminated to K-12 students and science teachers through the
University of Delaware, College of Engineering Outreach Programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;