* 0824720
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Using Remote Sensing to Create Indicators of Socio-Ecological System Resilience in Savannas of the Kavango-Zambezi Region of Southern Africa
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2010
* Michael Binford, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Ezekiel Kalipeni
* 07/31/2010
* USD 11,996.00

Most climate-change predictions identify Southern Africa as the world's most
affected populated region, adding to the current problems of recurring droughts
and crop failures, water scarcity issues, and high HIV infection rates. In
particular, the savanna ecosystems throughout Southern Africa, on which millions
of people depend for their livelihoods, are changing at a rapidly increasing
rate. This project addresses changes in land and resource availability occurring
as a result of climate and water variability and recent socio-economic changes
in a semi-arid savanna region in Southern Africa. The research combines
geospatial analyses of meteorological and hydrologic data and remote sensing
techniques with socio-economic instruments to create measures of socio-
ecological resilience and adaptability to natural and anthropogenic changes in
sensitive ecosystems. The study area is the Chobe River Basin, a watershed
shared between Botswana and Namibia, where different land-use management
strategies and economic policies affect both the ecosystem and the livelihoods
support system differentially. While the local communities in both countries are
predominantly resource-dependent or derive substantial benefits from ecotourism,
changes in the health of the ecosystem would have detrimental effects for the
human system. Thus, understanding underlying biophysical drivers of change by
accounting for different management regimes in the two countries and
establishing indicators of ecosystem resilience is the first step in assessing
socio-ecological resilience at the regional level. The measures include a
flooding extent index, an ecosystem productivity index, and a fire manipulation
index, each of which is related to the adaptability of socio-ecological systems
to external change. Next, by using existing socio-economic data and livelihoods
surveys, the research will establish the human response to both natural and
anthropogenic changes and enhance understanding of local adaptation mechanisms
to environmental change.

This study assesses the influence of flooding and shifting fire regimes on
driving vegetation dynamics in savanna watersheds and integrates quantitative
biophysical analyses with quantitative socio-economic indicators to develop new
ways of measuring socio-ecological resilience. The research will have
implications for socio-ecological resilience theory because it seeks new
quantitative measures in sensitive semi-arid ecosystems. This project will fill
a gap in the land-change science literature as few studies have considered the
effects of flooding, the world's most widespread and damaging natural disaster,
on vegetation dynamics in semi-arid ecosystems. A clearer understanding of what
drives changes in some ecosystems in Southern Africa would prove useful not only
for better ecosystem management but also, and more importantly, for designing
coping and adaptation strategies in the face of global climate change, human
population growth, and increasing large-mammal populations. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to
enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research career.