* 0824713
* Collaborative Research: Embedding of Thin Film Sensors in Advanced Ceramic Tools for Micro/Nano Scale Thermomechanical Measurements in and Near Tool-Workpiece Interface
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Xiaochun Li, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/2011
* USD 245,913.00

The objective of this award is to embed micro- and nano-scale high temperature
thermocouples and strain gauges in polycrystalline cubic boron nitride
materials, and to provide thermomechanical sensing with unprecedented spatial
and temporal resolution at and near the ceramic tool-work interface for
manufacturing process studies. It will first focus on the design, fabrication,
and embedding through diffusion bonding of thin film sensor arrays into
polycrystalline cubic boron nitride. The performance of the embedded sensors
will be characterized, and the interaction between the embedded sensors and
ceramic inserts under simulated harsh conditions will be studied. Hard turning
will be used as the vehicle for testing embedded thin film sensor arrays and for
the measurement of temperature and stress distributions in ceramic cutting tools
to advance the understanding of machining physics.

If successful, the embedded sensors will offer a capability of providing, for
the first time, sets of simultaneous measurements over a finely spaced grid for
mechanical and thermal distributions at the ceramic tool-chip interface. This
will enable manufacturing engineers to better understand the processes, optimize
ceramic tool design, and to effectively control the process. Advanced ceramic
tooling with embedded thin film sensors will have significant implications on
the national economy by markedly enhancing the competitiveness of US industries.
Undergraduate and graduate students will be able to obtain hands-on experience
in a range of advanced manufacturing concepts in addition to enhancements in
related curricula. Interdisciplinary research will foster a new generation of
engineers and scientists with broad and deep knowledge in the arena of thin film
sensor and manufacturing technologies. Outreach science modules will be
developed for high-school students. The program will also engage students from
under-represented groups.

