* 0824980
* Acquisition of an Advanced Optical Microscopy Laboratory for Computer Integrated Analysis of Fault Rock Fabrics and Fractures
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2009,06/30/2011
* Colin Shaw, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 06/30/2011
* USD 108,809.00

0824980&lt;br/&gt;Shaw&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This proposal seeks
funding to acquire a microscopy and sample preparation equipment in order to
create a Rock Microstructure of Natural Materials Laboratory at Montana State
University. The overall goal of the facility is to image and analyze
crystallographic preferred orientation (CPO) fabrics and microstructures. The
facility will comprise capabilities for optical orientation analysis with
Computer Integrated Polarization (CIP) microscopy and fracture microstructural
analysis using epifluorescence microscopy. Requested are an Olympus BX51 scope
with fluorescence and digital imaging capabilities fitted with CIP and an
Olympus SZX-16 scope with polarization accessories. For digital imaging, a
workstation with digitizing monitor is requested. For sample preparation, a
precision saw, grinder/polisher and accessories are requested. The
instrumentation will be employed for on-going NSF EAR-funded research on seismic
rupture pre- and post-rupture plastic deformation in the lower and middle
continental crust. Quartz crystallographic orientation will be assayed along
with fracture density and grain size distributions to better understand
deformation mechanisms and paleostress conditions from middle and deep crust
seismic faults. Quartz vein and pseudotachylyte-bearing samples will be analyzed
to understand deformation mechanisms. CIP and electron backscatter diffraction
(EBSD) will be used to map orientation and this in turn will be related to
estimate the strain field during deformation. Associated projects will have the
instrumentation applied to analyzing snowpack rheology by determining preferred
orientation at sintered grain snow boundaries, apatite orientation in fossil
bones as a proxy for stress adaptation and lifestyle, and the orientation of
calcite crystals in fossil dinosaur and bird eggs to better understand the
evolution of avian reproduction. The instrumentation will be incorporated into
existing laboratory space in one of two buildings. The preparation equipment
will be incorporated into an existing rock preparation room. Maintenance costs
are assumed to be minimal with supply estimates at only ~$1,250 per year.
Expendable supplies will be charged to applicable research grants. A nominal fee
will be charged to users in anticipation of computer and software maintenance
costs. The MNM lab will compliment instrumentation already available at MSU. The
requested EBSD sample preparation equipment will allow higher sample throughput
and alleviate the need to prepare samples in another department.
Interdisciplinary and inter-departmental collaboration will be possible through
the new facility. Due to the robust nature of the requested equipment, students
will gain hands-on experience and education. Due to the unique nature of this
facility, disseminated results will be of broad interest.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***