* 0824081
* Addressing Physical-Layer Challenges via CLAWS: Cross-Layer Approaches to Wireless Secure Communications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Min Wu, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 08/31/2012
* USD 312,000.00

The objective of this research is to investigate new approaches to achieving
security in wireless communications systems and other complex networks using
physical layer properties. The Cross-Layer Approaches to Wireless Secure
Communications (CLAWS) effort aims to address security in new communication
paradigms where security is difficult to provide only through existing
cryptographic and network security techniques. The CLAWS approach attempts to
jointly optimize overall system performance and security. The scheme should be
applicable to wireless sensor networks, wireless ad-hoc networks, and future-
generation wireless and hybrid communication systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of the research is based on: (i) development of a new secure
communication design methodology that jointly considers physical laws related to
signal transmission and processing, security requirements, and other system
performance requirements; (ii) application of the methodology to cooperative
wireless communications to trace compromised or adversarial relays, which is a
challenging form of insider attack that is not yet widely studied; and (iii)
application of the methodology to sensor networks to jointly optimize the
establishment of secure communication links and the sensing coverage
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the research result from
bridging theory and practice from a number of beneficial areas related to secure
wireless communications. The project includes outreach to local industry and
leverages undergraduate honor programs at the University of Maryland to
integrate research and education to train the future workforce. An experimental
test bed for interdisciplinary investigation of sensor network security actively
involves undergraduate students, especially women and minority students, in
cutting-edge research.