* 0824874
* International Mini-Workshop series on "An Assessment of Options for Post-CMOS Emerging Research Devices and Related Materials".  To be held in 2008 in Bonn Germany, Tokyo Japan
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2009
* Ralph Cavin, Semiconductor Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 04/30/2009
* USD 40,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: International Mini-Workshop series on An
Assessment of Options for a Post-CMOS Emerging Research devices and Related
Materials in Bonn Germany, Tokyo, Japan, San Francisco, CA, and Austin, Texas in
2008&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Context &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This request is for
funds to support an International Mini-Workshop series on An Assessment of
Options for a Post-CMOS Emerging Research devices and Related Materials. By 2022
or earlier the Semiconductor Industry will approach the end of CMOS scaling.
Extension of CMOS beyond this period will require invention of a new technology
that, when integrated with CMOS will extend the functionality-cost ratio of
CMOS-based information processing substantially and may lead to a technology to
eventually replace CMOS. A variety of new concepts for devices, fabrication
techniques, and system architectures are emerging today under the general
heading of ?nanoelectronics? that may provide the basis for continuing the
advances in information technologies that we have experienced for the last three
decades. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;A wide range of new ideas have
been proposed for post-CMOS technologies, such as molecular electronics, carbon
nanotube devices and spintronics etc. In 2007, the Semiconductor Industry, via
the International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors (ITRS) ERD chapter,
continued a process to access the applicability of a wide range of research
devices and device concepts to serve as a basis for continuing historical
scaling trends via set of workshops held in 2006. Similar to these workshops,
held in collaboration with and partially funded by NSF in 2004 and 2006, a new
set of workshops are planned for 2008. The ITRS Emerging Research device and
Emerging Research materials Working groups will hold four separate mini
workshops: Emerging Research Memory Devices in Bonn, Germany, Emerging Research
Logic Devices in Tokyo, Japan, Emerging Research Architectures in San Francisco,
and Emerging Research Materials in Austin, Texas. These workshops will set the
stage for the next ITRS Roadmap. &lt;br/&gt; Broader impact:&lt;br/&gt;These
workshops will result in promoting a close interaction between universities and
industry and a new ITRS Roadmap for the future. The ITRS Roadmap and the ITRS
chapters on Emerging Research devices and Emerging Research materials influence
the directions of research in the universities as well as industry. The workshop
and it will bring experts from industry and university to discuss new areas of
emphasis for the next ITRS Roadmap.