* 0824496
* Doctoral Research Improvement Grant: Systematics of Middle to Late Miocene Hominoidea
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2009
* Terry Harrison, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 07/31/2009
* USD 14,940.00

One of the most long-standing problems in primate evolution is the nature of the
relationships of Middle to Late Miocene (13-8 million years old) apes to each
other, to living great apes, and to humans. Scientists have formulated many
different hypotheses about hominoid (ape) relationships, but the application of
different methods and the use of different skeletal features have raised the
question of whether the observed results are an accurate representation of
relationships or whether they are simply an artifact of the methods used and
traits chosen. Current hypotheses about the evolutionary relationships of early
representatives of the human lineage rely largely on comparative analyses of the
highly specialized features in living African apes and modern humans. This
project will offer an important new perspective on hominoid relationships by
incorporating the greater range of diversity and less specialized morphologies
seen in Miocene apes in order to clarify the sequence in which features evolved.
This research involves a comprehensive analysis of 123 cranial and postcranial
features, from 17 living primates, which have been previously used to infer
evolutionary relationships among Miocene apes. These traits will be compared
individually, by anatomical system and holistically, to independent (i.e.,
molecular) measures of evolutionary relationships. Skeletal features will first
be quantified by linear measurements, and then analyzed individually in
permutation tests to assess the statistical significance of the information they
contain about evolutionary relationships. Parsimony analyses will then be
performed on these living species, as well as four later Miocene apes, using
those features that are found to have the highest information content in
resolving relationships. The results should indicate how much the choice of
different methods and traits is influencing our perception of Miocene hominoid
evolution, and thus provide a firmer foundation for clarifying the evolutionary
relationships of both Miocene apes and early fossil humans.

This project will provide new insights into the utility of different methods and
skeletal traits for inferring evolutionary relationships, and a rigorous test of
current hypotheses about evolutionary relationships in Middle to Late Miocene
apes. The study of Miocene apes is critical because they represent close
relatives of humans, and some later Miocene species are likely to prove to be
early members of the lineage leading to modern humans. As a consequence, a
better understanding of the sequence in which traits evolved in Miocene apes and
clarification of their relationships to living apes will have major implications
for understanding human evolution.





