* 0824381
* BRIGE: A Research and Education Program for the Development of Technology for Transmembrane Proteomics
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Susan Daniel, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Theresa Good
* 09/30/2011
* USD 174,999.00

EEC-0824381&lt;br/&gt;Daniel&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this
BRIGE proposal is to initiate a research and education program to develop new
technologies for rapid assessment of membrane constituent structure and
function. By combining technical expertise in membrane biophysics, chemistry,
and engineering with broad educational goals and outreach efforts, this program
is poised to advance our fundamental understanding of physical-chemical effects
on electrophoretic separations in supported lipid bilayers while preparing
students for careers as scientists and engineers with an appreciation for and
commitment to diversity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective is to
develop and understand the mechanisms of separation of membrane species by
bilayer electrophoresis and then to create devices that integrate separation of
cellular species with various unit operations on chip. The hypothesis is that
biomolecular separations in membrane platforms can occur by three mechanisms: 1)
differential partitioning of the components in and out of the bilayer and bulk
aqueous phase, facilitated by bilayer chemistry or temperature, 2) preferential
partitioning of one species into lipid rafts while the other stays outside, and
3) by hydrodynamic effects caused by obstacles in an otherwise fluid bilayer.
Insight gained from these studies will be used to optimize separations of more
complex species i.e., peripheral proteins, and eventually, transmembrane
species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach is to formulate bilayers of various
compositions and properties then measure the diffusion, mobility, and separation
efficiency of membrane components within it. Previous studies showed that
reducing mobility leads to better separations. Therefore, separations could be
enhanced by reducing diffusion in the bilayer by adding sterols or reducing
temperature, component interactions with lipid rafts, and adding hydrodynamic
obstacles of various sizes and concentrations, as all of these have been shown
to reduce mobility of membrane species. An evaluation of these new strategies
and the details of the mechanisms of separation are currently unknown and are
necessary to optimize separation resolution. Separations inside microfluidic
channels coated with bilayers will be integrated with 2D protein crystallization
and chemical interaction assays. This prototype device will be a stepping stone
towards future structure-function studies of proteins and lipids in a native-
like environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the proposed
activities is its potential to transform the state-of-the-art in membrane
proteomics by creating a biomimetic platform for rapid screening of membrane
protein and lipid chemical activity, membrane protein crystal formation, and
structure determination in order to understand biological function and
streamline drug development. The educational objective is to create ways to make
science and engineering more inclusive to underrepresented groups through
development of outreach programs and innovation in the classroom. To achieve
this goal, interactive laboratory projects will be developed and implemented
during two of Cornell's diversity programs: CATALYST (a summer camp in science
and engineering) and the Diversity and Prospective Women's Weekends, both
programs targeting high school students. Active recruitment to engineering and
mentoring of students will occur during these events with full participation of
the research group. In an effort to retain more students in engineering, the
Materials and Energy Balances core course will be modernized to reflect current
teaching and learning styles and incorporate interactive web-based tools to
increase the learning of all students. The research and education plan are
integrated carefully so that diversity within engineering is increased and this
diversity brings value the students, the research effort, and to society.