* 0824731
* SGER: Identity and Phylogenetic Significance of Biomarkers in Paleozoic Crinoids
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2008,03/31/2010
* Yu-Ping Chin, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Boush
* 03/31/2010
* USD 24,971.00

Identity and Phylogenetic Significance of Biomarkers in Paleozoic
Crinoids&lt;br/&gt;PIs: William I. Ausich and Yu-Ping Chin&lt;br/&gt;School of
Earth Sciences&lt;br/&gt;The Ohio State University&lt;br/&gt;This project will
expand our initial studies on taxon-specific biomarkers that we have extracted
from Mississippian crinoids. To date, we have established that: 1, taxon-
specific organic molecules can be extracted from individual fossil specimens; 2,
these molecules are consistent for different specimens of the same species,
different from other taxa, and distinctly different from molecules from
enclosing sediments; 3, extracted fossil molecules display a phylogenetic
significance with more closely related taxa having more similar molecules; and
4, extracted molecules are most probably a substituted anthraquinone, similar to
classes of molecules known to be produced by living crinoids. These results are
from analysis of a limited number of fossil specimens from two localities. This
project is designed to establish the feasibility of our earlier work on a larger
scale and to establish the significance of the phylogenetic information
preserved in these extracted molecules. Specific objectives include: 1,
determine the structure and identity of the preserved molecules in Paleozoic
crinoids; 2, because sampling is destructive, determine the least amount of
material needed for analysis; 3, determine the resolution of the phylogenetic
signal in these biomarkers. The phylogenetic significance will be tested with
the following sampling design: 1, analyze crinoids from other Mississippian
occurrences to determine consistency and existence of biomarkers in coeval
settings; 2, examine crinoids from the Ordovician to the Jurassic to assess the
phylogenetic significance through time; and 3, as possible, molecules will be
extracted from living crinoids. This SGER work will provide graduate student
support and funding for laboratory supplies and chemical analyses from the Ohio
State University Chemical Instrumentation Center. Analyses will include UV-Vis
light spectroscopy, Micromass LC-TOF mass spectrometer in ESI, Finnegan Trace GC
mass spectrometer in split mode, and Cary Eclipse spectrofluorimeter in 3-D
Excitation-Emission mode, which will include development of our own model around
the PARAFAC framework that is specific for the proposed
research.&lt;br/&gt;Results of the proposed research have the promise to
establish an entirely new research field and to transform the way
paleontologists study fossil echinoderms, if not fossils in general. However,
the true significance cannot be determined until a wider array of hypotheses is
tested with many more analyses, as proposed herein.