* 0824275
* Towards Neuromote: A Miniature, Impantable, Many-Channel, and Wireless Neural Recording, Processing, and Telemetry System
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Jack Judy, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 09/30/2012
* USD 450,000.00

Objective The objective of this research is to develop technologies and methods
towards realizing a miniature implantable many-channel wireless neural-recording
device. The approach is to develop and assemble sub-systems that can be
programmed by neuroscientists to investigate scientifically and medically
relevant neurophysiology.

Intellectual Merit The proposed wireless neural recording system consists of
scaleable sub-system components that can be configures to acquire a broad range
of neural signals. Furthermore, it includes a digital-signal-processing
architecture that performs on-chip spike detection and alignment steps in the
digital domain, which are typically performed off-chip in software. The proposed
system also must operate while being subject to varying electrode conditions
(i.e., impedance and offset voltage) while dissipating no more than several
milliwatts of power to avoid tissue heating and enable (future) methods of
wireless power transfer.

Broader Impact The broader impacts include of the proposed work include: (1)
technological transformation of important fields of research in neuroscience and
neurology, (2) updating and enhancing the technological capabilities and
experience of doctoral students training to be brain researchers or
neuroengineers, (3) the involvement of undergraduate engineering students from
underrepresented groups, and (4) the general education of California high-school
teachers and community-college instructors that participate in annual UCLA-
sponsored continuing-education events during the summer.