* 0824571
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Functional Morphology of Subchondral and Trabecular Bone in the Hominoid Hindfoot
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Brigitte Demes, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 08/31/2009
* USD 14,970.00

The external morphology of the hindfoot bones (distal tibia, talus, and
calcaneus) have long been held as key indicators of habitual posture and
locomotion in hominids. However, previous morphometric studies of some important
fossil hindfoot bones reveal unique mosaics of ape-like and human-like features
that complicate locomotor reconstruction of these extinct hominins. This study
will investigate whether the internal morphology of these bones (subchondral and
trabecular bone) hold a diagnostic locomotor signal that may help to further
characterize the nature of this mosaicism. From micro-computed tomography (µCT)
images of associated hominid hindfoot bones, this study will quantify and
concurrently examine strength-related properties of subchondral and trabecular
bone, which have both been hypothesized to reflect the habitual compressive
joint loads incurred during locomotion. The broader significance of this study
is to test the accuracy and consistency of these environmentally-plastic
properties in indicating a functional signal of joint load, thus validating the
use of subchondral and trabecular bone structural properties as tools to infer
locomotor behavior from isolated skeletal elements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
accuracy of these properties in indicating habitual load will first be assessed
by comparing the pattern of bone properties in the human talocrural (ankle) and
subtalar joints to the contact area and articular pressure patterns that have
been quantified in these joints from human biomechanics studies of simulated
bipedal gait. Secondly, this study will assess whether these bone properties are
consistent with current hypotheses of habitual hindfoot load in hominids and can
distinguish among species with different habitual locomotor behaviors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will critically evaluate the strengths and
limitations of quantitative µCT methods in comparative morphology that will be
highly valuable to future researchers who propose to use these methods to
address morphological questions in extant or fossil specimens. The
quantification and analysis of bone microstructure in the understudied hominid
hindfoot region will provide valuable comparative data for both clinical and
theoretical biomedical studies of bone biomechanics. This study will address
current hypotheses of habitual pedal posture in hominids, as well as reveal new
hypotheses that may further our understanding of the morphological evolution of
the hominid foot and ankle. Finally, once µCT images of the numerous fossil
hominin hindfoot bones are available, this study will provide a comparative
sample with which to interpret the subchondral and trabecular bone
morphology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;