* 0824546
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement:  Functional Analysis of Primate Semicircular Canal Morphology in Relation to Locomotor Head Accelerations
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2010
* Richard Kay, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2010
* USD 14,945.00

Reconstructing locomotor patterns from fossils is crucial for understanding the
origins of primates and important transitions in various clades. Recent studies
suggest that the structure of the semicircular canals of the inner ear provides
evidence about locomotion. The canals sense rotational head accelerations and
drive reflexes essential for normal movement. Canal radius of curvature, which
can be measured in osteologic specimens and fossils, predicts canal sensitivity.
Variation in canal morphology in living and, by inference, extinct primates has
been attributed to interspecific differences in locomotor behavior. However, the
manner in which movement selects for canal morphology is debated. While some
argue that large sensitive canals are adaptive for detecting slow head
accelerations (the "slow-sensitive hypothesis"), others contend that large
sensitive canals are adaptive for detecting fast head accelerations (the "fast-
sensitive hypothesis"). Paleontologists seeking to reconstruct locomotor
preferences have extrapolated from both hypotheses to arrive at opposing
conclusions about overall agility and patterns of directional head movement in
life. Alternative scenarios cannot be tested because there are no actual data
about rotational head accelerations in primates. To refine proposed links
between canal morphology and locomotor function, and to resolve conflicting
functional interpretations, this study will examine rotational head
accelerations in strepsirhine primates exhibiting diverse locomotor behaviors.
Head accelerations during locomotion will be characterized using 3-dimensional
kinematic analyses. Cranial CT scans will be used to measure canal radii of
curvature and to model canal sensitivity to rotations in different directions.
Direct measurements of locomotor head accelerations will then be compared to
morphologic determinants of sensitivity to test predictions of the slow-
sensitive and fast-sensitive hypotheses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Semicircular canal
morphology may offer clues about locomotion in extinct taxa that are separate
and distinct from the information provided by postcranial remains. Understanding
how behavior selects for canal morphology is critical for making accurate
inferences of this nature. This project will supply the first characterization
of locomotor head accelerations in primates. These data will be used to evaluate
competing hypotheses about the adaptive link between semicircular canal
morphology and locomotor head accelerations. It will advance understanding of
locomotor adaptation in extinct primates and will help to define the limits of
fossil-canal-based locomotor reconstruction. Moreover, the use of strepsirhines
may advantage inferences about the locomotor adaptations and evolutionary shifts
associated with primate origins.