* 0824927
* Collaborative Research: Rainfall estimation accuracy and classification from deep underwater sound measurements
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2008,03/31/2013
* Jeffrey Nystuen, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 03/31/2013
* USD 139,024.00

The sound produced by rainfall underwater can be used to quantitatively measure
rainfall at sea. The Ionian Sea Rainfall Experiment (ISREX) and the operational
POSEIDON project are unique data sets that combine deep underwater acoustic
measurements with high resolution radar and can be used to evaluate the
performance of the acoustic measurement. Acoustic rainfall rate accuracy will be
estimated using disdrometer-calibrated and gauge adjusted high-resolution X-band
radar (XPOL) data from the Ionian Sea Rainfall Experiment (ISREX) and
subsequently evaluated using operational PAL/ground-radar/buoy-anemometer
(POSEIDON buoy and Hellenic Meteorological weather radar networks - Aegean and
Ionian Seas) and archived PAL/rain gauge data (ITCZ - Pacific Ocean). The
acoustic classification of rainfall will be evaluated in comparison with radar
estimated fields of rainfall classification. A model incorporating the influence
of the spatial and temporal scale storm structure on the acoustic signal will be
developed and tested using ISREX and Poseidon data. Finally, the performance of
acoustic data in retrieving raindrop size distributions (rainfall DSDs) will be
evaluated through comparisons with dual-polarization radar DSD retrievals from
ISREX and the operational radar measurements over the POSEIDON buoy in the north
Aegean Sea. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how to use passive ambient sound
to monitor the marine environment is a fundamental tool that will contribute to
our ability to monitor important climate processes globally. In particular,
rainfall distribution is an important component of the global water cycle and
has a strong acoustic signal on ocean surface constituting ~75% of global
rainfall. Exploring the acoustic signal of rainfall is needed to use it for
quantitative estimation of rain including presence, classification, accumulation
and raindrop size distributions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improving our ability to
measure rain over the oceans is critical to describing global water cycle and
understanding potential trends in climate change, and for validating estimates
by global coverage satellite sensor. Monitoring and predicting climate change
has huge broader impacts on human society. Utilizing the underwater acoustic
signal from rain will allow rainfall climatology to be measured in many remote
or severe weather regions (Atlantic and Pacific ITCZ, North Atlantic, etc.).
Rainfall makes only one of the acoustic signals that are part of the marine
ambient sound budget. Other physical processes that can be measured are wind and
sea state (bubbles) conditions. A more complete understanding of the acoustic
signal will allow all of these processes (rain, wind and bubbles) to be measured
from sub-surface platforms allowing all weather, all season data collection.
These include many new ocean instrumentation platforms including sub-surface
moorings, cabled networks, drifters, profilers, gliders, etc. Passive acoustic
monitoring for marine mammals, especially whales, is critical to ecological
studies of these animals. Finally, the impact of human-generated sound on the
marine environment is of growing concern. A collateral result of this work will
be to better monitor the marine sound budget to provide fundamental baseline
data to allow informed decisions regarding management of sound-producing human
activities in the ocean.