* 0824977
* Decentralized Structural Control Strategies with Wireless Sensing and Actuation
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2013
* Kincho Law, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 06/30/2013
* USD 250,000.00

The objective of this research is to develop novel structural control methods
that take advantage of advanced sensing and wireless communication technology.
The key intellectual merit of this research is the development of structural
control methods that are ideally suited for embedment in a wireless sensing and
control system defined by a distributive computational architecture.
Specifically, decentralized control strategies will be developed to address the
issues of communication range, bandwidth and latency of a wireless sensing and
control network. Deliverables include new and novel decentralized control
schemes such as a market-based strategy that models the control problem as a
commodity market, simulation results of the structural control methods, and
experimental validation of combining decentralized controls and wireless sensing
and actuation technologies. Large-scale experimental tests will be conducted
with international collaborators to evaluate and validate this research and
development effort.&lt;br/&gt;This research is expected to enhance the safety
and performance of civil structures on one hand and expand the utilization of
wireless communication technology to structural engineering practice on the
other. This research will demonstrate how low-cost wireless devices could be
incorporated to mitigate excessive vibration effects caused by dynamics loads
reliably and economically. The wireless sensing and actuation devices and
structural control experiments will be demonstrated to graduate and
undergraduate students and to the broader educational communities through
Stanford?s web sites with videos and instruction kits and also through lectures,
publications and workshops. The multi-disciplinary nature of the project will
provide opportunities to educate future structural engineers to have better
understanding of issues related to wireless communication and information and
their effective utilization in the practice of structural engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;