* 0824590
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement:  Variation in Female Social Lives in a Male-Dominated Society: Bonds, Stress, and Reproduction in Female Hamadryas Baboons
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Larissa Swedell, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 08/31/2010
* USD 15,000.00

Sociality and social relationships are important to both human and non-human
primates because they lead to fitness benefits, measured by infant survival,
fertility and net reproductive rates. Lack of social support, on the other hand,
has been shown to be associated with chronic stress in human and non-human
primates. Chronic stress, by causing prolonged elevation of glucocorticoid
hormones, can severely impact individual health and survival and can also
adversely affect reproductive physiology. Thus it is important to understand the
importance of social bonds to individual primates, and to understand both the
beneficial effects of social bonds on fitness as well as the negative impacts of
the lack of social support on stress physiology. Hamadryas baboons (Papio
hamadryas hamadryas) provide an ideal system in which to study the effects of
social bonds on proximate measures of fitness and the lack of bonds on stress
physiology. Hamadryas live in a multi-level social system with the smallest
level being a one-male unit (OMU). An OMU, in addition to a "leader" male,
variably contains one or more females and their offspring, as well as secondary
"follower" males. Hamadryas society is probably the most male-dominated society
among primates and females receive a substantial amount of aggression from
leader males, especially during and after takeovers. Even though females focus a
sizeable proportion of their affiliative interactions on the leader male, they
also form social relationships both with other females and even follower males.
It is obvious, therefore, that depending on the type of OMU in which a female
resides, she will form very different social bonds with consequent variable
effects on her fitness. This study will examine variation in the behavior of
hamadryas females across different types of OMUs in a population of hamadryas
baboons at the Filoha outpost of the Awash National Park in Ethiopia. Using
proximate measures of fitness, such as short-term reproductive parameters
(conception rates and infant survival), and both physiological (glucocorticoid
hormones) and behavioral (self-directed behavior such as self-grooming,
scratching, self-touching and body-shaking) indicators of stress, this project
aims to determine the effect on female fitness of the strength and quality of
social bonds and whether females exercise strategies to cope with their specific
social environment. This project will examine a female's relationships with each
type of adult partner available to her in an OMU and answer questions addressing
the effects of social bonds on fitness measures and stress levels. By examining
female relationships with other females as well as with follower males, this
project aims to elucidate whether social bonds with others benefit both mothers
and infants in the form of alloparental help and extra protection received as
well as lower stress levels due to better social integration. Female
relationships with the leader male will also be studied to understand whether
females benefit from more tolerant leader males who allow females to have
relationships with other females or follower males, or whether females benefit
from more aggressive males who are more protective towards their
infants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will contribute to the slowly growing
body of knowledge about the effects of factors such as the availability of
social support on the physiology, health and reproduction of animals. This
research will improve knowledge of the adaptive value of social bonds and coping
mechanisms in primates and the effects of both on stress physiology. By
examining the effects on infants and female fitness of alloparenting by various
members of the social unit, particularly by males, this study can contribute to
our understanding of larger theoretical questions in evolutionary primatology,
as alloparenting has been suggested to be important in the evolution of both
human and non-human primates. The results of this study may also contribute to
our understanding of the evolution of baboon social systems and the evolution of
social behavior in primates as a whole. Lastly, their similarities with hominids
make baboons, especially hamadryas baboons with their multi-level social system
and strong long-term male-female bonds, very useful as models of hominid origins
and this study may therefore contribute to our understanding of human social
evolution.