* 0824607
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Hominin Paleoecology and Cervid Ecomorphology
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Sabrina Curran, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 08/31/2009
* USD 14,982.00

Accurate reconstructions of paleoenvironmental conditions are imperative for
testing hypotheses concerning human evolution, as so many of the pressures of
natural selection stem from the environment. At many fossil hominin sites,
mammalian remains are among the best preserved paleoecological proxies.
Ecomorphology quantifies skeletal morphological characteristics and correlates
variations in those characteristics to adaptations for specific habitats. In
order to understand how skeletal morphology reflects adaptations to habitats,
data from a large sample of extant mammalian specimens must be analyzed. Only
after correlations have been established between specimens of known habitat
types and their morphology can the method be applied to fossil specimens. This
study applies ecomorphology methods to the family Cervidae (deer and relatives),
which is usually the dominant taxon in Eurasian paleoanthropological
assemblages. Data for 31 extant cervid species (142 specimens) have been
collected and analyzed using Geometric Morphometrics (GM) on joint surface
margins and here will be applied to fossil specimens. GM is especially useful
for studies of ecomorphology as it is able to compare and analyze entire shapes
at once. Data will be submitted to canonical variates analysis in order to
categorize unknown fossil specimens into habitat types. The methods introduced
here can be applied to broken bones, which are the norm in paleontological
sites, thus increasing fossil specimen sample sizes upon which paleohabitat
reconstructions are made. This study will compare fossil sites that do contain
hominin remains (Ubeidiya, Israel) and those that do not (St. Vallier and
Seneze, France and Valea Graunceanului, Romania) to each other and to other
contemporaneous sites to evaluate the range of habitats that early Eurasian
hominins inhabited. This study will test two competing hypotheses for hominin
dispersal: that these hominins were tracking specific habitats as they dispersed
from Africa or that these hominins were more generalistic than their ancestors
and were able to survive in a wide variety of habitat types. Understanding the
range of habitats Homo erectus could inhabit will elucidate how flexible this
hominin's behavior was and how it was the first hominin to disperse to
Eurasia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide insight into how Homo
erectus, our direct ancestor, became the first hominin to disperse to Eurasia
and what that dispersal means in terms of its adaptive and behavioral
capabilities. Habitat reconstructions of four Eurasian sites will illustrate the
range of habitats that were and were not occupied by hominins as they dispersed
from Africa. The methods introduced in this study provide a new proxy, cervid
ecomorphology, which can be utilized to reconstruct paleohabitats from any site
that contains deer remains and will provide more complete pictures of hominin
lifeways. By analyzing joint surface margins with geometric morphometrics,
broken bones can be included in paleohabitat reconstructions and will enable
more thorough use of the reserved fossil record, allowing for more accurate
paleohabitat reconstructions.