* 0824452
* BRIGE: Infrastructure of Terahertz Imaging and Sensing Technology
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Seongsin Kim, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2013
* USD 294,479.00

0824452&lt;br/&gt;Seongsin M. Kim, University of Alabama
Tuscaloosa&lt;br/&gt;BRIGE: Infrastructure of Terahertz Imaging and Sensing Tech
nology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectua
l Merit: The objective of the proposed research is establishing and
demonstrating a one-of-a-kind Terahertz imaging and sensing infrastructure at
the University of Alabama that is suitable for sustaining a permanent
multidimensional interdisciplinary research activity. Intellectual merit:
Terahertz biomedical imaging promises to become the technique of the future for
early cancer detection by combining the strengths of current imaging techniques,
which could lead to much fewer false positives, while being harmless to healthy
tissues. THz radiation will be generated at room temperature using a femtosecond
laser source through optical down-conversion in a nonlinear optical crystal. To
enhance the efficiency of THz generation, the interaction length between the THz
and the optical pulses needs to be increased. This will be done using quasi-
phase matching structures, such as orientation-patterned GaAs or GaN. This
infrastructure will be used to gather original imaging data and thereby enable
the collaborative development of complementary multi-modal imaging techniques
that can yield biochemical information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The
proposed outreach program is designed to attract women to pursue career
engineering because it is a major health issue in their lives that transcends
any ethnic and social background. Furthermore, the numerous proposed proactive
education and outreach activities in the classroom and outside the University
are purposefully designed to enhance the participation of all members of
underrepresented groups, especially women and African American, by taking
advantage of the unique position of the University of Alabama in this domain,
leveraging resources already available here, and fully integrating the
established research laboratory and capability into an education program in
which the PI will be a role model for other members of underrepresented groups.
These activities will be in addition to disseminating research data in prominent
journals and widely attended scientific forums where UA students can serve as an
example for others.&lt;br/&gt;