* 0824405
* BRIGE:  Multi-Spectral, High-Frequency Imaging Sensors for Frequency-Domain Biomedical Imaging
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Valencia Koomson, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2011
* USD 191,339.00

The proposed research and educational efforts focus on the development and
application of a new class of image sensor architectures with transformative
effects on biomedical optical diagnostics. The aim is to further advance the
field of near-infrared spectroscopy by developing miniaturized, multi-spectral,
imaging sensors with pixel-level RF detection and signal processing. The
proposed work will improve image resolution, reduce acquisition time, and enable
portability of frequency-domain diffuse optical tomography (FD-DOT) systems. A
mixed-mode design methodology for high-sensitivity optical imaging sensors
optimized for phase-sensitive detection of RF-modulated optical signals will be
explored. The optical and electrical performance of photodetector structures in
nanometer-scale VLSI technologies will be evaluated with an emphasis on the
affect of new high-k dielectric materials and metal layer stacking on
photoresponse. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The resulting research will have broader
impacts in many areas, including medical optical diagnostics, high-performance
image sensor technology, and the semiconductor industry workforce. A central
focus of the proposed activities is to broaden opportunities to students from
underrepresented groups and engage students at all levels in interdisciplinary
research and integrated circuit design training. A summer enrichment program
will be launched, incorporating IC CAD tool training, coursework, a team-based
research project, and visits to labs/companies in the greater Boston area. There
is a strong mentoring and training component for students at all
levels.&lt;br/&gt;