* 0824017
* Use of Novel Excitation Schemes for Resonant Microcantilevers in Liquid-Phase Sensing Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Fabien Josse, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2012
* USD 678,225.00

RE: Proposal 0824017&lt;br/&gt;Use of Novel Excitation Schemes for Resonant
Microcantilevers in Liquid-Phase Sensing
Applications.&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to
develop efficient and highly sensitive resonant microcantilever sensors for
liquid-phase (bio)chemical sensing applications by reducing fluid damping and
effective fluid mass through proper design and, thus, improving the sensitivity
and resolution of the sensor. The approach is to utilize optimal cantilever
geometries and more general excitation characteristics. Specifically, the
lateral bending mode will be investigated. The use of in-plane rather than out-
of-plane forces demonstrates how the intelligent control of electromechanical
load characteristics may be used to drastically enhance performance, even in
liquids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit lies in a more fundamental
understanding of the coupling between a vibrating microstructure (cantilever
beam) and the surrounding fluid. The developed analytical models will ultimately
guide the design of more efficient microsensors, not only for the bio-chemical
sensing applications targeted here, but for resonant sensors operating in a non-
vacuum environment in general. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact stems
from the availability of the improved cantilever-based sensing platforms as a
sensing platform for liquid-phase (bio)chemical sensing and as an educational
tool coupling device physics, state-of-the-art microfabrication, sensor
technology and systems engineering. On the sensing system side, a performance
improvement of up to two orders of magnitude in the liquid phase could be truly
transformative, enabling the development of novel handheld sensing systems for
applications spanning environmental monitoring, detection of hazardous
compounds, and medical diagnosis. On the educational side, cantilevers represent
one of the simplest microstructures and are thus ideally suited for graduate and
undergraduate student training and K-12 outreach programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;