* 0824157
* The Science and Technology of Carbon Nanotube-Semiconductor Heterojunction Contact Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Andrew Rinzler, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2012
* USD 272,054.00

Abstract The objective of this research is to develop new electronic device
architectures enabled by carbon nanotubes-semiconductor junction contacts that
provide new functionality and ultimately simplify device manufacturing. Metal-
semiconductor contact junctions are transcendent electronic components that
pervade modern electronics. Nevertheless much remains to be understood about the
transport across these contacts, particularly in the rapidly evolving realm of
organic semiconductors. The University of Florida researchers have discovered
that carbon nanotubes provide a unique metal for such junctions that afford a
new degree of freedom permitting electronic control over the junction
characteristics. The approach is to fabricate devices exploiting this degree of
freedom and establish the design parameters, coupling experiment with simulation
tools that optimize the devices, thus demonstrating the performance and
manufacturing gains to be had. The intellectual merit of the effort lies not
only in the technology to be developed but also in the understanding to be
gained in the more general science of metal-semiconductor contacts. Prof. Andrew
Rinzler, an experimental physicist, and Prof. Jing Guo, an electronic engineer
specializing in device simulation and modeling, are uniquely suited for both
development of the technology and for gaining a quantitative understanding of
these novel contact junctions. Broader impacts will include:Economic benefits
from accelerated insertion of inexpensive organic semiconductors into commercial
devices. Webcam interviews for high school teachers and students will be
conducted for early exposure of K-12 students to modern electronics technology.
A web-based simulation tool on carbon nanotube heterojunction devices will be
developed and deployed on the NSF sponsored nanoHUB. Minority and female
students will be engaged through the Society of Women Engineers chapter and the
University Minority Mentorship Program at the University of Florida