* 0824467
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement : Biological and Cultural Factors Associated with Lactational Dysfunction in Overweight Women
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2008,06/30/2010
* Laura Hauff, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 06/30/2010
* USD 15,000.00

Studies of human reproductive ecology have provided key insights into how
evolution has shaped reproductive mechanisms (e.g., ovulation, gestation and
lactation) to respond appropriately to environmental circumstances. For example,
physiological mechanisms reduce ovulatory function in women already nursing or
with low energy stores. Lactation, however, is largely unaffected by low energy
stores as this process is given metabolic priority when maternal energy is
partitioned. Though most such studies have focused on nutritionally stressed
populations, recent research has demonstrated that overweight women face a
higher rate of lactational dysfunction. Compared to normal weight women,
overweight women establish lactation later postpartum and if established, stop
breastfeeding sooner. This result is surprising from a reproductive ecology
perspective because overweight women have ample energy stores needed for
lactation and because of the metabolic priority generally afforded to lactation.
Although studies consistently report an association between maternal obesity and
late onset to and short duration of lactation, the causes of this relationship
remain unknown. This project will focus on the central question: Why are
overweight women at risk for lactational dysfunction? Because the process of
establishing and maintaining milk production depends upon a finely tuned set of
physiological, behavioral and social conditions, this research will utilize a
bio-cultural approach. Pregnant women from Minneapolis-St. Paul will be
recruited to participate in a matched-pair case-control study. Data will be
collected using three methods: First, a prenatal survey will investigate how
psychosocial and demographic factors influence breastfeeding to test the
relationship between maternal obesity and these factors. Second, nursing
episodes will be observed and participants will record attempts to breastfeed as
well as factors influencing their decision to wean, in order to test the
association of behavioral patterns and maternal obesity. Finally, serum samples
will be drawn to test hormonal differences between obese and non-obese women.
Statistical analyses will identify the relative contribution of the effects of
maternal obesity, hormone concentrations, behavioral patterns and psychosocial
factors on breastfeeding outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Breastfeeding provides
numerous benefits for infants and their mothers. As obesity rates continue to
rise globally, it becomes increasingly important to uncover the reasons why this
cohort of women is at risk for lactational dysfunction. This project will lay
the groundwork for knowledge that can be used by public health institutions to
disseminate information on the special problems overweight women face when
attempting to breastfeed. Elucidating the causes of lactational dysfunction in
this population will help to explain lactational dysfunction in other
environmental and cultural contexts and will make it easier to predict the
proximate mechanisms leading to poor lactation performance. Finally, this
project will advance knowledge regarding how modern human females manage trade-
offs relating to reproductive strategies. It will address the puzzle of how a
surplus of (stored) metabolic energy can interfere with the performance of an
energetically demanding task essential for reproduction. In doing so, it will
contribute to the understanding of how physiological pathways supporting milk
production relate to pathways of fat storage and metabolism. &lt;br/&gt;