* 0824250
* Adaptive Radio Platforms based on Recursive Receivers Employing Non-Linearity Compensation and Interference Cancellation
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Ranjit Gharpurey, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 08/31/2012
* USD 260,954.00

Objective: The objective of this research is to develop innovative radio
receiver architectures and circuits with a goal to significantly improve the
trade-off between power-efficiency and interference-handling capability in radio
front-ends. The approach is based on low-power front-end architectures such as
recursive receivers and techniques for adaptive interference cancellation and
linearization. A key focus of the research will be on receivers for wireless
systems with multi-mode and multi-band
functionality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The research will
include a detailed investigation of approaches to significantly alleviate the
dynamic range constraint in the analog front-ends of wireless receivers
implemented in short-channel complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS)
processes. Through the use of techniques such as feedforward linearization and
interference cancellation, these constraints will be addressed prior to signal
digitization in the receiver, while minimizing the use of external passive
filters, in order to help facilitate integration of wireless transceivers in
future generations of CMOS processes. A receiver architecture based on these
approaches will be implemented in a 130nm or similar short-channel CMOS
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The agile radio front-end
architectures developed as part of this research are expected to impact several
current and future wireless systems for diverse end-applications such as
biomedical, communications and computing. The research and training program will
involve student researchers at the graduate and undergraduate levels, and
include students from underrepresented groups. Research results will be used to
update courses, and will be disseminated through publications, seminars and
websites.&lt;br/&gt;