* 0824657
* SGER: Dietary Paleoecology of Early Cenozoic Ungulates of North America
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2010
* Matthew Mihlbachler, New York Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Boush
* 05/31/2010
* USD 24,867.00

Dietary Paleoecology of Early Cenozoic Ungulates of North America

Matthew Mihlbachler

I propose the study the dental microwear of Paleogene ungulates of North America
to test hypotheses relating the paleodietary ecology of mammals to dental
morphology and climate change. The fossil record documents the repeated
evolution of lophodont dentitions from more bunodont forms. This trend is
thought to correspond to a dietary shift from frugivory to folivory necessitated
by global cooling, increasing seasonality, and associated habitat changes. The
dental microwear methodology will be used to predict the diets of extinct
species, to reconstruct the ecological profiles of successive faunas, and to
trace the early dietary histories of major ungulate lineages, including the
modern orders Artiodactyla and Perissodactyla. The dental microwear methodology
liberates dental morphology from the task of making paleodietary inferences,
thus allowing us to examine paleoecological change independent of morphological
change and to track paleodiets at finer temporal scales. Solounias is largely
responsible for developing the methods that will be used, while Mihlbachler has
taken a role in further developing many aspects of these methods. The first year
will be spent compiling casts of teeth for use wear analysis, curation of the
cast library, and collection and analysis of data. Data analysis and
dissemination of results will be completed in year two. This project will
address two basic hypotheses that we believe are critical to mammalian
evolutionary dietary paleoecology: Hypothesis 1: The evolution of lophodonty
among Paleogene ungulates and ungulate-like mammals corresponds to a widespread
shift from frugivory/omnivory in the beginning of the Paleogene to predominantly
folivory by the close of the Paleogene. If dental microwear contradicts or is
only loosely associated with dental classifications, it is a strong signal that
mammalian paleodietary ecology should be more carefully evaluated, drawing
evidence not just from dental morphology, but from dental use wear data (such as
microwear) and other morphologically independent methods such as stable
isotopes. Hypothesis 2: Mammalian paleodietary responses to climate changes
occurred on time scales that are much finer than that which is suggested by
trends in dental macroevolution. The Bighorn and Clark?s Fork Basins document a
critical time period near the Paleocene-Eocene boundary. This critical time
interval documents a rapid increase in CO2, the appearance of many immigrant
taxa, and dwarfing events among several lineages. The dense sampling of mammals
with high stratigraphic resolution through this interval afford us a rare
opportunity to study paleoecological change during a critical interval in
mammalian evolution at a scale of temporal resolution in which greenhouse
warming processes and many evolutionary processes (speciation, extinction) are
known to operate. In addition to developing a better understanding of evolution-
ecology-climate dynamics, other broad impacts of this proposal are to expose a
number of undergraduates and medical students to the scientific process to
facilitate further research along similar lines and to provide results for an
NSF funded website that is currently under development at the AMNH. Students
will be hired to assist with the dental cast collection resulting from this
proposal, and the entire collection of casts on modern and Miocene mammals
collected by Solonious from prior NSF grants. These casts will be cataloged and
made available to those who wish to conduct similar research in mammalian
paleoecology.