* 0824612
* Collaborative Research: Acoustic Instrumentation for Imaging and Quantifying Hydrothermal Flow in NEPTUNE Canada Regional Cabled Observatory at Main Endeavour Field, JdFR
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2008,04/30/2016
* Russell Light, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 04/30/2016
* USD 1,433,986.00

The PI's request funding to develop and connect sonar instrumentation to monitor
hydrothermal flow at the NEPTUNE Canada Regional Cabled Observatory (RCO) in the
Main Endeavour Field (MEF) on the Juan de Fuca Ridge (JdFR) offshore British
Columbia as part of the Ocean Observatories Initiative (OOI). The backbone cable
for this RCO was installed in 2007 and the nodes and junction boxes are
scheduled for installation in 2009. The proposed instrumentation will
acoustically image time series of the changing 3D geometry, flow rate and volume
flux of buoyant plumes discharging from vents and areal distribution of diffuse
flow from the surrounding seafloor. Connection to NEPTUNE Canada will provide
the power and bandwidth to extend our present technically proven capability of
imaging from days/weeks (ROV or battery power) to months/years. This temporal
extension will enable monitoring of fluxes of hydrothermal flow and detecting
linkages with external forcing processes from tidal cycles to geologic events
(earthquakes, volcanic activity). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed new
instrumentation, the Cabled Observatory Imaging Sonar System (COVIS), is
designed as an ideal instrument for the power and data bandwidth afforded by the
cabled observatory and will adapt to NEPTUNE Canada Stage I mechanical,
electrical, and software functional requirements. A state-of-the-art commercial
off-the-shelf sonar (400 kHz) will be acquired and integrated onto a custom
benthic tripod lander with a central tower and angular translation system. The
3-axis angular translation system will allow operators to precisely position the
multi-beam sonar head into observing positions for both plume and diffuse flow
measurements, will be adaptable to changes of the flow orientations, will be
capable of autonomous response to significant geophysical events detected by
other NEPTUNE Canada instrumentation via shore based control software, and will
have scope to be moved within the vent field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work should enable a real-time window to
seafloor hydrothermal flow and its interaction with oceanic and geological
processes. The great public awareness and educational impacts this installation
could have for the general public and K-12 through college education/inspiration
are obvious and should be encouraged. There may be some thesis benefits for
engineering graduate students, as well.