* 0824729
* Acquisition of an X-ray Diffractometer for Mineralogical and Sedimentological Studies
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Jonathan Martin, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2010
* USD 167,485.00

0824729&lt;br/&gt;Neuhoff&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks
funding to purchase an X-ray diffractometer to replace a current 30-year old
model within the Department of Geological Sciences at the University of Florida.
The current instrument suffers from loss of quality and accuracy in the
diffraction pattern and is no longer supported by the manufacturer. The proposed
acquisition is a Rigaku Ultima IV vertical goniometer powder X-ray unit. This
unit is supplied with cross-beam optics which support both traditional focusing
and parallel beam diffraction allowing analysis of samples with varying
geometry. The requested system is complete with software and automation
capabilities. XRD is a common technique for studies in mineralogy, sedimentology
and petrology. The research team will put the requested instrument into service
to 1) understanding the mineralogy of heterogeneous sediment and rock samples,
2) assessing the stability of zeolites, clays, and anion salts which control the
physicochemical behavior of surface rocks, 3) understanding the physical
properties of water in angstrom to nanometer scale pores within amorphous and
crystalline solids, 4) defining water-rock interactions in marine, estuarine and
terrestrial systems ? with focus on aquifier rocks and sediments during
groundwater-surface exchange, 5) understanding biogeochemical impacts of
submarine groundwater discharge in coastal systems, 6) understanding the global
sedimentation increase associated with the late Cenozoic Northern Hemisphere
glaciation, 7) understanding coastal urbanization through studying sedimentation
processes in modern impacted and paleo-estuarine environments, and 8) to better
understand human impacts such as deforestation, soil erosion, and land-use
changes on watershed sedimentology. The management plan has the PIs
administering the upgrade and maintenance. Laboratory space is allocated through
the department and a state-supported non-tenure track faculty member will
provide technical support. Overhead support will provide electrical and cooling
requirements. A small remuneration ($5-10 per hour in-house and ~$40 per hour
for outside users) will be collected to support periodic maintenance. Currently,
students are not provided hands-on training in XRPD due to safety concerns. The
proposed instrument will be made available to students performing research and
also used classes in the undergraduate and graduate curriculum: mineralogy,
petrology, sedimentology, and geochemistry. The instrument is to be used in
outreach such as the Florida Scholar?s program, targeting high school students
and K-12 teachers. PIs will also publish data in peer-reviewed
papers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;