* 0824712
* Supporting Students Attending the 2008 Adaptive Hypermedia Doctoral Consortium
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2008,03/31/2009
* Susan Gauch, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 03/31/2009
* USD 14,580.00

This is funding to support travel by 6 students currently enrolled in PhD
programs in the United States to present their accepted papers and posters, and
to take part in the Doctoral Consortium, at the upcoming Adaptive Hypermedia
Conference, to be held July 28-August 1, 2008 in Hannover, Germany. User
interfaces that adapt themselves to individual needs and preferences, or to
available user information, are becoming increasingly important, so much so that
adaptivity has become a selling point for software products. A system with the
ability to construct and consult user models can adapt diverse aspects of its
performance to individual users or user groups, thus enhancing its
effectiveness, usability and/or acceptance in a wide variety of situations. This
leads to the concept of adaptive hypermedia as providing the underpinning of
personalized interfaces that can successfully deal with information overload
while improving the quality of information retrieval and filtering, information
restructuring and annotation, information visualization, etc. But as Web sites
explore ways to personalize, they must also investigate the effect of such
algorithms on privacy, efficiency, and our ability to disseminate new
information. In addition to the ubiquitous Web applications, educational
applications and applications oriented to users with different kinds of
disabilities can also benefit from adaptive systems. The International
Conferences on Adaptive Hypermedia is the major forum for the scientific
exchange and presentation of research in adaptive hypermedia and adaptive Web-
based systems, held biannually; AH 2008 will be the 5th event in the series, and
represents the marriage of the Adaptive Hypermedia and User Modeling
communities, both of which are major sponsors. Active participation of young
researchers in the conference is very important, both for the health of the
field and for the researchers themselves. The AH 2008 Doctoral Consortium
provides a unique opportunity for PhD students partway through their
dissertation research to gain wider exposure in the community for their
innovative work, and to obtain feedback and guidance from senior people in the
field. Experience has shown that most Doctoral Consortium participants at past
UM and AH conferences were later able to expand and publish their work
originally presented at the Consortium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
Bringing young and creative researchers to AH 2008 will help advance an
important and socially valuable research field. For many graduate students, the
cost of attending the conference exceeds their travel budget. Thus, NSF funding
will significantly impact the careers of the next generation of researchers, by
enabling a number of them to take part in an important event they would
otherwise have to miss. Participation will also help foster a sense of community
among these young researchers, by allowing them to create a social network both
among themselves and with senior researchers at a critical stage in their
professional development. The PI has indicated that she will act to assure
participation by members of traditionally under-represented institutions, and
will pay close attention to inclusion of minorities and women.