* 0824881
* Planning a PI Meeting for the NSDL Program
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2008,02/28/2010
* Kaye Howe, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 02/28/2010
* USD 258,098.00

This project is planning and implementing a meeting in Fall 2008 for the PIs and
projects supported by the NSDL program and for the communities directly engaged
with these projects and with NSDL.org, specifically K-12 and higher education
STEM teachers and learners. In the distributed, networked environment in which
NSDL projects and NSDL.org are developed and used, face-to-face meetings provide
opportunities to exchange research results and promising practices and to
explore common challenges and solutions. The cross-section of PIs and project
staff who attend ensures an exchange of ideas vertically and horizontally. The
primary goals of the meeting are: i) to provide opportunities for networking for
all attendees; ii) to feature accomplishments of the NSDL community; and iii) to
demonstrate the value of NSDL projects' contributions to cyber-enabled STEM
education. Outcomes include: i) documentation of the meeting planning process,
including timelines and communications, proposal review processes, and a meeting
website; ii) an archive of meeting presentations and posters; and iii) an end-
of-meeting survey and related report to the NSDL community. The intellectual
merit of the project lies in its support and facilitation of meeting attendees'
exchange of research results and new ideas. In addition the meeting planning
team has an ongoing commitment to integrate emerging technologies and services
that support peer connections during the meeting planning process and during and
after the meeting. The annual meeting itself is exerting broader impact by
drawing together researchers and developers of educational cyberinfrastructure
with users of cyber-enabled STEM education resources from across the United
States. In addition, significant participant support costs broaden the spectrum
of participation beyond NSF-funded projects. Participants also disseminate
meeting results; and presentations are archived at the meeting website.