* 0824031
* High-Resolution RF to Digital Converter for Next Generation Broadband Communication Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2008,11/30/2011
* Jose Silva-Martinez, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 11/30/2011
* USD 330,000.00

Objective: The objective of this research is to demonstrate the feasibility and
robustness of a new mixer-less high-performance receiver architecture for multi-
standard wireless radio systems based on a programmable bandpass sigma-delta
modulator. The approach uses a highly linear low-noise amplifier as the input
stage to a programmable high resolution analog-to-digital converter and enables
low-noise conditioning, filtering and high-resolution signal digitization at
radio frequencies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The research aims
at eliminating the analog down-conversion that is traditionally used in existing
receiver front-ends. The new architecture employs highly selective LC filters
embedded in the control loop that rejects the out-of-band interferers. This
further relaxes the requirements of the analog circuits employed in the
digitizer. This approach lowers the complexity and power consumption of the
receiver while providing high resolution. Additionally, a unique self-healing
software based calibration scheme will be developed to optimize the analog-to-
digital converter for performance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
new adaptive analog-to-digital interface has the potential to enable the
efficient implementation of broadband systems such as cognitive and software
defined radios. The new architecture can also be readily reconfigured as a high-
performance spectrum-analyzer for monitoring frequency spectrums. The project
will involve graduate and undergraduate students and will include substantial
participation by under-represented groups. The research results will be
incorporated into courses and disseminated through technical journals and
conferences as well as web postings.