* 0824299
* SGER:  The Salvage Panama Canal Paleontology/Geology Project
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Carlos Jaramillo, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 06/30/2009
* USD 36,200.00

This Small Grant for Exploratory Research to the Smithsonian Tropical Ressearch
Institute (STRI) will provide for a rapid response team consisting of U.S. and
international paleontologists, geologists, and students to collect and conserve
fossils and geological samples from the new outcrops of the Neogene sediments
exposed along the Panama Canal as it undergoes widening over the next few
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Panama, in particular, and the tropics in general,
hold the greatest biodiversity of marine and terrestrial biota. STRI has been
studying how this great diversity has formed and how it is maintained. Part of
the answer to these questions relies on an examination of the fossil and
geological record, because the production of biodiversity takes millions of
years. However, the fossil record from the tropics is very difficult to obtain,
because good rock outcrops are rare to non-existent. Most of the landscape is
covered by vegetation, and the weathering is intense, which alters the
composition of the rocks and destroys the fossils.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
expansion of the Canal provides a rare opportunity to access fresh rock outcrops
covering a large range of geologic time. Examination of these fresh rock
outcrops will give access to the geological record from before, during, and
after the formation of the isthmus of Panama, with all its evolutionary,
paleoclimatological, and tectonic implications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For this
project, time is of the essence. Fossils and rocks must be documented, mapped
and collected as the excavation of the Canal moves forward. The team will be in
the Canal work zone almost every day over the next few years. With this team in
place, many unique fossils and geological samples will be preserved for future
study that might otherwise be destroyed or covered back up by future
excavations. This grant provides excellent international experience for U.S.
graduate students by becoming members of the STRI's paleontological and
geological research group. All sample metadata will be catalogued using the
Paleostrat system.