* 0824199
* WINeRS: A Multichannel Wireless Implantable Neural Recording and Stimulating System for Hippocampal Electrophysiology Research on Memory
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2013
* Maysam Ghovanloo, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2013
* USD 332,219.00

Objective: The objective of this research is to develop a multichannel Wireless
Implantable Neural Recording and Stimulating (WINeRS) system to be used as a
bidirectional interface with the central nervous system for neurobiology
research applications. The system will be evaluated in the context of
hippocampal electrophysiology research on memory.

Intellectual Merit: High power, large size, low efficiency, limited bandwidth,
and susceptibility to noise and interference are some of the major existing
challenges in development of such systems, which will be targeted by adopting a
modular scalable system-on-a-chip architecture. The ultra low-noise recording
unit will be clockless and tunable to the frequency band of interest within the
neural signal. It will have stimulus artifact rejection capability and adaptive
resolution to the bandwidth and number of active channels. Three individual
radio-frequency carriers will be optimized for high-efficiency inductive
powering, high-rate forward data transmission, and wideband back telemetry
across the skin. State-of-the-art microassembly will be devised to combine the
multichannel stimulation and recording units with multiple antennas, microwire
bundles, and micromachined electrode arrays on a head-mounted package.

Broader Impact: Diseases that target the hippocampus, such as dementia and the
Alzheimer?s, which affected 5.1 million Americans in 2007, are rapidly growing
in the aging industrial societies. The proposed microsystem could be invaluable
tool in the hands of neuroscientists. The proposed effort also includes the
development of senior design courses for undergraduate students, and involved
undergraduate students in research activities.