* 0824592
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Behavioral Endocrinology and Reproductive Strategies of Wild Female Geladas
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/2008,10/31/2010
* Eila Roberts, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 10/31/2010
* USD 14,935.00

Among mammals, females generally invest more than males in each reproductive
event -- an imbalance that often results in different reproductive strategies
for males and females. The typical male strategy is to mate with as many females
as possible while females are generally more "choosy" and will only mate under
favorable social and environmental conditions. Possibly the most salient example
of a male reproductive strategy is infanticide - when a male kills a female's
unweaned offspring (sired by another male) to hasten her return to a fertile
state. In turn, to protect their reproductive effort, female mammals often
develop counterstrategies to infanticide such as forming defensive alliances
with other individuals in their social groups, producing deceptive sexual
behavior and sexual swellings to mimic the signs of fertility, spontaneously
aborting a pregnancy, or prematurely weaning dependent young. Anecdotal evidence
on wild geladas (Theropithecus gelada), a close relative of baboons, suggests
that infanticide following male takeovers may be a threat for females with
dependent offspring. However, as yet, female reproductive counterstrategies in
geladas have never been examined. This project aims to investigate the function
and underlying physiology of female reproductive strategies in geladas, to
answer the question: does intersexual conflict exist in geladas? The first
objective is to describe the normative patterns of gelada reproduction in terms
of gonadal hormones, sexual swellings, and female reproductive behavior. The
second objective is to investigate the functional significance behind the
physiology, sexual swellings, and reproductive behavior of female geladas
following male takeovers. In other words, this research will determine whether
infanticide is a threat to female geladas and whether females have developed
counterstrategies as a result. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is unique in
two ways. First, it explores the potential for intersexual conflict to exist in
geladas from both mechanistic and adaptive approaches. Female physiological
profiles will reveal whether females perceive male takeovers as a threat and
whether female sexual swellings are deceptive or not. Field observations will
provide the behavioral context with which to interpret the hormonal data.
Together, the hormones and behavior yield a more complete picture of what is
going on. This is the first study to investigate the hormones and behavior
surrounding female reproductive strategies in primates. Second, infanticide will
be investigated from the female's perspective. While infanticide has been
investigated in a variety of species, research has strongly focused on the costs
and benefits for males. Further documentation of female reproductive strategies
and counterstrategies in primate species will contribute towards a better
understanding of intersexual conflict.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data from this work
will have important conservation implications. Geladas are an endangered species
and improved understanding of their reproductive behavior can help breeding
efforts in captive settings.