* 0824337
* BRIGE: Understanding Engineering Students through the Lens of Identity Theory - Implications for Recruitment and Retention of Underrepresented Students
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2013
* Olga Pierrakos, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Richard N. Smith
* 07/31/2013
* USD 208,643.00

This BRIGE project addresses the widespread and pervasive problems of
maintaining global competitiveness by increasing the number of engineering
graduates, improving the representation of women and minorities in engineering,
and understanding how to improve recruitment and retention of engineering
students. Employing identity theory provides a unique perspective and a much
needed understanding of our students. The goal of this research is to employ a
mixed methods approach by collecting quantitative and&lt;br/&gt;qualitative data
to better understand the multiple identities of our students and the factors
that shape these identities. The study includes freshman and senior STEM
students at James Madison University as well as freshmen and senior students at
four additional institutions with engineering programs by conducting interviews
questionnaires and personal identity instruments. We are looking for significant
breakthroughs to contribute to our basic understanding of our students? multiple
identities as a means of also understanding what activities, experiences,
circumstances, and settings shape their identities (particularly their identity
as engineers). Apart from the findings that will contribute to our basic
understanding of students, the ultimate deliverable will be a survey instrument,
Engineer Identity Survey (EIS), interview protocol and questionnaires that could
be used by engineering programs at various levels. The PI is well-positioned
with a foundation of related work and strong early career motivation to pursue
this research, publish and disseminate the research and findings. This BRIGE
grant would provide a strong research foundation upon which the PI can pursue
more engineering education research funding. &lt;br/&gt;