* 0824103
* Single Photon Adiabatic Wavelength Converter on a Silicon Chip
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Stefan Preble, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 09/30/2011
* USD 182,982.00

Objective: &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to demonstrate an efficient
single photon wavelength converter based on a classical linear
effect.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;Quantum-optical
communication systems have the promise to revolutionize how&lt;br/&gt;data is
transmitted and processed. In the future it will be desirable to process qubits
in various information channels. In such a system the ability to transfer single
photons between information channels using optical wavelength conversion is
desirable. However, wavelength conversion has traditionally required a non-
linear effect, which inherently means a very large number of photons at another
frequency must be present in order to assist the conversion of the single
photons. In contrast, the goal of this project is to demonstrate a single photon
wavelength converter on a silicon chip based on a recently demonstrated low-
power linear adiabatic wavelength conversion process. Theoretically this process
has a 100% conversion efficiency, therefore, every single photon will change its
energy. The process will be achieved by low-power optical or electrical tuning
of an on-chip silicon resonant cavity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact:&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will have broad impacts in the fields of
quantum optics and quantum information systems. The device will lead to complex
quantum integrated circuits for studying quantum computation and light-matter
interactions. Furthermore, the project will have significant educational impact
by involving undergraduate students in the required senior design course
sequence. Current research results will also be integrated into a graduate level
course in Microsystems Engineering. Lastly, the developed fabrication processes
and experimental techniques will be made available to other researchers at RIT
and small companies.