* 0824635
* Collaborative Research: Fast Spin Up of Ocean General Circulation Models Using Newton-Krylov Methods
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Samar Khatiwala, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2012
* USD 361,750.00

Numerical models of the climate system play an important role in efforts to
understand past climate variability and predict future climate changes. In many
studies, climate models are driven by forcing fields that are either time-
independent or that vary periodically (seasonally) and it is often highly
desirable to obtain equilibrium solutions of the model. Existing methods, based
on the simple expedient of integrating the model until the transients have died
out, are too expensive to use routinely because the deep ocean takes several
thousand years to equilibrate. The principal objective of this project is to
develop a practical and efficient method for computing equilibrium solutions of
periodically forced ocean general circulation models (OGCMs). The general
approach will be to formulate the problem as a large system of nonlinear
algebraic equations to be solved with a class of methods known as matrix-free
Newton-Krylov, a combination of Newton-type methods for superlinearly convergent
solution of nonlinear equations, and Krylov subspace methods for solving the
Newton correction equations. To render this approach practical for global models
with order (107) degrees of freedom, novel matrix free preconditioning
strategies will be developed. The "matrix-free" nature of the proposed approach
makes it extremely flexible, allowing its use with any ocean or climate model.
The method can be applied to models forced at any period, including those driven
by time-independent forcing, although the main focus here is the seasonal cycle.
Preliminary results suggest that this scheme can accelerate the spin up of
seasonally forced OGCMs by over two orders of magnitude over current practice.
The convergence properties of this technique will be analyzed, and its
efficiency assessed against traditional "acceleration" methods. While the
primary target is ocean climate models with a nominal resolution of one , the
method will also be applied to the next generation of higher resolution models,
including eddy permitting ones. The technique will be applied to obtain
equilibrium solutions for various forcing estimates for both present day climate
from ocean reanalysis products, and that of the Last Glacial Maximum.

Intellectual merit: The slow dynamical adjustment timescale of the deep ocean is
one of the principal obstacles to our ability to make more effective use of
climate models. The proposed study will address this fundamental problem in
climate simulation by developing practical algorithms for efficiently computing
equilibrium solutions of seasonally forced OGCMs. A direct outcome of this
research will be improved estimates of the circulation of both the modern ocean,
and that of the Last Glacial Maximum.

Broader Impacts: By greatly reducing the computational cost of obtaining
equilibrium solutions of climate models, this research will allow scientists to
address questions of scientific and societal relevance that are currently
unfeasible. These questions include systematic parameter sensitivity studies and
simulations of paleoclimate, areas that are especially important for
characterizing uncertainties in climate change simulations. A key advantage of
the proposed approach is that it makes few assumptions about the underlying
ocean or climate model code thus ensuring that the results of this research can
be used by the widest possible group of researchers. This work is directly
relevant to ongoing work in the areas of ocean circulation, paleoceanography,
and ocean biogeochemistry. More broadly, while the specific objective is to
address the ocean spin up problem, the computation of periodic solutions and
limit cycles of systems modeled by partial differential equations is a very
general one, and the proposed method is likely to have broad applicability in
other disciplines. This research will contribute to the training and education
of a graduate student. Numerical code developed as part of this research will be
made freely available to the research community. Findings of this study will be
published in journal articles and presented at conference meetings.