* 0824352
* BRIGE: "Smart" Toughness Enhancement in Metal-Matrix Composites:  Linking Structure, Properties and Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Michele Manuel, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2011
* USD 175,000.00

The research objective of this award is to identify the structure-property
relationship between the phase transformations occurring during the deformation
of a metal-matrix composite reinforced with shape memory alloys and fracture
toughness. Magnesium metal-matrix composites will be fabricated into two types
of fracture toughness specimens, one reinforced with pseudoelastic wires and the
other with shape memory alloy wires. The phase transformations in the wires will
be continuously monitored during J-integral testing through the use of
electrical resistivity measurements. Concurrently, modified single fiber pullout
specimens will be tested to establish a relationship between the
matrix/reinforcement interfacial strength and composite
toughness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research will
lead to improvements in the fracture toughness of metal-matrix composites,
specifically self-healing alloy composites. The design and development of a
light-weight self-healing alloy composite that can repair itself in response to
structural damage is critical in systems that are at present impractical to
repair in service. The primary goal of this work is to utilize a mechanistic
approach to identify and model the role of adaptive microstructures as
reinforcements in ?smart? metal-matrix composites. This provides the opportunity
and a methodology to enhance the mechanical properties of metals that currently
demonstrate limited fracture toughness by processing and reinforcing these
materials with adaptive elements. The proposed work provides a significant
contribution towards the development of high specific strength self-healing
structural metals that can be toughened using shape memory alloy wire
reinforcements. An integral part of this program is the enhancement and
promotion of diversity using several education initiatives targeted to students
at all grade levels. &lt;br/&gt;