* 0824118
* Adaptive Control of Time-Varying Systems Using Multiple Models
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Kumpati Narendra, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2012
* USD 398,712.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the
research is to understand how a machine or an organism can adapt to a time-
varying environment, particularly when it is rapidly time-varying. Under such
conditions, conventional adaptation (based on incremental adjustments) may be
too slow to cope with the changes. Obviously a new approach is needed, and the
multiple-model method is an attractive candidate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rapidly
varying environments arise in medicine, neuroscience, vision, economics, and
other disciplines. The world we live in is an excellent example, where sudden
and discontinuous changes are possible. The multiple model based approach
described in the proposal can be thought of as a method which attempts to
classify (or identify) the different situations that might arise, and proposes
the appropriate actions that should be taken.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a mathematical standpoint, the research proposed
opens a new area of adaptive control. It attempts to answer an important
theoretical question which will have significant impact on problems that arise
in many other disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To the non-expert it will
provide some understanding of the limits to adaptive control. More specifically,
it attempts to answer questions related to how fast the environment can change,
if we are to adapt successfully to it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research, when completed, will provide both
graduate and undergraduate students, much needed training in new areas of
mathematics related to advanced control
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduates at Yale, who are women and
underrepresented minority students will be actively encouraged by the PI to
participate in the projects during the summers as well as to work on them under
this direction for their senior projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI organizes
seminars regularly at Yale, He also delivers both scientific and popular
lectures (e.g. Peabody Museum, Whitney Senior Citizen Center) both in the United
States and around the world, and organizes the bi-annual Yale Workshop on
Adaptive and Learning Systems. The results of the research carried out will be
widely disseminated at these different settings. Finally, the mathematical
results will be published in leading control journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;