* 0824879
* GOALI: Enabling Friction Stir Welding in Unstructured Environments Through Process Identification and Shared Control
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2012
* Nicola Ferrier, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 06/30/2012
* USD 340,168.00

The objective of this project is to determine how well a skilled human operator
can share in the control of a robotic friction stir weld system. Friction stir
welding has been called the most significant advance in joining technology in
the last 20 years. It offers advantages in weld quality, consistency, energy
consumption, and cost over traditional joining methods, yet its introduction has
been hampered by a need for significant up-front effort in developing part-
specific programs for machine control. To justify these up-front investments,
production volumes must be sufficient to amortize the investment at a reasonable
cost per part, precluding use of friction stir welding in low-volume and repair
applications. In addition, large process uncertainties such as weld path
deviation and widely varying gap conditions between plates arise in many
manufacturing applications but cannot be addressed using traditional control
techniques. Finally, the large forces required during friction stir welding
prevent it from becoming a manual process. To realize the benefits of friction
stir welding for low-volume and repair applications, it is our belief, that a
tele-operated robotic system, employing shared human-computer control, offers
the best chance to overcome the limitations. To accomplish this and evaluate its
effectiveness, we have devised a three phase research approach. Phase1 will seek
to understand how specific friction stir welding process parameters, such as
feed rate, travel angle, and working angle, affect the quality of a friction
stir weld. Phase 2 will determine the optimal method of controlling these
parameters ? through direct computer control or through a shared-human control
approach. In Phase 3, we will evaluate the performance of the shared-control
architecture in a lab and production environment where large aluminum assemblies
are fabricated.

The benefits to society include the development of an enabling technology for
on-site friction stir welding - giving this emerging solid-state welding process
the same flexibility that current fusion processes enjoy. In addition, societal
benefits arise from the application of shared control to a variety of
manufacturing processes used in repair, one-off, and low-volume production.
Further societal impact will result from integrating techniques and results into
the engineering curriculum and training students in this interdisciplinary
research. Close industrial collaboration will enhance technology transfer and
the opportunity for students to receive diverse research experience, and to
successfully make connections from basic science to important technological
needs.