* 0824618
* A Proposal to Continue 'A National Data Program for the Social Sciences'
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Tom Smith, National Opinion Research Center
* Cooperative Agreement
* marie cornwall
* 09/30/2014
* USD 15,629,498.00

SES-0824618 Tom Smith Michael Hout Peter Marsden

This project continues the National Data Program for the Social Sciences
(NDPSS), more specifically the General Social Survey (GSS) and the United States
component of the International Social Survey Program (ISSP) The NDPSS is a
social indicators, infrastructure, and data dissemination program. Its gather
data that allows us to (1) monitor and explain trends, changes and constants in
attitudes, behaviors, and attributes and examine the structure and functioning
of society in general as well as the role of various sub-groups; (2) compare the
United States to other societies, by developing cross-national models of human
society; and (3) make high quality data easily accessible to scholars, students,
and others with minimal cost and waiting. The GSS is a regular, ongoing
interview survey of U.S households. The mission of the GSS is to make timely
high-quality scientifically relevant data available to social science
researchers. Since 1972 the GSS (with NSF support) has conducted 26 in-person,
cross-sectional surveys of the adult household population of the U S with
approximately 51,000 respondents. GSS content is wide ranging with approximately
5084 variables overall.

The GSS has spurred cross-national research by inspiring other nations to
develop data collection programs modeled on the GSS and by joining with the
International Social Science Program (ISS). Since 1984 ISSP has grown to 43
nations. The GSSDIRS website is extremely popular with users, having over
4,000,000 visits annually The ISSP website is visited over 200,000 a year. The
user community includes researchers, college teachers, university students,
business planners, media and public officials. Sociologists, political
scientists, economists, statisticians, survey methodologists, anthropologists,
geographers, biologists, engineers, psychologists, criminologist, legal
scholars, medical/health researchers and business administration and management
scholars use GSS data. This use of the GSS is widely documented in publications.

This renewal includes several enhancements, upgrades and innovations to the GSS.
Specifically, it will 1) add contextual data to supplement individual-level
information to place the individual in a social context; (2) expand our coverage
of America's ethnic and cultural diversity by the development of Spanish
versions of GSS instruments and conducting interviews in Spanish: (3) fully
implement a panel deign to study change among individuals and (4) facilitate the
collection of auxiliary data on other social units besides individuals and
households and to advance multi-level, multi-contextual analyses.

Broader Impacts

The NDPSS has already had enormous impact beyond the boundaries of the survey
itself. The GSS is held as the gold standard by which many other survey data
collection activities are measured, and the ISSP program has led to innovations
and developments in cross-cultural and cross-national research. The GSS thus
serves as a model that is being emulated elsewhere, such as in the recently
created European Social Survey program. This renewal project will pioneer the
development of a state-of-the-art Interview-to-Internet archiving and
dissemination system that will speed access to the computer-assisted interview
data and allow users to access all information associated with each variable in
a database via extensive hypertext links. The contributions of the GSS to the
teaching of quantitative social science analysis are unprecedented. Its
accessibility and ease of use has added value far beyond the original data
collection efforts, and researchers in the social sciences continue to mine the
data both old and new to advance knowledge and test theories. The GSS and ISSP
program is part of the core infrastructure of social science research in the
U.S.