* 0824741
* Template-Assisted Nanoparticle Processing
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Kathy Lu, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 06/30/2012
* USD 305,526.00

Current top-down approach subtractively creates nano-features but the process is
expensive. Bottom-up approach manipulates species at nanoscale but systematic
and large scale assembly is non-existent. The objective of this project is to
pioneer a novel template-assisted nanoparticle process in order to produce large
surface area materials with hierarchical nanopatterns and nanostructures.
Specifically, the program aims to obtain hierarchical nanopore patterns by
combining focused ion beam pre-texturing and nano-patterning, understand
nanoparticle colloid phase stability and separation for large area nanostructure
creation, and formulate a quantitative characterization method in three
dimensional sintering for large area nanostructure preservation and control. The
template will direct the hierarchy and size distribution of the nanopatterns;
the colloidal phase separation and quantitative sintering characterization will
offer new and efficient approaches for nano-fabrication. The hierarchical
nanopatterns are expected to deliver much enhanced properties. &lt;br/&gt; The
materials to be used, TiO2 and ZnO, are the most desired candidates for
photovoltaic solar cells, optoelectronics, novel chemical and biological
sensors, and catalysts. The hierarchical nanostructures have direct and
immediate impact on drastically increasing solar cell energy conversion
efficiency and photoluminescence efficiency, among others. The research
methodology has wide-ranging significance in multi-scale device integration
while improving process reliability and producibility. For nano-education, the
program is targeted at engineering-wise underrepresented females by actively
recruiting and retaining female engineering students. Broader societal impact
will also result from journal publications, conferences, and
newsletters.&lt;br/&gt;