* 0824129
* Stretchable Optoelectronics and Applications in Hemispherical Electronic Eye Imagers
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2013
* John Rogers, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2013
* USD 330,000.00

Objectives: &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will create electronic and
optoelectronic systems that can be reversibly stretched or compressed to large
strains, while providing strain-independent electrical performance at the level
of state-of-the-art devices built on brittle semiconductor wafers. These systems
will exploit inorganic semiconductor nanomaterials configured into structural
shapes that can geometrically accommodate large mechanical deformations without
imparting significant strains in the materials themselves. Comprehensive
theoretical models will provide a basic understanding of the physics of these
systems, and guide design of systems capable of eliminating the influence of
mechanical strains on device
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;The
scientific and engineering thrusts include:&lt;br/&gt; 1) Semiconductor
nanomaterials to build high quality electronic and optoelectronic devices on
substrates other than semiconductor wafers. These materials will be integrated
with ultrathin polymer sheets using transfer printing techniques.&lt;br/&gt; 2)
Elastomeric transfer elements and substrates to transform these nanomaterials
and devices from their initial planar configurations into various buckled,
curvilinear and "wavy" shapes needed to achieve stretchable/compressible
mechanical response.&lt;br/&gt; 3) Analytical and computational models to
understand the physics associated with strain-induced deformations in these
nanomaterials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: &lt;br/&gt;Successful
development of the proposed approaches will create entirely new classes of
electronic and optoelectronic systems, with wide-ranging application
possibilities. The broad appeal of these systems provides excellent educational
opportunities not only for graduate and undergraduate students, but also for the
wider community interested in new technology. Interactive displays at
science/technology museums will form a focus of outreach activities.