* 0824399
* "BRIGE:Contribution of Purkinje Fiber Dynamics to Ventricular Fibrillation"
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2011
* Elizabeth Cherry, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 07/31/2011
* USD 174,998.00

EEC-0824399 Cherry

BRIGE awards maintain global competitiveness by increasing the diversity of ENG
researchers, who are initiating research programs early in their careers. BRIGE
awards further the broaden participation of engineering researchers by
increasing the number of engineering graduates, by improving the representation
of women and minorities in engineering, and by understanding how to improve
recruitment and retention of engineering students.

Evidence suggests that the Purkinje network may be involved during ventricular
tachyarrhythmias, and it is known that Purkinje cells can exhibit period-
doubling bifurcations, enhanced normal automaticity, abnormal automaticity and
triggered activity that may be proarrhythmic. However, direct evidence for
Purkinje involvement in ventricular fibrillation is difficult to obtain
experimentally at resolutions that would allow the matter to be settled
definitively. The PI will investigate Purkinje dynamics during fibrillation
using mathematical modeling and simulation, an approach that has been a useful
tool for many years to study cardiac dynamics and mechanisms of arrhythmias over
a wide range of spatial and temporal scales. The approach will encompass three
specific aims: 1) create a detailed mathematical model of the canine Purkinje
cell using ion current measurements; 2) develop a detailed model of canine
ventricular anatomy, including a realistic Purkinje network; and 3) determine
the contribution of Purkinje fibers during ventricular fibrillation in the
canine heart. The newly developed Purkinje model, together with the new canine
ventricular anatomy with Purkinje network, will provide a novel tool to assess
the contribution of the Purkinje system during induced arrhythmias.
Identification of Purkinje fiber contributions to arrhythmia development or
evolution may lead to new avenues of treatment in the future. Furthermore, all
results will be made available to other researchers and to the general public
via the PI?s website, which is already established as a leading source of
information about the heart and cardiac modeling. This basic research has the
potential to have a significant impact on future biomedical research by
providing an additional means to study ventricular arrhythmias and by suggesting
a possible new approach for treating cardiac disease.

The research will help to improve diversity in engineering by directly
supporting a female investigator and a female graduate student. It will also
help to integrate research with both formal and informal education through
classroom teaching and dissemination of information via a web site, with a
special emphasis on interactive programs and animations. Web-site visualization
tools will enhance infrastructure for research and education. Results available
via web sites, participation in multidisciplinary conferences, and integration
of research and education activities will promote broad dissemination of
information. In addition, the improved understanding of the contributions of
Purkinje fibers during ventricular arrhythmias may lead to future advances in
arrhythmia treatment.

This BRIGE grant will broaden the participation of and increase opportunities
for all engineers including those from groups underrepresented in the
engineering disciplines. This BRIGE grant will also encourage the PI to become
actively and competitively engaged in research as an independent investigator.