* 0824227
* BRIGE: Infrastructure Health Evaluation via Experimental Techniques
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Elizabeth Ervin, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Omnia El-Hakim
* 08/31/2010
* USD 149,090.00

After recent high profile failures, the spotlight has settled on the nation's
aging infrastructure. The prevalent means of damage evaluation is a qualitative
visual inspection which can identify some external but no internal damage. The
goal of structural health monitoring is the determination of damage state, or
"health," at any given time. Any damage increases local stresses as well as
overall motion such that a structure is less likely to resist another abnormal
event. Experimental studies can contribute to understanding progressive collapse
resulting from this damage accumulation. The goal is to limit the total damage
caused by all abnormal events as well as aging throughout the structure's
lifetime, allowing more effective condition-based maintenance and increasing
public safety. Longer term goals include in-field testing and required
reinforcements. Future expansion areas include hazard resistance, non-
destructive testing, and design revisions.

The overall objective is to synthesize research and educational activities
through an experimental structural health program. The three project objectives
are initiation of research on structural health management, creation of unique
laboratory experiences for a diverse population, and further development of the
PI as a role model for underrepresented groups. Through a laboratory-based
research and educational plan, a cross-disciplinary vision exists for a
practical research facility that doubles as an innovative classroom. Five
currently active outreach programs will incorporate this project's activities to
produce a positive scholastic impact on pre-college, undergraduate, and graduate
students as well as educators and professionals. Considering diverse
perspectives, every student can benefit from an experimental encounter with
dynamics: the excitement of demolishing a structure is unfailing.