* 0824632
* Collaborative Research: Quantitative Importance and Trophic Role of Noctiluca Blooms in the Arabian Sea
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2008,03/31/2011
* Helga Gomes, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 03/31/2011
* USD 296,905.00

Until the late 90's Noctiluca miliaris, a large heterotrophic dinoflagellate was
a minor component of phytoplankton populations in the northern Arabian Sea,
appearing in bloom form only sporadically during the Southwest Monsoon (SWM,
summer monsoon) and in coastal regions predisposed to upwelling and deep slope
water intrusions. Since then N. miliaris blooms have increased in frequency,
intensity and distribution, but with the majority of blooms being observed
during the Northeast monsoon (NEM, winter monsoon). Large blooms of these
organisms have now become more pervasive and widespread throughout the Gulf of
Oman and in the western and central Arabian Sea replacing diatom-dominating
blooms of the NEM that were seen frequently during the multi-disciplinary
Arabian Sea, Joint Global Ocean Flux Studies (JGOFS). There is particular
concern that the emergence of N. miliaris blooms and their association with
waters that are nutrient-rich and undersaturated with respect to oxygen may be
indicative of eutrophication of the Arabian Sea ecosystem. Such concerns are
consistent with recent indications that the Arabian Sea is becoming more
productive and that its permanent oxygen minimum zone is intensifying due to
increased organic matter export from the euphotic zone. There is also concern
that the replacement of diatoms by N. miliaris is potentially having a large
impact on the food web and carbon cycling in the Arabian Sea.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will carry out a targeted field program aimed
at understanding the emergence and fate of N. miliaris blooms. In particular the
project will investigate 1) the environmental conditions facilitating large N.
miliaris blooms in the Arabian Sea and 2) the trophic role of N. miliaris blooms
and 3) implications of these blooms for carbon cycling and biogeochemical
processes in the Arabian Sea. This field study has been devised in consultation
with colleagues at the National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) &amp; the Space
Applications Centre in India who have offered ship time on board the India's
research vessel R/V Sagar Kanya and laboratory facilities at NIO at no cost to
this project. An existing collaboration with the Sultan Qaboos University (SQU),
Oman will also allow access to data from an ongoing field program in the
northern Arabian Sea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide training to
two US undergraduate students at Bigelow Laboratory and one graduate student
from Univ. Texas (UT) will be involved full time. This project will provide an
opportunity for students from the US to work alongside students from India.
Through this truly international collaborative effort the project will encourage
scientific curiosity about the response of marine ecosystems to climate change
as well as foster a cross-cultural exchange of ideas. The investigators will
leverage education and outreach efforts through development of a website which
will be linked to Bigelow Laboratory's existing algal blooms and the Univ. Maine
COSEE-OESS website. This website will be translated into Hindi, the official
language of India and into Arabic, the language of Oman. This web-based resource
will be tailored for non-specialist audiences with strong emphasis on visuals.
At the UT Marine Science Institute. a radio segment on this research will be
written for Science and the Sea, a radio program produced for National Public
Radio, and played on most public radio stations nationwide
(http://scienceandthesea.org/)