* 0824480
* Mixed-Integer Optimization for Multi-Item Multi-Echelon Production and Distribution Planning
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2008,02/28/2009
* Simge Kucukyavuz, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Cerry M. Klein
* 02/28/2009
* USD 242,693.00

The objectives of this research are (1) to develop fixed-charge network flow
(FCNF) models for complex multi-item multi-echelon production and distribution
planning problems under possible scenario uncertainty, (2) to provide a rigorous
study of the polyhedral structure of FCNF, (3) to develop and implement
effective algorithms for FCNF, (4) to apply these algorithms to solve the
aforementioned problems. This grant provides funding for the development of a
unified theory of cutting planes for FCNF on a general network, without making
any assumptions on the structure of the subgraphs. The proposed method for
developing cutting planes will exploit the underlying network flow information.
The explicit and combinatorial nature of the resulting inequalities will enable
the characterization of the conditions under which the inequalities are strong.
They will also enable the development of effective separation algorithms.
Furthermore, the inequalities proposed for the deterministic production and
distribution planning problems will be adapted to their stochastic counterparts
to address the volatile nature of the demand and supply patterns.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the solution methods developed will be very
effective in solving not only challenging production and distribution planning
problems in industry, but also a large class of mixed-integer programs defined
on networks, such as telecommunications network design and emergency medical
services deployment. The strong cutting planes developed can also be integrated
into existing commercial or open-source mixed-integer programming solvers, which
are increasingly used in state-of-the-art planning and scheduling software. The
research activities will be closely integrated with the teaching and advising of
graduate and undergraduate students. The research results will be further
disseminated through publications and conference presentations.&lt;br/&gt;