* 0824628
* Technician Support for the Stable Isotope Laboratory at Florida State University
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2011
* Sherwood Wise, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 03/31/2011
* USD 89,545.00

0824628&lt;br/&gt;Wang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks
funding for technician support (1/2 of cost) in the Stable Isotope Laboratory in
the Department of Geological Sciences at Florida State University. This proposal
is a follow-on to a previous successful IF equipment and technician support
grant. The technician will be responsible for day-to-day operations,
maintenance, logistics, training, scheduling, and supervising. Projects in
paleoceanography, paleoecology, paleoclimate, nutrient cycling, forest and
wetland biogeochemistry and hydrology, food web and trophic interactions, and
methane biogeochemistry will benefit from this support. Previous technician
support has been instrumental in getting the lab up and running. Currently, the
administration has agreed to offer ½ of the technician?s salary. The PIs all
have or have requested EAR funding. The management plan has the instrument
housed in the stable isotope facility. After the two years of funding requested
in this proposal, college and departmental funds plus recharge monies will be
used to support the full-time technician. The PI team is diverse and represents
a breadth of disciplines. The partner is a historically black institution. The
technician will support both graduate and undergraduate research and education.
Summer educational outreach will be performed through
REU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***