* 0824491
* Collaborative Research: SGER - Rapid Resolution of Particle Sampling Issues for GEOTRACES
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2009
* Phoebe Lam, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 04/30/2009
* USD 24,646.00

With funds from this Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER), researchers at
the University of California at Berkeley and the Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution will participate in the first phase of the US-GEOTRACES
Intercalibration study by providing deployment of the Multiple Unit Large Volume
in-situ Filtration System (MULVFS) at sea in the Atlantic in the summer of 2008.
Large sampling methodological biases (with one reported differences between
bottles and pumps as large as a factor of 200, and multiple cases of factor of 3
or more differences) continue to confound the particulate sampling community.
There is good evidence that MULVFS particulate matter samples are not subject to
bias. Furthermore, such sampling biases far out weigh issues of analytical
methodology issues that the currently funded IC particle work is almost
exclusively designed to address.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central goal of this
project is to eliminate PI/sampling approach dependency for the GEOTRACES
Program particulate sampling and to reconcile the different sampling approaches
to be used in the science phase of the Program. Work will support multi-
investigator particulate matter intercalibration studies using MULVFS in both
the environmentally easy locations such as BATS and in physically dynamic and
biologically variable locations such as in the Gulf Stream. Comparison with
other particle sampling methodologies in both challenging and non-challenging
environments will lead to understanding and resolution of biases /differences
that are both substantial, documented in published literature, and further
documented in this proposal. Such an inter calibration has never been done
before. A Further benefit is that MULVFS will greatly improve the efficiency of
the June 2008 IC experiment by providing high resolution baseline profiles of
trace metals and nuclides in the upper water
column.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project will tackle the very
real problems of method-dependent particle sampling and pre-analysis biases
(large particle loss from some pumps, significant settling loss before
filtration in bottles, poor sample preservation, etc.). The work is of relevance
to all members of the oceanography community who engage in particle studies, and
thus is of relevance to broad elements of the NSF Chemical and Biological
Oceanography Programs.