* 0824568
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Health Behaviors and Social Networks
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2010
* Mark Pachucki, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2010
* USD 6,758.00

Nicholas Christakis&lt;br/&gt;Mark Pachucki&lt;br/&gt; Harvard University
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While it is commonly accepted that what we eat affects our
well-being, existing research that seeks to specify causal relationships between
eating behaviors and health outcomes has largely ignored the role of social
connections between individuals. To what extent do our specific food consumption
patterns depend on the taste preferences of people to whom we are directly (or
indirectly) connected? The specific goals of this research are to evaluate: (a)
the extent to which taste preferences spread through a population; (b)
interrelationships between social status and food choice; and (c) the roles that
social ties play in mediating food choice and health conditions such as obesity
and cardiovascular disease. The question of how food choices and our health are
connected is a particularly rich area to study mechanisms relating to taste.
Social scientists have done a great deal of work in recent years to
systematically document the properties of cultural preference formation and how
human interaction influences choice, but most of this research has not
considered the most literal interpretation of taste: the taste for food. By
synthesizing unusually complete data on health outcomes, social ties, and eating
behaviors, this research will elaborate relationships between eating behaviors,
network characteristics, and health outcomes over a 20-year period. Hypotheses
concerning taste transmission and strength of social ties are generated by from
sociological research of taste preferences, social networks, inequality, and
biological theories of diet, nutrition, and disease. Latent variable methods
will be used to characterize eating patterns; longitudinal regression methods
will be used to assess strength and directionality of relationships between food
choice, social ties, and health; statistical network methods will be used to
estimate influence of social ties on taste diffusion. By looking quantitatively
at the diffusion of innovation of our tastes for food, this research is a fresh
approach for studying the interconnectedness of culture and social networks.
With growing concern for the alarming rise in obesity and cardiovascular
disease, this project also has important public health implications. A better
understanding of the social mechanisms that underlie these health conditions can
point to more effective behavioral interventions to address modifiable risk
factors for disease. In addition to elaborating mechanisms by which social norms
can change in a given population, this research has the broader potential to
make the public think more critically about not just what, but how, it
eats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;