* 0824202
* Ultra-sensitive Magnetic Sensors Integrating the Giant Magnetoelectric Effect with MEMs and Advanced Microelectronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Suman Datta, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Anupama Kaul
* 09/30/2012
* USD 352,271.00

Research Objectives and Approaches: The objective of this research is to develop
ultra-sensitive and compact magnetometers, featuring the direct on-chip
integration of magnetoelectric sensors, with advanced microelectronics, for non-
invasive medical imaging. The approach is based on the potential of picoTesla
magnetic sensitivity using integrated magnetoelectric composites. This research
aims to further improve the sensitivity beyond those based on the direct stress
mediated magnetoelectric coupling by improving the mechanical impedance match
between the constituents, by exploring totally new magnetoelectric coupling, and
by incorporating MEMs-based structures as resonant moving gates of MOSFETs for
further amplification. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
demonstration of a heterogeneous integration strategy at the devices and
circuits level that seamlessly merges microelectronics with sensors holds great
promise of enabling transformational shifts in the semiconductor and sensor
industry. Further, the proposed research will provide fundamental understanding
on the magnetic energy transfer efficiency between the constituents of the
composites. The research will also provide insight into design and fabrication
of resonant moving gate transistors that markedly improve the sensor
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The successful development of
chip scale magnetic sensors will revolutionize the field of biomagnetic field
detection and imaging. Moreover, the availability of low cost diagnostic tools
will greatly facilitate early disease detection. On the education and outreach
font, this research will foster an interdisciplinary educational program that
will inspire students to understand fundamental materials science and device
physics and incorporate them into solid-state device fabrication to address
complex detection and diagnosis problems in the life science and biomedical
imaging area. &lt;br/&gt;