* 0824714
* Upgrade of the University of Kentucky ARL SEMQ Electron Probe Microanalyzer
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2008,05/31/2010
* David Moecher, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 05/31/2010
* USD 202,379.00

0824714&lt;br/&gt;Moecher&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks
funding to upgrade the existing Applied Research Laboratories SEMQ electron
microprobe at the University of Kentucky. Requested upgrades include replacing
components of the beam-forming and imaging electronics, purchasing components to
improve the imaging capabilities and enhance qualitative and quantitative
analyses, and upgrading computer software and hardware. Electronics upgrades are
sought due to the instrument?s age and considerable recent down-time.
Refurbished components will be sourced from the manufacturer. To improve imaging
capabilities, a cathodoluminescence (CL) detector is requested along with an
OV98 multilayer crystal for wavelength dispersive analysis. A new EDS imaging
system with Peltier cooling will provide analytical flexibility for the new
detectors. New software/hardware will consist of upgrades to Probe for Windows
to Enterprise edition and a new computer to hold DAQ boards and run software.
The instrumentation upgrade will be employed for on-going NSF EAR-funded and
other research projects. Major objectives include: 1) zircon and monazite
geochronology - CL imaging will be a key component for elucidating compositional
information, while automated stage positioned ED spectral analysis will
facilitate geochronologic reconstructions, 2) garnet and other silicate zoning
analysis using visualization capabilities - thermobarometry, geochronology and
structural analysis will be assessed using X-ray mapping, 3) decompression
microstructures - retrograde eclogites, high-pressure granulites, and their
inclusions will be used to better understand the burial and exhumation history
of Paleozoic collision orogenesis, 4) Paleoseismicity and petrogenesis -
pseudotachylyte (PST) will be assayed in order to assess formation temperatures
and fluid states, 5) coal and shale geochemistry and mineralogy - organic and
inorganic components will be evalued using WDS and EDS in coals and black
shales, and 6) SE, BSE and EDS analysis of archeological artifacts in order to
characterize their origins and uses. The current probe has four wavelength
dispersive spectrometers, a BSE, and an EDS. The new CL detector and crystal
will be incorporated into the existing instrument configuration and supported by
the proposed software upgrade. The instrument is housed in a modern, capable
facility with ample services. Departmental funds are used for gases and liquid
nitrogen. Instrument service is performed by the PI and graduate students. A
service contract is funded by the University. Usage fees are collected when
volunteered. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***