* 0824903
* The effects of temperature on ecological processes in a rocky intertidal community: a mechanistic approach
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2013
* Emily Carrington, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2013
* USD 542,658.00

Temperature influences organismal physiology, behavior, community interactions,
and ecosystem function; yet rarely are the mechanisms understood. Accurately
predicting the consequences of temperature for a species requires knowledge of:
local climatic conditions, the relationship between climate and organismal body
temperature, and the physiological and ecological consequences of body
temperature. Few studies to date have explored all three areas concurrently.
This project will examine in detail the biophysical, physiological, and
ecological effects of temperature on a rocky intertidal community, a marine
ecosystem that has emerged as a model system for studying the ecological
consequences of temperature. It will focus on three major species,
representative of rocky marine shore species worldwide: the barnacle, Balanus
glandula, its predator Nucella ostrina, and the rockweed Fucus gardneri, which
provides shelter for both species. The research is centered around three major
goals: to develop biophysical models to explicitly link local climate to
organismal body temperatures; to develop energy budget models to relate
organismal body temperature to individual performance; and to identify the
effect of temperature on interactions among the three species through a series
of laboratory and field experiments. This research will provide a model system
for understanding the effects of temperature on both individual performance and
species interactions. It represents a significant contribution to understanding
basic ecological questions, such as the role of temperature in structuring
communities, and will also contribute to a more mechanistic understanding of the
ecological consequences of future climate changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will promote a broader understanding of how temperature affects
organisms and communities among scientists, students, and the general public in
at least four ways. First, the research themes address a basic, yet poorly
resolved, question in ecology: the influence of temperature on organismal
performance and species interactions. This multiscale, integrated approach has
the potential to transform current paradigms of how environmental change affects
species and communities. Understanding the role of temperature in structuring
communities is directly relevant to Biological Oceanography's special emphasis
on biological diversity in marine systems. Second, the project is highly
interdisciplinary by nature, and will forge new research partnerships among
three female scientists (the PI, a postdoc, and a collaborator at an RUI
institution) and will provide new educational opportunities for several graduate
and undergraduate students. The investigators will offer undergraduate research
opportunities to underrepresented groups with their continued participation in
the FHL Blinks Program to Enhance Diversity each summer, and expect to provide
several REU experiences as well (separate NSF proposal resubmission pending).
Third, The PI will incorporate research results and techniques into her
undergraduate and graduate courses at FHL and the UW Seattle campus. The FHL
undergraduate course integrates public outreach into the curriculum; these
activities are part of FHL's broader Science Outreach Program that promotes
science education and environmental stewardship. Finally, the results of this
project will be incorporated into ongoing conservation and monitoring efforts
conducted in the upper Puget Sound region by the University of Washington and
the Friday Harbor Laboratories. The project will also enhance understanding of
the ecological consequences of climate change, a significant societal problem.