* 0824830
* Nonlinear and Adaptive Control of Smart Material-Actuated Systems with Application to Nanopositioning
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Hassan Khalil, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* George Chiu
* 07/31/2012
* USD 216,000.00

The research objective of this award is to develop a novel multi-time-scale
nonlinear and adaptive control framework for hysteretic systems, and thus to
enable robust, precision, and high-bandwidth control of smart material-actuated
systems. Smart materials, such as piezoelectric materials and shape memory
alloys, exhibit strong coupling of complex hysteretic behavior with the
nonlinear dynamics of structures and fluids that are driven by smart material
actuators, especially at medium-to-high drive levels. The latter, together with
the uncertainties in both hysteresis and dynamics, makes it challenging to
precisely control smart material-actuated systems. In this research, a multi-
time-scale averaging theory for hysteretic systems will be established. This
will, for the first time, provide a framework for merging adaptive hysteresis
compensation with a plethora of nonlinear and adaptive control methods for
hysteresis-free systems through time-scale separation. In addition, a general,
parallel paradigm for hysteresis inversion and adaptation will be developed
based on reconfigurable computing hardware, to enable efficient implementation
of the proposed theory. The developed theory and algorithms will be validated in
the control of a piezoelectric actuator-driven nanopositioning
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project can positively impact a number
of application areas of smart materials, such as micro- and nanotechnology,
biomedical devices, robotics, and aerospace and automotive industries. The
interdisciplinary project will offer valuable training experience for talented
graduate and undergraduate students, especially those from underrepresented
groups. It will also enrich existing and newly developed courses on smart
materials and controls at Michigan State University, such as Smart Material
Sensors and Actuators, and Adaptive Control. The PIs will also proactively seek
opportunities to transfer the developed technology to the nanopositioning and
scanning probe microscopy (SPM) industry.&lt;br/&gt;