* 0824440
* Coupled Solid-Deformation/Fluid-Flow Simulation of Failure Initiation in Variably Saturated Slopes
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Ronaldo Borja, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 09/30/2012
* USD 285,252.00

&lt;br/&gt;Landslides occur when earth material moves rapidly downhill after
failing along a shear zone. Debris flows are differentiated from landslides by
the pervasive, fluid-like deformation of the mobilized material. Landslides and
debris flows threaten lives and property worldwide. Despite the fact that good
progress has been made within the last two decades relative to understanding
hydrologically-driven slope failure, important research has yet to be conducted
in 3D physics-based fluid flow and hydrologically-driven slope instability in
variably saturated soils.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award funds
interdisciplinary research focused on a physics-based characterization of
coupled hydrologic response/slope stability processes for steep hillslopes at
the catchment scale. The model will couple solid deformation with fluid flow
processes in variably saturated soils, as well as quantify the exchange of water
between the subsurface and surface continua. This allows us to better understand
the effects of surface runoff, evapotranspiration, and percolation on the
spatial and temporal variations of degree of saturation, effective stress, and
deformation pattern within the variably saturated slope. The coupled model will
be tested with comprehensive and exhaustive data from the Coos Bay experimental
catchment (CB1), as well as with the numerical results of recently conducted
simulations on the same catchment using an Integrated Hydrology Model (InHM).
This research will also utilize a recently developed stabilized low-order finite
element approximation scheme employing equal orders of interpolation for the
solid displacement and pore pressure fields. The highly instrumented CB1 slope
failed as a large debris flow in November 1996, thus providing large volumes of
data with which to compare the model predictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research team will combine expertise in geotechnical engineering, computational
geomechanics, and quantitative hydrogeomorphology available at Stanford
University to develop and test a physics-based model of slope failure
initiation. To the knowledge of the PIs, no slope failure initiation model
currently exists in the literature that addresses the effect of variable
saturation in a quantitative way. We believe that the FE method has reached such
an advanced stage that it can now handle not only complex geometry but also the
effect of variable saturation. A further intellectual merit of this research
lies in the tremendous opportunity for testing and validation of the proposed
mathematical approaches with the available data set. The CB1 data set allows
model testing and validation on a large-scale slope with complex topography and
variable saturation. The availability of high-quality hydrological and
geotechnical data for CB1 will help constrain the parameters of the problem,
thus providing tremendous opportunity to gain a better understanding of the
important processes controlling slope instability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
study is a timely contribution towards an improved understanding of the
processes that control slope instability in a system driven by a rigorous
characterization of the near-surface hydrology and soil constitutive properties.
The simulation effort will effectively demonstrate the utility and/or limits of
physics-based slope stability models less comprehensive than the one to be
developed here for field conditions similar to CB1. The proposed research will
also utilize the advances in computational fluid dynamics for application to
geotechnical and geosciences problems. Both PIs are seriously committed to
ensuring full involvement of undergraduate and underrepresented students in this
project. This can be gleaned from their proven track record of mentoring,
advising, supervising, and graduating undergraduate and underrepresented
students at Stanford.&lt;br/&gt;