* 0824401
* BRIGE: Engineering Stimulus-responsive Colloids with Elastin-like Polypeptides
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2011
* Harry Bermudez, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
*  Ashok S. Sangani
* 07/31/2011
* USD 173,650.00

EEC-0824401&lt;br/&gt;Bermudez&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BRIGE awards maintain global
competitiveness by increasing the diversity of ENG researchers, who are
initiating research programs early in their careers. BRIGE awards further the
broaden participation of engineering researchers by increasing the number of
engineering graduates, by improving the representation of women and minorities
in engineering, and by understanding how to improve recruitment and retention of
engineering students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This BRIGE award will investigate the
controlling of interactions between building blocks and their assemblies leading
to the creation of functional materials, especially at small length scales.
Developments of asymmetric colloidal particles have largely demonstrated proof-
of-principle concepts with a relative lack of novel functionality. The PI seeks
to control the introduction of both anisotropy and functionality by use of
protein engineering. The model system to be studied is the filamentous
bacteriophage, whose surface features can be precisely altered by modifying
spatially and chemically distinct capsid proteins. By introducing stimulus-
responsive behavior in these semiflexible, rod-like particles, the researcher
intends to incorporate elastin-like polypeptide (ELP) motifs of hydrophobic
"guest" residues by recombinant DNA methods. The hypothesis to be studied is
that modification of the major coat capsid protein would be amplified by the
2700 copies per particle, yielding stimulus-responsive colloids.
Characterization of ELP-phage particles can be assessed by various
microbiological assays, light scattering techniques, and calorimetry. As a first
demonstration of utility of these responsive colloidal particles, control over
binding by the "switching" behavior will be demonstrated. Further work will be
accomplished through multiple scenarios using these materials and their
responsive behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is of a broad relevance to
science and society by addressing fundamental questions relevant to
technological applications. Development of colloidal systems with novel
properties can potentially impact numerous fields in which colloids are used,
such as paints, foods, aerosols, inks, and even biological fluids. Additionally,
the PI plans to leverage his visible role as a member of an underrepresented
group to actively recruit students and post-doctoral fellows from diverse
populations. In partnership with the University of Massachusetts Graduate School
and the Northeast Alliance, the PI is personally participating in recruiting of
underrepresented groups at venues such as the Louis Stokes Alliance Minority
Programs other graduate/professional school fairs. A second integrated objective
is facilitating interdisciplinary research at the boundaries of chemistry,
physics, and biology. The environment at the Polymer Science &amp; Engineering
department is ideally suited for such an endeavor given its longstanding history
of educating students from diverse backgrounds. To this end, the PI will develop
a new spring semester course entitled "From Biopolymers to Biological Colloids"
covering physical and chemical aspects of these materials found both inside and
outside the cell. The course will be open to interested graduate and upper-level
undergraduate students from the University and the four nearby institutions that
together, form the Five College system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This BRIGE grant
will broaden the participation of and increase opportunities for all engineers
including those from groups underrepresented in the engineering disciplines.
This BRIGE grant will also encourage the PI to become actively and competitively
engaged in research as an independent investigator.