* 0824967
* Acquisition of a Multiple-Collector Inductively-Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2008,11/30/2011
* John Casey, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 11/30/2011
* USD 269,658.00

0824967&lt;br/&gt;Lapen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks
funding to purchase a multi-collector, inductively coupled plasma mass
spectrometer (MC-ICP-MS). While the University has TIMS capabilities, the
requested instrument will be used for in situ and high-precision low ionization
efficiency elemental isotope ratio measurements. Target elements are Hf, Fe, U,
Th, Ta, and W). PIs are considering either a Thermo Neptune or NuPlasma HR which
currently are comparable in performance and price. The PIs currently have a
CETAC LSX-213 laser ablation system and dedicated Class 500 clean laboratory.
Many fundamental geoscience and cosmochemical questions rely on precise, high-
resolution elemental isotope ratio measurements. The main research questions to
be addressed with the new MC-ICP-MS involve 1) Understanding mantle evolution.
Lithospheric accretion at non-volcanic rifted margins and at ultraslow mid-ocean
ridges processes will be studied by combined basalt and mantle rock Sm-Nd, Lu-Hf
and Re-Os analyses. Os, Sr, Nd, and Hf isotope analyses will elucidate processes
occurring during mid-ocean ridge mantle melting. 2) Planetary geology ? lunar
basalts and SNC meteorites will be used to understand early Moon and Mars
differentiation processes through Lu-Hf and Sm-Nd analyses, 3) Crustal evolution
during orogeny ? crust-mantle interactions, arc magmatism, and mountain belt
dynamics will be studied in terms of Lu-Hf and Sm-Nd geochronology of high- and
ultrahigh-pressure rocks, 4) Environmental geology ? petrochemical processing
impacts (atmospheric inputs) will be assessed by tracking isotopic and elemental
fingerprints related to refinery operations. The new instrument will be housed
in a 300 ft2 clean room already allocated by the University. The University will
contribute $50K per year for 3 years to support a full-time technician. The
University also funds and staffs machine and electronics shops. The lead PIs
along with the technician will be responsible for day-to-day maintenance,
instrument operation and student/user training. A scheduling committee will be
created with the lead PIs and an outside scientist. Instrument time will be
prioritized by committee. Ample preparation laboratories/facilities currently
exist at UH. The instrument will represent the only on of its kind in the
greater Houston area. Students will be incorporated from coursework level
through using the instrumentation for dissertation research. Minorities will be
encouraged through NSF-sponsored projects providing opportunities for
underrepresented populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;