* 0824974
* Acquisition of a 213nm laser and cathodoluminescence detector for microanalysis of zircon and other Earth materials
* GEO,EAR
* 11/15/2008,04/30/2010
* James Crowley, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 04/30/2010
* USD 137,842.00

0824974&lt;br/&gt;Kohn&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This proposal seeks
funding to acquire a 213 nm laser and cathodolminescence (CL) detector for
geochronologic and trace element research at Boise State University. The CL
detector will be affixed to an existing JEOL JSM-T300 SEM currently deployed in
the Department of Physics. The instrument currently has SE, BSE, and EDS
detectors Upgrades for digital imaging capabilities are included to allow the
SEM to interface with the CL detector. The SEM-CL will be used to target zircons
for subsequent laser ablation (LA) ICP-MS with the requested laser. The CL
detector is also proposed for targeting Ti measurement domains in quartz. The
laser will be affixed on a to-be-purchased quadrapole ICP-MS to be housed in the
Department of Geosciences for zircon, garnet, monazite, carbonate and phosphatic
fossil analysis. The instrumentation will be employed for on-going NSF EAR-
funded research projects. Major objectives in clued: 1) in situ U-Th-Pb zircon
dating using CL-SEM coupled with ID-TIMS allowing mineral age determination, 2)
garnet and other silicate zoning analysis using LA-ICP-MS to infer petrogenic
processes and better understand high-resolution radiogenic isotope compositions,
3) monazite dating using U-Th-Pb decay series, 4) carbonate and fossil dating
using U-series, 5) foraminifera elemental zoning analysis to determine
paleotemperatures and paleonutrient distributions, and 6) quartz CL imaging for
subsequent Ti-thermometry. Underlying themes among these measurements include a
better understanding of Paleozic climate changes, clastic rock provenance and
stratigraphy, rock origins and histories, and paleonutrient distributions and
cycling. &lt;br/&gt; The CL instrumentation will be incorporated into existing
SEM system housed on the Department of Physics which will be upgraded to support
digital imaging. The SEM system will continue to be maintained by currently
hard-funded technicians. Remuneration costs will be added as a surcharge for CL
usage. The LA system will be coupled with the newly-purchased ICP-MS in a newly-
renovated laboratory. A full-time technician will be hired through University
funding lines. Co-PI Crowley will administer the LA-ICP-MS to include
maintenance and training, along with the technician. An hourly rate will be
charged for usage. The instrumentation will serve as the basis for student
training at all levels through existing outreach programs which feature seminars
and laboratory tours. Over 100 pre-college students have been exposed through
the current outreach efforts. The PI recently received an Undergraduate Research
Mentor of the Year award for incorporating undergraduates in laboratory efforts.
The instrumentation will be incorporated into teaching curricula and research
results will be disseminated through the literature and through collaborative
efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;