* 0824443
* BRIGE: Sustainable Methods for the Production of Anisotropic Metallic Nanoparticles Using Tunable Fluids
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Christopher Kitchens, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2011
* USD 234,000.00

This BRIGE award supports the study of gas expanded liquids (GXLs) as a novel
processing media for the production of anisotropic, metallic nanoparticles;
which display unique morphology-dependent properties. The research objectives
are to 1) synthesize anisotropic nanoparticles using colloidal directed assembly
within GXLs, 2) demonstrate effective methods for the rapid size-fractionation
of anisotropic nanoparticles and deposition into uniform, ordered arrays using
GXLs, and 3) gain a fundamental understanding of the interparticle interactions
and surface forces that govern the synthesis and processing of anisotropic
nanoparticles in GXLs. Previous work has investigated the use of GXLs (low-
pressure mixtures of CO2 and organic solvents) and other tunable fluids for the
synthesis and processing of ligand-stabilized, spherical metallic nanoparticles.
Here tunable fluids, specifically GXLs, will provide sustainable means for the
production of unique nanomaterials for diverse applications. Gold and silver
nanorods in GXLs will be produced by developing a seed-mediated growth
processes; coupled with GXL mediated processing to yield uniform nanorod
populations and long-range, ordered nanorod arrays. Advanced characterization
techniques and thermodynamic modeling will be employed to gain a fundamental
understanding of the anisotropic nanoparticle synthesis and directed assembly to
further enhance production and processing capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, this work will advance knowledge in the field of nanomaterial
synthesis and manufacture by campaigning two specific philosophies: 1)
Sustainable methods of nanoparticle synthesis and processing are achievable and
have significant advantages over conventional methodologies for large-scale,
economic, and green nanomaterial production. 2) The fundamental driving force
for the synthesis of anisotropic nanoparticles is kinetically controlled
processes that result from directed assembly rather than conventional colloidal
template mechanisms.