* 0824082
* High-Performance Sensor Technologies in Silicon Photonics
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Thomas Koch, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2012
* USD 303,331.00

The research in this proposal targets innovations in design, fabrication, and
functionality of silicon-photonics-based chemical and biological optical sensors
that will enable higher levels of performance in highly practical, low-cost
integrated solutions. The objective of the research is the application of recent
breakthroughs in waveguide fabrication and design to achieve ultra-sensitive
sensor capabilities in the silicon photonics platform, and to introduce novel
designs that can simultaneous provide for ultra-high sensitivity and elimination
of spurious signal problems in a passive design. Applications include ultra-
sensitive detection of trace chemicals and pathogens in environmental, food-
processing, and defense applications, chemical monitoring in industrial and
research applications, and high performance biomedical instrumentation for
research and clinical applications. Intellectual Merit: The intellectual merit
includes the fostering of innovative advances in fabrication and design that
overcome or circumvent today's practical and fundamental performance limits.
This multidisciplinary project leverages today's most compelling
microfabrication technology platform and provides a ready pathway to
manufacture. The CMOS platform also ultimately admits the potential of
integrated on-chip electrical amplification, control, A/D conversion, and DSP
functions for unprecedented system-on-a-chip functionality at very low cost.

Broader Impact: The broader impact includes outstanding multidisciplinary
educational experiences afforded to graduate students working on the project,
tangible enhancements to existing optics-specific K-12 outreach programs, and
strong opportunities for undergraduate research. From a societal perspective,
the potential to leverage the $40B annual world-wide investments in silicon
microelectronics into new sensor applications is compelling. If successful, this
could open the door to commercial solutions with a tremendous positive impact on
quality of life.