* 0824361
* Conjugated Polymer-Quantum Rod Nanocomposites in Well-Defined Nanoscopic Geometries
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Zhiqun Lin, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
*  Ashok S. Sangani
* 06/30/2011
* USD 276,273.00

CBET-0824361&lt;br/&gt;Lin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Placing conjugated polymers in
direct contact with quantum dots or quantum rods (i.e., preparation of
conjugated polymer-quantum dot (CP-QD) or conjugated polymer-quantum rod (CP-QR)
nanocomposites) provides a well-defined interface between CP and QD or QR, thus
facilitating an efficient charge transfer between them. However, few studies
have centered on such direct integration, and CP-QR nanocomposites confined in
nanoscopic geometries have never been explored. The objective of this proposal
is to explore the effects of confinement on the photophysical properties of CP-
QR nanocomposites. Two unique strategies will be used to confine CP-QR
nanocomposites: (1) directly immobilizing nanocomposites in highly ordered
hexagonal arrays of straight cylindrical nanopores (i.e., a nanoporous alumina
membrane); and (2) confining and shearing nanocomposites between two parallel
plates, formed by bringing two crossed cylindrical mounts covered with mica
sheets into contact, to film thicknesses ranging from molecularly thin to
several hundred nanometers. The research findings will be used to enhance the
general level of nanoscience education. Integrated educational activities will
be pursued to expose several audiences, including K-12 students, to new
knowledge in nanoscience, thereby promoting general awareness of its importance.
&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is based on an interdisciplinary effort that
involves polymer chemistry, polymer physics, nanofabrication techniques, and
photophysics. The intellectual merit of the work is manifested in the innovative
studies of exploiting nanoscopic geometries as unique physical environments to
control the conformation of CPs, which in turn regulates the charge transfer
from CPs to QRs and, ultimately, the photophysical properties of CP-QR
nanocomposites at the nanoscale. Four specific research goals will be pursued:
(1) prepare CP-QR nanocomposites based on rational design; (2) reveal the effect
of external nanoscopic confinement on the photophysical properties of CP-QR
nanocomposites (first strategy); (3) establish correlations between the
confined-and-sheared chain conformation and photophysical properties of CP-QR
films ranging from the molecularly thin to several hundred nanometers thick
(second strategy); and (4) exploit CP-QR nanocomposites for use in
optoelectronic devices. The findings will also enhance understanding of other
CP-related or QR-related nanocomposites confined at the nanoscale. The outcomes
from the research are expected to contribute significantly to the advancement of
nanomaterials science. &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the proposed work
include stronger nanoscience education across several levels. Female
undergraduate students will be recruited for summer nanocomposite research, thus
strengthening the involvement of an underrepresented group in the project.
Summer workshops for K-12 teachers will also be created. High school interns
will develop Web-based lesson plans on polymeric nanomaterials for 5th-8th
graders nationwide. This activity will ultimately expose elementary- and middle-
school students to the nano-world. Knowledge generated by this project may lead
to the creation of novel nano-optoelectronic devices that are extremely critical
to national security and the defense industry as well as civilian applications,
thereby transitioning fundamental scientific discoveries into useful
technologies that benefit society.