* 0824398
* SGER:  Hydrology of Water Pools near African Villages
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2010
* Elfatih Eltahir, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 06/30/2010
* USD 65,158.00

Hydrology plays an important role in shaping the dynamics of malaria
transmission in Africa. The hydrologic processes that lead to the formation of
water pools near African villages represent a key link between variability in
the natural environment and the dynamics of malaria transmission. The long-term
goal of the proposed research is to develop credible computational tools that
can be used to (1) design intervention technologies based on environmental
management of the local hydrology; as well as to (2) predict the impact of
climate variability on the hydrology of water pools and the associated malaria
transmission. The proposed project represents the first steps toward this goal.
In the course of the proposed research, one graduate student will be introduced
to this important field of research. This project will contribute to the ongoing
international research project on African Monsoon Multidisciplinary
Analysis(AMMA).The objective of the proposed project is to improve our
understanding of the factors that define the hydrology of water pools in Africa.
A new model of the natural environment, with a focus on the hydrology of water
pools, will be developed. We shall determine how local environmental conditions
lead to the formation of these natural water bodies and hence provide habitats
that are suitable for sub-adult mosquitoes; and we shall attempt to predict the
response of these pools to seasonal and inter-annual climate variability. A
field site in Niger will serve as the focus of this activity. Several important
questions will be addressed: What is the role of local environmental conditions
rainfall, soil, topography, and vegetation) and microclimatic conditions
(defined in terms of radiation, temperature, wind and humidity) in dictating the
dynamics of the water pools that serve as habitat for mosquito populations? What
is the relative role of local hydrologic conditions, such as location within a
watershed and depth to the groundwater table, in shaping the water pools? Can we
predict the response of these water pools to seasonal, inter-annual, and longer
term climate variability in Africa? What is the impact of land use change on the
spatial coverage and persistence of these water pools? A specific set of
hypotheses will be studied: (i) A significant fraction of the variation in
mosquito abundance between villages can be explained by variation in the
location of groundwater table relative to the surface; (ii) The temporal
distribution of rain storms is a significant factor in the formation and
persistence of the water pools that act as habitat for mosquito.