* 0824781
* Collaborative Research:  Acquisition of Equipment to Upgrade and Expand the AfricaArray Seismic Network
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Andrew Nyblade, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 12/31/2012
* USD 134,498.00

0824781&lt;br/&gt;Nyblade&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AfricaArray is a 3-year-old
multi-faceted initiative to promote coupled educational and research programs
for 1) building science capacity in the U.S. and Africa 2) addressing
fundamental science questions in Africa of academic, economic and societal
importance, and 3) enhancing diversity in the geosciences, both in the U.S. and
Africa. At the core of AfricaArray is a network of 26 permanent seismic stations
spanning 11 countries in eastern and southern Africa that has been built
cooperatively by seismic network operators across Africa, with assistance from
U.S. and European scientists, to form a shared research facility that serves
African and U.S. scientists alike.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In this project, the
AfricaArray seismic network will be upgraded and expanded to provide the
definitive seismic data set for imaging the largest geophysical anomaly in
Earth's mantle, the African superplume. Data from the upgraded and expanded
seismic network will allow scientists to address several first-order, inter-
related questions focused on the structure and dynamics of the African
superplume.&lt;br/&gt;1) What is the nature and origin of the African
superplume?&lt;br/&gt;2) What is the geodynamic relationship between the African
superplume and mantle convection?&lt;br/&gt;3) What are the dynamics of upper
mantle convection under the east African rift system and plateau and how does it
relate to the African superplume structure under southern Africa?&lt;br/&gt;4)
What is the structure of African cratonic lithosphere and how does it influence
mantle dynamics beneath the African plate?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Determining the
chemical and dynamic causes of the African superplume and defining its relation
to shallower mantle structure and surface processes (uplift, rifting, volcanism)
is arguably the most important issue in understanding the dynamics of the deep
mantle. Seismic images will play a key role in gaining this
understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***