* 0824341
* BRIGE: Morphological Characterization of Nanomaterials by Atomic Force Microscopy
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2008,12/31/2010
* Rebecca Cortez, Union College
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 12/31/2010
* USD 175,000.00

The research objective of this award is the development of an advanced
nanomaterials characterization program based on state-of-the-art techniques such
as atomic force microscopy (AFM). Research on the morphology of nanomaterials as
determined by AFM will provide insight into the structure-property relationship
of materials at the nanometer scale. This type of information is critical to
advancing the understanding of new nanomaterials, and provides insights into
these materials that are difficult to obtain using other techniques. This award
will support initial efforts to develop appropriate techniques for analysis of
advanced nanomaterials such as nanoshells and carbon nanotubes. Specific topics
to be examined include evaluation of nanotube density, nanotube orientation, and
alignment. This will provide a unique database of information that is highly
relevant to technical areas such as nanoelectronics. As materials and their
understanding are fundamental to many engineering advancements and challenges,
the establishment of a nanomaterials characterization program is critical in
defining the techniques and protocols needed to develop revolutionary materials.

If successful, this program will provide a cornerstone to the development of a
strong nanomaterials characterization program at Union College. Research in
nanomaterials characterization using AFM supported by this grant will expose
undergraduate students to state-of-the-art nanomaterials, and to the very real
changes that are occurring at the interfaces between historical disciplines. The
immediate impact of this will therefore be to provide all students including
underrepresented undergraduates from engineering and science disciplines with a
substantial comprehension of nanoscale science and technology. This will provide
them with an excellent foundation upon which an outstanding career in
nanotechnology can be established.