* 0824837
* Atom-specific Selenium Derivatization of Nucleic Acids for Crystallization and Structure Studies
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/2008,11/30/2013
* Zhen Huang, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Michele McGuirl
* 11/30/2013
* USD 1,063,738.00

Intellectual Merit: X-ray crystallography is one of the best methods for the
determination and study of 3-D structures of nucleic acids and protein-nucleic
acid complexes at the atomic level. Such studies provide novel insights into
nucleic acid functions and mechanisms. Via atom-specific substitution of nucleic
acid oxygen with selenium, the research group on this project has pioneered and
developed the selenium modification for nucleic acid heavy atom derivatization
and crystallization, which are the two major challenges/bottlenecks in nucleic
acid X-ray crystallography. This project has led to a successful demonstration
of the utility of selenium derivatization for phasing, and to the discovery of
crystallization facilitation by the 2'-Se derivatization of nucleic acids. The
current research project involves further X-ray crystallographic studies on DNAs
and RNAs in order to provide a viable rational solution for standard heavy atom
derivatization and phase determination, as well as a potential solution for
crystallization facilitation. The intellectual merit of this research project is
in providing new insights into molecular interactions, packing, crystallization
mechanisms, crystal growth facilitation, as well as structures of the Se-
derivatized DNAs and RNAs and the corresponding natural nucleic acids. In
addition, new synthetic routes to introduce Se into multiple positions of DNAs
and RNAs will be developed for function and crystal structure studies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact of the Research: This research project will
significantly enlarge scientific knowledge on nucleic acids, lead to novel
materials and applications, allow broader access to these valuable new materials
and unique molecules, as well as attract the attention of the general public.
This research group will reach out to faculty members in research non-intensive
colleges and high schools, and invite them to participate in this research
project. The outreach and research opportunities will help to raise the
awareness and scientific literacy of the general public. Moreover, many
students, especially underrepresented minority students, will be trained through
participation in this project in hands-on experimental research, and scientific
communication skills. The Chemistry Department at Georgia State University (GSU)
has a strong tradition of educating and serving undergraduate and graduate
students, especially underrepresented minority students. This project will offer
various extensive multi-disciplinary training opportunities and generate synergy
in research training in both Chemistry and Biology Departments at GSU.