* 0824003
* Large-scale semidefinite programming algorithms and software for control, signal processing and system identification
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Lieven Vandenberghe, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2012
* USD 330,839.00

Objectives Semidefinite programming is an extension of linear programming in
which the inequality constraints are replaced by linear matrix inequalities.
Semidefinite programs (SDPs) share most of the attractive properties of linear
programs (convexity, polynomial-time complexity), but are also much more
general. Numerous applications have been discovered during the last fifteen
years, particularly in systems and control, and several general-purpose software
packages have been developed. The proposal is motivated by the limited
scalability of current general-purpose software. The objective is to develop
specialized methods and software, with an efficiency far exceeding the
capabilities of existing solvers, for two classes of SDPs that are of central
importance in control and signal processing. The first class are SDPs derived
from matrix sum-of-squares characterizations and the Kalman-Yakubovich-Popov
lemma. This includes some of the most important applications of SDPs in control.
The second class are nuclear norm minimization problems, which are important as
convex heuristics for the NP-hard problem of minimizing the rank of a matrix
subject to convex constraints. As an application of large-scale nuclear norm
optimization, we intend to develop new system identification methods based on
convex optimization.

Intellectual merit SDP packages exploit sparsity, following the successful model
of linear programming. This approach is less successful in semidefinite
programming, for two reasons. First, techniques for exploiting sparsity in SDPs
are much less effective than for linear programming. Second, converting a dense
structured SDP into a sparse problem usually requires the auxiliary matrix
variables and constraints, which greatly increases the problem dimensions. It is
therefore of critical importance to develop new strategies for exploiting
structure that are not only based on sparsity but incorporate domain-specific
knowledge from system theory.

Broader impacts Software based on the research results will be made freely
available. This will contribute to a wider adoption of semidefinite programming,
especially in the area of system identification. The research results will be
integrated in the graduate optimization sequence in the Electrical Engineering
Department at UCLA. We also plan to offer undergraduate research opportunities
via individual study courses and summer internships, in partnership with the
Center of Excellence in Engineering and Diversity at UCLA.

