* 0824920
* SGER: Frequency tunable terahertz resonator devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2008,10/31/2009
* Eva Schubert, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 10/31/2009
* USD 75,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;ECCS-0824920&lt;br/&gt;E. Schubert, University of Nebraska-
Lincoln&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective&lt;br/&gt;This proposal focuses on
design, fabrication, and proof-of-concept for novel frequency-tunable terahertz
resonator structures made from chiral nanocomposit materials (CNM). Nanoscale
arrangement and hybridization creates artificial materials (nanostructure
electrically conductive coils) with entirely new properties. Applications are
envisioned for areas such as nano-photonics, nano-electromechanics, nano-
magnetics, nano-electromagnetics, and nano-sensors, for example. The goal of the
proposal is to show the feasibility of a frequency-tunable CNM terahertz (THz)
resonator device structure using conductive nanocoils and Schottky contact
capacitors produced from the depletion layer at the interface between the coil
and semiconductor substrate. &lt;br/&gt;The goal will be reached in the
following steps: &lt;br/&gt; 1. Investigation of depletion layer properties at
the interface between aluminum sculptured thin films and p-type doped silicon
substrates and manipulation of the depletion layer thickness by an external
applied electric field. &lt;br/&gt; 2. Filling and cross-linking the polymer
polyvinyl phenol (PVP) into the sculptured thin film and demonstration of
resonance frequency tuning in hybrid resonator device structure. &lt;br/&gt; 3.
Reduction of the capacitor area by using patterned substrates for glancing angle
deposition of aluminum nanocoils on p-type silicon substrates. &lt;br/&gt; 4.
First demonstration of tunable terahertz resonator devices from chiral
nanostructure hybrid materials with reduced capacitor area by means of terahertz
ellipsometry. The frequency tuning will be obtained by applying an external
electrical bias to the depletion layer. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit
&lt;br/&gt;The research plan will lead to breakthroughs for the design and
performance of new hybrid electromagnetic devices based on advances for
revolutionary new electromagnetic materials from chiral nanostructure hybrids.
The active THz resonator device structures may be incorporated in THz sources
and detectors and close thereby an current gap electronic device technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact &lt;br/&gt;Terahertz devices are very
promising for applications in medicine, remote sensing, imaging, and satellite
communications, and they might be also useful for homeland security tasks.
Nonetheless the terahertz spectral region is one of the most under-utilized
frequency ranges. The proposed active THz resonator device structures will
contribute to enhance THz technology with an immediate influence on the society.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;