* 0824001
* Interfacial Nucleation and Growth of Hierarchical Structures and Phases in Polymer Nanocomposites
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2010
* Devesh Misra, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 12/31/2010
* USD 196,445.00



Intellectual Merit: The research objective of the project is to investigate the
basic physical mechanisms underlying the evolution of hierarchical structures
and phases during pressure-induced crystallization of polymers containing
dispersion of nano-particles. The research will address critical issues of
nucleation and growth of polymer crystals at interfaces in polymer nano-
composite systems. This will provide an insight into the adhesion process, which
would point to methods to improve the interfacial properties of these material
systems. Thermodynamic models with predictive capabilities will be developed for
a wide range of nano-particle-reinforced polymer systems based on the nature of
thermodynamically-driven interactions at the polymer-nano-particle interface.
Successful completion of the research will provide generic guidelines governing
pressure-induced processing of polymer nano-composites that fundamentally affect
the structure and composition on a nanometer-size scale, in a manner similar to
nano-grained metals.

Broader Impact: The understanding of physical processes will enable high
strength-toughness combination to be achieved in polymer nano-composite systems,
allowing use of thinner sections or components with consequent energy savings.
Additionally, enhanced scratch resistance of nano-structured composites would
promote their use in storage devices, biomedical components, and applications
requiring optical transparency. Graduate and undergraduate engineering students
will benefit through involvement in research and integration of research with
existing curriculum.

