* 0824466
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Testing Theories of Kin and Nonkin Social Bonds in Understanding SocialIinteractions in a Multi-level Society of Sichuan Snub-Nosed Monkey
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Caie Yan, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2010
* USD 12,281.00

This project investigates patterns of social interactions and kinship networks
of a highly endangered Asian colobine (Rhinopithecus roxellana) in China.
Ultimate goals of this study are to explore the evolution of primate sociality,
as well as the role of kin and non-kin affiliation and cooperation in the
formation of social networks in nonhuman and human primates by studying the
uncommon social structures exhibited by R. roxellana. R. roxellana is reported
to exhibit a multilevel social system composed of over 100 members in which
individuals form one-male-units (OMUs, which include one adult male, several
adult females and their offspring), all male units, and bands (several OMUs that
travel, feed and rest together). Multi-level societies are rare in primates, and
have only been reported in two other species (geladas (Theropithecus gelada),
and hamadryas baboons (Papio hamadryas)). Little is known, however, concerning
the set of social and ecological factors that promote and maintain stability and
tolerance among members of a multi-level social system, and the degree to which
individuals residing in the same OMU and band are related. In this project, a
13-month field study of adult individuals of a habituated band of R. roxellana
will be conducted. Fecal samples will be collected from adult band members and
extract DNA. Two genetic markers, mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) and microsatellite
DNA, to estimate relatedness among band members will be employed. Combed data on
affiliative, agonistic, and cooperative behavior with genotype data, will serve
to test theories of kin selection, reciprocity, biological markets, and
byproduct mutualism in explaining social interactions among individuals of R.
roxellana societies.

The results of this study will help to identify the social and ecological costs
and benefits to individuals of forming large, coordinated, and highly flexible
social units. In addition, data on the genetic diversity in approximately 50
Sichuan snub-nosed monkeys will be obtained. This species is highly endangered.
Detailed data on social behavior and genetic structure of this species will
yield information on their residence patterns, immigration rates, and dispersal
distance. Such information is critical for the design and management of natural
reserves for R. roxellana.