* 0824970
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Nature of Medicine: Colonial Regulation, Nature, and Medicine in South Africa
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2011
* Kristina Bishop, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Ezekiel Kalipeni
* 02/28/2011
* USD 12,000.00

This study examines the status of indigenous medicine in South Africa and those
who practice it, investigating how historical and colonial narratives form the
legal landscape of medicine and the ways that resurgent representations of
authentic medicine are mobilized in the present, in both policy and practice. In
colonial South Africa the relationship between indigenous and biomedicine was
strained as colonial officials regulated how indigenous people could practice
medicine. Indigenous healers were limited to using only local natural products,
such as herbs, to heal and only white medical doctors could legally use European
medicines and treatments; the African use of such tools was banned, and legal
divisions developed between "indigenous", "natural", and "biomedical" practice.
Today South African officials debating treatments for HIV similarly argue for
the use of "traditional" natural materials such as beetroot and garlic to cure
illness, raising issues surprisingly familiar to those from the colonial era.
This research asks: to what degree do colonial conceptions manifest themselves
within current representations and struggles around medicine with the advent of
new diseases and treatments such as HIV/AIDS? Specifically, how do the
narratives found in South African policy around HIV/AIDS medicines create,
reproduce or alter the narratives found in colonial medical policy? How does the
use of medicines by practitioners vary from or reflect narratives about
indigenous medicine? Using archival data to uncover colonial discourses, plus
interviews with current day clinicians, local practitioners, and decision-makers
to understand contemporary debates, is to be followed by narrative policy
analysis to examine the current policy structure. This research seeks to
determine whether and how the current debate is not just about HIV/AIDS and
South Africa's treatment policies, but is in part an articulation of set of
structured conditions emerging from social history.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the struggles between biomedicine and
indigenous medicine has important implications in South Africa today, where the
debate surround the contemporary health crisis of HIV/AIDS, which infects an
estimated 29 percent of the adult population. By understanding the social
assumptions embedded in the use and regulation of "indigenous" treatments,
"natural" cures, and "biomedicine", we can better anticipate and mediate current
conflicts in understanding and treating HIV in South Africa. A clearer
understanding of medical policies and discourses, and their historical roots,
can be used to uncover biases against effective treatments (whether local or
"western" biomedical) and this knowledge can be used to devise more effective
clinical and education programs for the treatment of HIV/AIDS. In addition,
understanding how colonial narratives reassert themselves in current policy and
practice can help undo the pernicious idea that those practicing medicine
outside of the biomedical norm are doing so merely out of ignorance of modern
biomedicine's benefits. Indigenous medicine might instead be viewed as a complex
configuration of the traditional as well as the modern, which together may be
useful to those suffering from illness, allowing more objective analysis of its
limitations and benefits for public health. This project is jointly supported by
the Geography and Regional Science Program and the Office of International
Science and Engineering.