* 0824278
* Doctoral Disseration Improvement: Long Calls Among Savanna Chimpanzees at Ugalla, Western Tanzania
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2009
* James Moore, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 09/30/2009
* USD 14,963.00

Fluid social systems place unique cognitive demands on individuals given the
necessity to coordinate reunions and negotiate relationships over large
distances and with intermittent encounters. A variety of fission-fusion species
produce loud calls, a behavior likely critical in maintaining contact between
widely spaced community members. Despite investigation into the variables that
influence vocal behavior, previous research has been unable to situate
interparty calling in a socio-ecological context, especially when callers are
separated by large distances. This study will address the function of chimpanzee
loud calls (pant hoots), as well as explore hypotheses concerning chimpanzee
acoustic behavior and its relationship to the environment, important especially
when using savanna chimpanzees to model early hominin behavioral adaptations to
arid habitats. Specific objectives include examination of whether chimpanzees
(1) use loud calls to coordinate reunions or movements between widely separated
parties (enabling a large percentage of the community to maintain contact for
prolonged periods of time), (2) exhibit specific sleeping-site calling behavior,
and (3) adjust grouping patterns to scarce resources and/or predator density. To
meet these objectives, an acoustic localization system has been developed that
will monitor and record calling behavior and caller locations within
(potentially) an entire chimpanzee community in Ugalla, Western Tanzania,
providing data on fission-fusion patterns. Microphone units deployed across the
study area will transmit, in real time, sounds to a central computer where data
will be analyzed, stored, and used to locate chimpanzee parties for behavioural
data collection. Spatial and regression analyses will assess the relationship
between chimpanzee nesting sites and the acoustic environment, whilst streaming
spectrographic software will be used to analyze pant hoots in various
contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For chimpanzees, where relative party size and
recruitment of allies are key factors in intergroup (e.g. lethal raiding) and
intragroup relations, vocalization behaviour is an important means through which
individuals monitor each other's locations and behaviour, especially when not in
visual contact. The extremely large home ranges of savanna chimpanzees
(&gt;270km2 compared to &lt;15km2 in forests) are likely to impact the nature of
parties, how they coordinate movement, and possibly on community social
structure itself. Revealing how savanna chimpanzees maintain their social
relationships in these conditions has implications for both Pliocene hominins
that evolved in a similar habitat, and for the adaptability of a fission fusion
system. More broadly, this study will develop and demonstrate a new technology
that can be used for behavioral, ecological, and conservation research on any
loudly vocalizing animal. Through training in the appropriate field and
analytical methods, Tanzanian researchers and wildlife managers can then apply
this new, useful technology to new additional research questions.