* 0824890
* Acquisition of an X-ray diffraction unit for earth science research and education at the University of Wisconsin, Madison
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2010
* Clark Johnson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2010
* USD 148,346.00

0824890&lt;br/&gt;Xu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks funding
to purchase a new X-ray diffraction (XRD) instrument. The current 20 year old
instrument has developed electrical problems and suffers from unreliable
background stability. The manufacturer of the current instrument has since gone
out of business and no support options are available. The requested upgrade will
be capable of general powder X-ray diffraction, micro-diffraction, and wide
angle X-ray scattering. Also proposed is a 2-D image plate detector system. XRD
is a common technique for studying Earth and extraterrestrial materials. The
research team will put the requested instrument into service to 1) better
understand mineralogical signals indicative of supporting life found in Earth
and planetary samples, 2) better understand rock-water interactions through
mineral signatures, 3) determine biosignatures in Earth and planetary rocks, 4)
understand the role of microbes in mediating redox reactions in Fe-bearing clays
and Fe-oxides in addition to U(IV) mineral formation and redox processes in the
subsurface, and 5) quantitatively survey clay, carbonate and feldspar/quartz
mineralology in glacial tills, eolian sediments, and lacustrine deposits in
order to reconstruct paleoclimatic changes. The new instrument will be housed in
current X-ray Diffraction Laboratory at UWM. Current infrastructure (cooling
water, AC, power, distilled water, etc) is in place to support the acquisition.
A 50%-time XRD lab manager will support operation and is supervised by the PI.
The lab manager will train new users, provide tech support, maintain the XRD and
associated instruments, develop techniques and keep general records. A first-
come, first-serve web-based sign up system is in place for the current
instrument and will continue to be used. Users pay an hourly fee. The fees
support 25% of the FTE lab manager and maintenance costs. The old instrument
will be kept for training purposes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;