* 0824567
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement:  The Role of the Progesterone Receptor, Energetic, and Life History Variables in Women
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2010
* L. Christie Rockwell, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 07/31/2010
* USD 15,000.00

Variation in human female reproductive function likely reflects the action of
natural selection in our evolutionary past. The capacity to vary ovarian steroid
production with ecological or energetic conditions is well known but underlying
genetic variation that could also impact reproductive phenotypes is less well
studied. This research project will examine whether a physiologically
significant, high frequency genetic variant of the human progesterone receptor
gene (PROGINS) impacts uterine function. PROGINS consists of three genetic
markers that are in complete linkage-disequilibrium. One of the three markers, a
single nucleotide non-synonomous substitution in exon 4, causes a valine to
leucine amino acid substitution in the resulting protein. This amino acid
substitution may account for the diminished response to progesterone attributed
to PROGINS-encoded progesterone receptors. A phenotypic affect of PROGINS is
also suggested by numerous epidemiological studies that identify it as a risk
factor for reproductive disorders and cancers. In this project uterine function
will be assessed indirectly by the study of menstrual cycle characteristics
(total menstrual cycle length, follicular phase length, luteal phase length,
length of menstrual bleeding and menstrual blood loss), and more directly, by
measuring endometrial thickness via ultrasound. Because the PROGINS variant may
cause less responsiveness to progesterone which normally counters the
proliferative effects of estrogen on the uterus it is anticipated that
individuals with the PROGINS variant will have a longer duration of menstrual
bleeding, greater volume of blood loss, altered cycle length, and thicker
endometria at the mid-luteal phase. At the extreme these phenotypes may have a
negative impact on fertility in contemporary populations but a diminished
responsiveness to progesterone may have been selectively advantageous in the
past when ovarian hormone levels were likely lower. The current project will
also investigate whether PROGINS interacts with life history and energetic
variables to cause variation in uterine function. Both additive and
multiplicative effects will be studied through the use of a moderated multiple
regression technique. All studies will be conducted in a sample of normal,
healthy women of European descent, the ethnic group that has the highest
reported frequency of carriers (37%) of the PROGINS variant.

The causes of fertility differences among women are multifactoral. Lifestyle,
diet, activity levels, access to health care, and biological variables such as
age or parity, clearly impact the likelihood of successful pregnancy but the
influence of underlying genetic variation on normal reproductive function is
less well understood. Data generated from this project will contribute to models
that explain the role of genetic variation and genotype-environment interactions
that contribute to complex reproductive phenotypes in normal women. This
approach to human biology illuminates the range of non-pathological human
variation and will provide a context in which to study health and disease.

