* 0824602
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: The Effects of Parental Investment and Market Integration on Growth and Immune Function in an Indigenous Amazonian Population
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2008,10/31/2009
* Lawrence Sugiyama, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2009
* USD 14,974.00

Humans, like all organisms, face competing demands when allocating limited
resources, such as energy and nutrients, towards competing demands like growth,
immune function, and reproduction. As a consequence, growth during childhood is
highly plastic. Undernourished or malnourished children grow at slower rates and
reach shorter adult statures than those who are well nourished. Exposure to
infectious diseases and pathogens also causes delayed growth and reduces adult
stature. Resource availability and pathogen exposure also change the development
of the immune system. The immune system is made up of multiple branches of
immunity which fight different types of pathogens and entail different costs.
Thus, the immune system develops in order to respond adaptively to local
threats. In developing populations, two factors which affect resource
availability and pathogen exposure are family size and market integration, or
the degree to which individuals participate in market economies as opposed to
engaging in traditional subsistence activities such as hunting, fishing, and
horticulture.

This research will investigate the effects of family size and market integration
on growth and immune function in children living in the Ecuadorian Amazon. These
children come from an indigenous Amazonian population known as the Shuar who
traditionally subsisted on hunting, fishing, and horticulture. Today Shuar live
across a range of circumstances, from urban to traditional. It has been
previously shown that many Shuar children have growth that falls below
international standards and varies with distance from towns, subsistence, and
family size. This research will test the hypothesis that in addition to growth,
large family size will limit resources for children and therefore decrease total
immune function, and alter the development of the immune system to use forms of
immunity such as inflammation, as opposed to costlier forms of immunity such as
cell-mediated immunity. This study will also examine the impact of market
integration on growth and immune system function. The study will measure 300
children in three Shuar villages that differ in terms of market integration and
distance to urban centers. Data will be collected on growth status, resource
availability, market integration and subsistence activities, and family
composition. Biomarkers in dried blood spots will be used to evaluate the status
of the immune system for each child. By collecting all of these measures
together, this study will show how immune function and growth vary across
familial and economic circumstances.

This project will provide new information about how immunity is regulated across
environments and how immunity and growth interact. On a basic level, this
research will contribute to our knowledge of the development and functioning of
the immune system. This information may help us to understand things such as the
connection between inflammation, obesity, and heart disease, and the increase in
asthma and allergy lately seen in many Western populations. This project will
also inform development initiatives by providing information on the health
consequences of cultural changes occurring in the developing world.