* 0824566
* Micro- and Nanofabric Protection of Organic Matter in Clay-rich Muds and Polychaete Fecal Pellets: Direct Visualization by TEM and Quantitative Analysis
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2013
* Richard Bennett, SEAPROBE, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 08/31/2013
* USD 267,529.00

Intellectual Merit. This research addresses challenging issues of organic matter
(OM) preservation in marine clay-rich sediment and soils using novel techniques
for visualizing three dimensionally OM in nano- and microfabric signatures using
transmission electron microscopy (TEM). This effort will advance the
understanding of processes and mechanisms and nano- and microfabric signatures
that drive OM preservation at these scales during the very early development of
marine sediment. It will provide direct "cutting edge" evidence confirming or
refuting concepts and ideas advanced without direct observational evidence by
the scientific community concerning OM preservation in marine sediment. It will
provide direct visual evidence of protection against enzymatic digestion of OM
by clay fabric. Hypotheses to be tested include, (1) pore throats and tortuosity
of pores impedes the movement of enzymes through clay fabric and (2) OM is
preferentially sorbed onto edges of clay platelets and interstices at the
junctures of clay domains. Hypothesis testing entails developing a realistic
quantitative three-dimensional visual model of OM protection based on potential
enzymatic digestion of specific substrates and direct TEM observations of OM
distribution with respect to pores reconstructed from serial sections of
sediments representing the globally most important OM depocenter. Clay is
inherently electron dense and easily visualized by TEM; visualization of OM will
be accomplished with electron dense stains. Smectite and illite clay samples
will be studied including field collected fecal pellets from marine polychaetes.
This research will advance the development of realistic conceptual models of OM
preservation and ultimately organic carbon cycling based on direct visualization
of organo-clay relationships and quantitative analysis. The research will also
provide quantitative data for advancing (1) understanding of biogeochemical
fluxes of organic carbon in marine sediments and (2) the development of emerging
models addressing organo-clay preservation dynamics.

Broader Impacts. A graduate student from the University of Southern Mississippi
(USM) will be trained in TEM techniques and image analysis, will participate in
writing manuscripts, and in presenting data at regional and national scientific
meetings. Training will be offered to science education graduate students in TEM
techniques and image analysis during our regular summer teaching program.
Undergraduates through the local NSF REU program will assist in TEM work and
image analysis and present research at local and regional meetings. The project
supports three investigators at two institutions in an EPSCoR state and
establishes collaboration among disciplines and institutions with CoPIs from
academia and the private sector. Research results will be published in leading
international journals as well as local and national professional meetings. A
website will be established to make our data and interpretations widely
available. This project has broader societal and economic implications by
increasing knowledge of OM sequestration during early sediment diagenesis and
understanding the development of protokerogen and ultimately kerogen in
petroleum source rocks.