* 0824421
* The Future Directions in Genetics Studies Graduate Training Workshop
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2009
* Carl Craver, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2009
* USD 25,000.00

The Future Directions in Genetics Studies workshop is a four day graduate
training workshop for students of history, philosophy, and social studies of
biology, with an emphasis on behavioral genetics. It seeks to explore new
avenues for HPS research by exploring the interface of neuroscience and genetics
by bringing together researchers who specialize in these areas. Eight to twelve
researchers of distinction from the fields of HPS of biology will be invited to
give plenary talks addressing the specific questions: What exactly does it mean
to say that there is "a gene for" a specific trait or behavior? How do genes
carry information? And who should have access to such information? How should
research at the interface between genetics and neuroscience best be conducted?
How can philosophers, historians, sociologists, and geneticists collaborate to
contribute to the future of genetic studies?

Very little work has been done in the HPS of behavioral genetics. The
incorporation of neuron-scientific work that relates to behavioral genetics, and
broader issues of interest in the history and philosophy of science, can be
expected to expand both the range of scholars involved and the possible topics
for future collaboration. The conference will bring graduate students of
different fields together to discuss their research and gain fresh perspectives
on their work. The desired result is to help PhD candidates make contact with
cutting edge research, to see that their work can have broad appeal, and to
encourage them to make their research accessible to those in other fields who
could benefit from their work.

As this workshop is designed around training graduates students in the HPS of
genetics, one primary goal of this workshop is to create an environment where
graduate students can feel comfortable participating as full members of the
academic community. The organizers promote the use of "happy office hours"
wherein faculty members make themselves available at a specific time and
location such as a coffeehouse, restaurant, or classroom for students to drop in
and make informal contacts or discuss research ideas. This effectively creates
lots of time for interaction between student and faculty researchers for
thinking together. In addition, the organizers are actively recruiting speakers
from underrepresented groups, especially women. The inclusion of neuroscientists
and psychologists in discussions with members of the HPS community promises an
expansion of disciplines including new topics for discussion and new lines of
research.