* 0824095
* Cyber-Enabled Radio Propagation Prediction for the Design of Advanced Wireless Communications Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Magdy Iskander, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 08/31/2012
* USD 223,697.00

The objective of this research is to exploit the geospatial resources available
in cyberspace for the study of radio propagation in urban and mountain areas.
The approach is interdisciplinary and includes research in the area of 3D
reconstruction of buildings using 2D and projected images and examination of the
effect of terrain and building materials on radio propagation coverage. It will
result in the development of ray tracing models suitable for modeling complex
building structures such as metal-framed structures and complex walls.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merits: This research is interdisciplinary
involving areas of geospatial resources, computational intelligence,
electromagnetic wave propagation, and wireless communications systems. The
integrated research will lead to the development of potentially transformative
propagation modeling algorithms and tools to provide computationally efficient
and more accurate capabilities for radio propagation prediction and
characterization for advanced wireless communications technology including
cognitive radio systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This research
addresses the need for accurate, fast, worldwide radio frequency signal coverage
prediction for advanced wireless communications. The project will also impact
society through several educational and outreach activities that are closely
integrated with the research, including the development of a new graduate course
and involvement of undergraduate students in the research. In particular, the
propagation modeling activities will be integrated with the State of Hawaii
Research Experience for Teachers (RET) program (ACT 111) to involve high and
middle school teachers and students and stimulate interest in STEM courses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;