* 0824333
* BRIGE: Toughening Mechanisms in Supramolecular Networks with Photocrosslinkable Moieties
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2011
* LaShanda Korley, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 07/31/2011
* USD 175,000.00

EEC-0824333 Korley

BRIGE awards maintain global competitiveness by increasing the diversity of ENG
researchers, who are initiating research programs early in their careers. BRIGE
awards further the broaden participation of engineering researchers by
increasing the number of engineering graduates, by improving the representation
of women and minorities in engineering, and by understanding how to improve
recruitment and retention of engineering students.

This BRIGE award addresses the toughening of elastomeric materials. The
toughening of elastomeric materials has primarily focused on the incorporation
of reinforcing domains (nanofillers, ordered domains); little attention has been
given to modification of the elastic response of the network under deformation
as a mode of toughness enhancement. Inspired by the hierarchical molecular
architecture of and toughening mechanisms exhibited in natural materials, such
as collagen and titin, it has been suggested that the incorporation of periodic,
ordered domains, similar to the architecture of titin, in an elastomeric
framework is a viable method for tuning the elastic response. Weakly-binding
supramolecular motifs are ideal systems for developing tunable (temperature,
binding activity, environmental conditions) and responsive elastomeric platforms
for this investigation.

The significance of this interdisciplinary research program lies in the
generation of new scientific knowledge relating the thermodynamic and kinetic
phenomena of the supramolecular template and the photopatterned crosslinked
domains. It is anticipated that this fundamental investigation will provide
valuable insight into the underlying toughening and dynamic restructuring
mechanisms exhibited in nature-inspired supramolecular elastomers. The research
will contribute to global efforts to rationally design lightweight, functional
materials with enhanced material properties and impact technological
advancements in protective systems, sensors, etc.

This BRIGE investigation seeks to impact advanced, functional materials and to
drive the development of new technologies through establishment of key
structure-function relationships. The PI has designed a thematic program to
apply the novel and exciting research to broad educational and outreach
activities. The PI has formed Project Research Teams to mentor and train
undergraduate and high school students, especially from underrepresented groups
in STEM fields. Additionally, the PI has created innovative outreach programs
for middle and high school students, including a Saturday Science Academy, to
address the national need to broaden participation of underrepresented groups in
STEM disciplines, particularly engineering. The common thread of this
educational and outreach platform is that the PI and strategic partners from
industry and academia will serve as mentors, role models, and educators through
a comprehensive blend of applied research, preparatory programs, and hands-on
learning.

This BRIGE grant will broaden the participation of and increase opportunities
for all engineers including those from groups underrepresented in the
engineering disciplines. This BRIGE grant will also encourage the PI to become
actively and competitively engaged in research as an independent investigator.

