* 0824978
* Acquisition of a Gas Source Mass Spectrometer and Carbonate Preparation Device
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2008,03/31/2013
* Paul Koch, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 03/31/2013
* USD 419,480.00

0824978&lt;br/&gt;Zachos&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks
funding for a new gas source dual-inlet isotope ratio mass spectrometer with a
Kiel carbonate device. Requested is a Thermo MAT 253 with a Kiel IV prep device.
The system will be capable of routine carbon and oxygen isotope analyses from
carbonates with high precision and low sample size (~5 Âµg C). The acquisition
will allow the use of individual acid reaction vessels, increasing precision and
minimizing sample sizes. The instrument will add to existing analysis
capability. General research themes outlined for the new instrumentation fall
into the areas of paleoclimatology, paleoceanography and paleoecology. One focus
is understanding the biogeochemistry and climate evolution of the late
Cretaceous and early Cenozoic ?greenhouse? worlds; the causes and evolution of
the Paleocene-Eocene Thermal Maximum (PETM). The PI intends to measure shell
carbonates spanning the PETM in the fossil record. Shell analysis obviates
artifacts due to sediment reworking or bioturbation, but requires low sample
volumes. A related project will look at the coupling of biogeochemical cycling,
including nutrients, and climatic forcings during the PETM. The instrument will
also be applied to understanding paleoclimatic and paleoenvironmental forcings
on the ecology, evolution of extant and ancient vertebrates (extinct). In
addition, foraminiferal isotope analysis will be used to reconstruct
paleoclimates associated with the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM). Aside from the PI
and co-PI research thrusts, a number of other PIs at UCSC and elsewhere will be
supported. The management plan has the new instrument replacing an Optima (which
will be retired). No additional laboratory space will thus been needed. A lead
technician and lab manager is currently employed and partial support is
requested in Year 1. Zachos will oversee the installation and initial management
of the Kiel IV device. It is expected that grant support and per-sample fees
will support the facility long-term. The UCSC Stable Isotope Laboratory operates
on an open access policy. This helps attract users from UCSC, other regional
institutions and the international scientific community. Users have been roughly
~50% female. Recharge rates are kept low and the laboratory manager provides
extensive training. UC-wide programs such as the California Alliance for
Minority Participation ensures a diverse in-house user
base.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;