* 0824068
* Collaborative: 3D Integrated Imaging Receivers for 10-Gb/s Free Space Optical MIMO
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Zhaoran Rena Huang, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2012
* USD 249,045.00

The objective of this research is to create a new class of power-efficient
imaging photoreceivers to reach an aggregated data rate of 50 gigabits per
second and beyond for broadband wireless optical communication. The approach is
to develop a large array of planar tessellated photodetectors with a rate of 10
gigabits per second per pixel. The array includes diversity selection circuits,
which are implemented using an optical multi-input/multi-output
configuration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to intellectual merit, this
project addresses two well-known challenges in optical wireless communication,
channel scintillation and optical beam alignment. The research explores power-
efficient InGaAs metal-semiconductor-metal photodetectors that are integrated
with silicon integrated circuits for multifunctional operation (decision,
amplification, and computing), and the implementation of multi-input/multi-
output architectures for signal processing of massive amounts of data. This
research is expected to augment the body of knowledge on carrier drift
characteristics in the photodetectors at low voltage bias and the physics of
complex three-dimensional optoelectronic device structures. This research also
explores heterogeneous integration of compound semiconductor device on silicon
circuits using three-dimensional wafer bonding for photoreceiver
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to broader impacts, the research
has the potential to benefit a variety of applications, including wireless
networks with reduced security vulnerabilities, networks able to transfer high-
resolution digital images in the midst of equipment sensitive to electromagnetic
interference in healthcare settings; and optical interconnects in large-scale
data centers. A cross-university curriculum is addressed, covering multi-
disciplinary topics in information theory, system-level design, analog circuits,
device physics, fabrication and integration. Various programs are used to
recruit students from underrepresented groups. K-12 outreach efforts are
coordinated through the Tufts Center for Engineering Educational Outreach.