* 0824864
* Collaborative Research: Collection and Analysis of Radiocarbon Samples on Repeat Hydrography Lines
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Ann McNichol, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 09/30/2014
* USD 478,505.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt;The major objective of this study is to collect and analyze
both radiocarbon (P14PC) and stable carbon (P13PC, P12PC) isotopes during the
second phase of the CLIVAR Repeat Hydrography (RH) program. The study will be
focused on the Atlantic Ocean. Samples will be collected and analyzed from all
of the planned RH Atlantic cruises over the next 6 years and additionally from 4
non-US repeat cruises. The total planned sampling will allow an updated estimate
of the 3-D radiocarbon distribution for the Atlantic in addition to monitoring
changes in the bomb-P14PC transient. Sampling for radiocarbon will continue on a
repeat schedule of 15-20 years, slower than the international CLIVAR repeat
sampling of once per decade. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Radiocarbon has long been
recognized as an important tracer for studies of ocean processes. Data generated
from this study can be used to study mixing, ventilation rates, production
rates, residence times in the deep ocean, deep ocean biogeochemistry and oxygen
use rates, air-sea gas exchange, thermocline ventilation rates, as a proxy for
anthropogenic COB2B in the ocean, and to evaluate ocean general circulation
model (OGCM) performance. The latter application is particularly important based
on our reliance on such models to predict the consequences of increased global
COB2B. The combined input of radiocarbon and CFCs into OGCMs provides a
critically important test of the models that cannot be gained through one tracer
alone. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study includes no funding for scientific
interpretation nor for student participation of any kind (with the exception of
high school students as bottle washers). Consequently, the immediate broader
impacts are very limited. Once the data are public and especially after they
have been incorporated into large scale data products the results are expected
to have important and very wide impact on both the biogeochemical and physical
oceanographic fields. The data will be combined with results from all available
sources and will be available to the entire global community in easy to use
formats. &lt;br/&gt;