* 0824688
* Towards Multiscale Mechanical Design of Hierarchical Cellular Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Gary Peter, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 12/31/2011
* USD 250,000.00

Wood is an example of an extraordinary cellular material that is highly porous
yet lightweight, strong, stiff, hard and tough, a combination of mechanical
properties that have not been achieved in synthetic porous materials. The
objective of this proposal is to use computational and experimental analyses to
create a fundamental understanding of how the multiscale structural organization
of wood, from the molecular to the macroscopic, determines its mechanical
properties and to discover design principles that may generally apply to
multiscale hierarchical design of synthetic cellular materials. The outcomes of
this research will include: (1) a simulation tool for multiscale modeling of
polymeric materials from the atomic to the macroscopic, (2) a quantitative
structural model of wood from molecules to wood tissue, (3) the multiscale
structure-property relationship of wood, and (4) guidelines for hierarchical
design of synthetic cellular materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this
research will not only enhance our understanding of the unique mechanical
properties of wood, but will also provide a theoretical tool for analysis and
design of hierarchically-structured polymeric materials. It will contribute to
the development of next generation multiscale, multifunctional composite
materials. In addition, a fundamental understanding of the importance of the
hierarchical structure of wood is also crucial for plant biologists who are
interested in the genetic mechanisms that govern secondary cell wall formation.
Simulation tools that give insight into how wood composition and structure
determine its mechanical properties will also inform biologists about how wood
composition can be modified to enhance specific end uses. This research
necessarily merges materials science and mechanical engineering with biology,
and, therefore, provides a unique opportunity to establish a multidisciplinary
learning and training program that transcends the traditional boundaries between
academic disciplines and offer students an integrated approach of team research
and career development. &lt;br/&gt;