* 0824372
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Assessing the Interaction of Risk Aversion and Social Organization in Juvenile Primates
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2009
* Christopher Schmitt, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 07/31/2009
* USD 11,590.00

Primates are unique among mammals in having extended periods of juvenile
dependency. Several evolutionary explanations for this prolonged juvenile phase
have been proposed, but few of these have been tested in the field, in part
because juveniles have rarely been the focus of behavioral research. The few
field studies that have explicitly examined juvenile development in primates
have focused on taxa that live in female philopatric and female-bonded social
groups, neglecting the broad diversity in social organization found in the rest
of the Order. By contrast, this study will provide new data on juvenile
development and life histories for wild taxa living in societies characterized
by a high level of female dispersal, either in cohesive (lowland woolly monkeys,
Lagothrix poeppigii) or fission-fusion (white-bellied spider monkeys, Ateles
belzebuth) social groups in the Yasuni Biosphere Reserve, Ecuador. In collecting
an array of behavioral and developmental data, this study will examine how
aspects of juvenile development and behavior may be explicitly tied to social
organization, primarily through examining aspects of predation avoidance, food
competition and efficiency, and social development that are expected to vary in
the different social environments offered by fission-fusion and cohesive groups.
This research will also provide the first comparative field test of the most
widely accepted explanation for the evolution of extended juvenility in
primates, the Ecological Risk Aversion Hypothesis, which argues that the
extended juvenile phase in primates is the result of a metabolic slowdown during
development arising from the need to remain in the center of social groups to
elude predators where high food competition prevents adequate food
intake.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultimately, this study will fill important gaps in
our understanding of the juvenile phase in primates, both through increasing the
diversity of juvenile primate data available and by explicitly linking social
organization to juvenile behavioral development, which may in turn shed light on
the evolution of the markedly extended juvenile phase seen in primates,
including humans. Additionally, the scientific presence at the Tiputini
Biodiversity Station fostered by the project will enable the training of several
field assistants from primate habitat countries, and contribute to the
biological station?s mission of Ecuadorian education, ecological discovery, and
Amazonian conservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;