* 0824767
* International Workshop on Delivering Sustainable Infrastructure; Auckland, New Zealand; December 15-17, 2008
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2008,11/30/2008
* James Mihelcic, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 11/30/2008
* USD 60,421.00

Sustainable infrastructure systems require a greater understanding of the
complexity of those systems, including their dependence on environmental systems
and services; their interdependence on other infrastructure systems, and on
social, technical and economic systems; their dynamic behavior over time and
space; and the need for the services they provide. This workshop will bring
together a diverse blend of researchers to explore and form research initiatives
within the theme of Delivering Sustainable Infrastructure for the Built
Environment. It is scheduled for Dec. 15-17, 2008, following the Third
International Conference on Sustainability Engineering and Science (Dec 9-12).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop objectives are to: 1) identify priorities and
an action plan for research into Sustainable Infrastructure related to the urban
built environment; and, 2) identify and prioritize collaborative research
projects, including establishing research teams, identifying funding
opportunities and outlining research objectives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
workshop outcomes will be: 1) an agenda for establishing a funding initiative
and/or program to support research into sustainable infrastructure that serves
the urban built environment; and 2) development of 3?]5 clearly outlined
international collaborative research projects, including establishing research
teams, identifying funding opportunities and outlining the research objectives.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 3 US workshop organizers are committed to recruiting 7
additional US researchers and 3 doctoral students for a group of 13 US
participants that will be diverse in terms of discipline, area of expertise,
gender, race, and career length. Also attending are 25?]30 additional
international researchers and 7?]12 international doctoral students. These
individuals will come from four countries (UK, Japan, New Zealand, and
Australia) and their participation will be supported by their home governments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will provide fundamentals for the study and
application of the science and engineering of sustainability and may affect the
planning and management of future urban infrastructure that serves the built
environment. The development of priorities for research and of specific
interdisciplinary research projects will assist in directing resources into
topics which are considered crucial in developing this field, both academically
and professionally. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results will promote a better
understanding of the role of various disciplines in developing socio?]technical
systems and will enable a greater understanding of the risks inherent in the
large, multiple?]scale, complex dynamic systems which comprise socio?]technical
systems. Specifically, it should assist in developing better responses to
climate change, increased urbanization, increasing use of resources, and
implications of shortages of resources and management of aging urban
infrastructure. The research projects resulting from the workshop that have a
focus on globalization and sustainability should attract (and train) a more
diverse, globally integrated, and competitive science and engineering workforce.
International research collaboration will lead to innovation in course and
curriculum development. &lt;br/&gt;