* 0824959
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Global Processes and Individual Choices
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2010
* Anna Rubtsova, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2010
* USD 7,498.00

SES-0824959&lt;br/&gt;John Boli&lt;br/&gt;Anna Rubtsova&lt;br/&gt;Emory
University &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transnational corporations market
infant formula around the globe, while numerous International Non-governmental
Organizations (INGOs) promote breastfeeding. The breastfeeding advocacy
movement, which emerged in the 1970s, was instrumental in putting the issue of
infant feeding on the agenda of international policy-makers, and numerous
international policy initiatives supporting breastfeeding have emerged since
1981. Hence, the primary objective of this project is to investigate how global
political, cultural, and economic processes impact infant feeding practices
worldwide. The theoretical framework is provided by three sociological theories
of globalization - world-polity, world-system, and McDonaldization. The
researcher hypothesizes that globalization affects infant feeding through
changes in both social institutions (e.g., national legislation) and individual
beliefs. Therefore, this project has two components. One component investigates
how global processes affect both national adoption of breastfeeding-supportive
legislation and national breastfeeding rates; it is based on statistical
analyses of publicly available quantitative data. The other component concerns
whether and how global processes influence individual decision-making regarding
infant feeding. It draws on in-depth interviews with mothers of infants in Kiev,
Ukraine, and in Atlanta, Georgia. This research makes contributions to both the
field of sociology and society at large. Sociologically, the project will
improve our understanding of the macro-micro link by considering the interaction
between global- and individual-level processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: At the practical level, many national and international institutions
are involved in designing policy measures to improve infant feeding in general,
and to increase breastfeeding in particular. This study will broaden
understanding of the impact of past policy (e.g., the International Code of
Marketing of Breastmilk Substitutes). In addition, by investigating how global
processes interact with local contexts and individual beliefs and circumstances,
the study will provide new insights that could be instrumental for the
development of more effective policies.