* 0824564
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  URBAN-TO-SUBURBAN RACIAL DESEGREGATION: A NATURAL EXPERIMENT
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2010
* Simone Ispa-Landa, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2010
* USD 6,549.00

PI and Co-PI: Orlando Patterson and Simone Ispa-
Landa&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Social and Academic Urban to Suburban Racial
Desegregation A Natural Experiment&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0824564
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study uses a natural
experiment in the suburban public schools surrounding a Northeastern city to
examine the processes through which continual immersion in divergent
neighborhood contexts influences individuals and communities. The research has
two overarching goals. First, the project seeks to understand how routine
exposure to a majority-White, affluent suburban neighborhood context could
influence the social and academic behaviors and aspirations of African-American
adolescents from urban neighborhoods. Second, the research aims to identify the
processes through which these students affect the social and cultural landscape
of their school communities. Methodologically, the research relies on a
comparison of three groups of eighth-to-tenth grade students in a metropolitan
area. The first group attends majority-White schools in affluent suburban school
district through a racial desegregation program (n=30). Members of the second
group have been waitlisted for the desegregation program and attend low-
performing, majority-minority public, charter, and parochial schools in the city
(n=30). The third group consists of affluent White suburban students attending
schools that participate in the desegregation program (n=30). Broadly, the
research will provide theoretical and empirical insight into how social
inequalities are reproduced and interrupted. The research will benefit policy
makers by identifying the mechanisms through which exposure to an affluent
suburban environment influences less privileged adolescents.