* 0825291
* U.S. South Africa Dissertation Enhancement:   Late Paleozoic Fossil Plants from Gondwana:   Clarifying the Role of Glossopterids In Seed Plant Evolution
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2010
* Patricia Ryberg, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* DeAndra Beck
* 06/30/2010
* USD 9,149.00

This award supports doctoral dissertation research of Patricia E. Ryberg,
graduate student in the laboratory of the PI, in paleobotany. Funding will allow
Ms. Ryberg to work with Dr. Marion Bamford, University of Witwatersrand, and Dr.
Rose Prevec, Rhodes University, South Africa. Ms. Ryberg's research is on the
systematics and phylogeny of the Glossopteridales, extinct seed plants of
Permian rocks (~260 myr) from the Southern Hemisphere (Gondwana), which are
thought to be ancestors of the flowering plants. Drs. Prevec and Bamford are,
respectively, the world's expert on glossopterid reproductive structures, and
curator of the largest and most diverse collections of this group. Ms. Ryberg's
research will concentrate on comparing her fossils from Antarctica with those
from South Africa, in order to provide data for a global phylogeny of the
glossopterids, and for a seed plant phylogeny. The final goal is to understand
the evolution of the group and their possible relationship to the flowering
plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enhance Ms. Ryberg's
dissertation, and provide a basis for continuing collaboration with South
African colleagues. Through this project, she will gain knowledge and
international contacts for future work. South African paleobotanists will
provide training and knowledge of their approach to impression fossils and Ms.
Ryberg will have the opportunity to discuss her dissertation research with them.
The international collaborations begun with this study will provide connections
for additional research in the future, which will enhance Ms. Ryberg's teaching
and research after her Ph.D. is completed.