* 0825173
* Bridging Time Scales with a Unit Process Approach for Modeling Ion Interactions with Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Jonathan Freund, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 08/31/2011
* USD 250,000.00

Bridging Time Scales with a Unit-Process Approach for Modeling Ion Interactions
with Materials

In this program a new approach will be developed for modeling multi-timescale
problems with applications in ion interactions with materials. We refer to this
as a unit-process approach, whereby atomistic modeling methods are used to
extract the average effects of single events at the short time scale, and then
the data are incorporated in long time scale models for the larger and slower
system evolution. The approach will be demonstrated for a class of problems in
ion interactions with materials, via two specific tasks. First, basic unit-
process models for ion-bombardment will be made more quantitative; the two
examples demonstrated in preliminary work are the crater function approach for
bombardment of amorphous surfaces, and the defect statistics approach for
bombardment of crystalline surfaces. Second, these improved unit-process models
will be incorporated into two types of long time scale system morphology
studies, namely (i) crater function based surface evolution studies of ion
bombarded amorphous surfaces undergoing ion roughening and diffusional
smoothing, and (ii) concentration evolution equation studies of ion bombarded
crystalline surface morphology, where statistical populations of ion induced
defect concentrations evolve to dominate the surface structure.

The new approach will introduce a powerful framework for bridging multiple time
scales in mechanics modeling, making possible accurate mechanics models spanning
time scales from femtoseconds to hours. It will also lead to significant
advances in understanding ion interactions with semiconductors, which will
impact the fields of ion implantation, surface modification, and milling, as
well as radiation damage for aerospace and energy applications. The program will
also have important educational impact at UIUC and beyond. During the first year
of the program, the PI will help establish a student chapter of the Society of
Engineering Science (SES) at UIUC and will leverage the 2008 SES conference,
being held at UIUC, to help grow the chapter. The student chapter will draw
members from undergraduate and graduate students in both mechanical engineering
and engineering mechanics.