* 0825961
* GOALI: Modeling Solute Effects in Magnesium Alloys: First-principles to Predictive Finite-Element
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Dallas Trinkle, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Demitris Kouris
* 07/31/2012
* USD 281,261.00

GOALI: Modeling Solute Effects in Magnesium Alloys: First-principles to
Predictive Finite-Element Dallas R. Trinkle; Materials Science and Engineering;
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign Louis G. Hector, Jr.; General Motors
Technical Center; Warren, Michigan

The University of Illinois and General Motors will collaborate on a computer
modeling study of how different chemical additions?like aluminum and zinc as
well as more exotic elements?change the strength of the metal magnesium to
design new magnesium alloys for widespread use. The computer model starts with
an understanding of how atoms bind to each other to model changes in chemical
bonds as the metal is bent and shaped. Different chemical additions further
change the bonding, which makes the alloy stronger/weaker, or ductile/brittle.
Modeling changes in strength and ductility allows researchers to design and
optimize new magnesium alloys in a computer, rather than through expensive
trial-and-error approaches. In addition, the quantitative understanding of
chemical bonding from atoms is built into computer models for the shaping and
behavior of real automobile parts.

Magnesium alloys have two-thirds the density of aluminum; replacing many of the
steel and aluminum body pieces in an automobile with magnesium can significantly
reduce the weight of a vehicle, which reduces fuel consumption by nearly 30% and
a substantial reduction in emissions of greenhouse gases. The computer modeling
will allow the design of new alloys much more rapidly, and allow magnesium
alloys to enter widespread use for transportation. Students at Illinois will
learn first-hand the connection of academic research to industrial development,
and materials science that benefits society. Moreover, Prof. Trinkle and Dr.
Hector will work with high school science teachers in Illinois and Detroit doing
in-class presentations and demonstrations about the use of materials science to
combat global warming.