* 0825235
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Food Insecurity and Nonstandard Work among Low-income Rural Households, a Longitudinal Analysis.
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2009
* Alisha Coleman, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2009
* USD 6,500.00

PI and Co- PI: Diane McLaughlin and Alisha J. Coleman
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Doctoral Dissertation Research: Food Insecurity,
Nonstandard Work, and Low-income Rural Households&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0825235
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will
undertake a panel study to investigate predictors of food insecurity focusing on
characteristics of employment of parents or primary and secondary caregivers in
the household. Food insecurity refers to a household?s inability to obtain the
food necessary for its members. The research question is: How do type and
characteristics of employment (e.g. number of hours worked, days/schedule of
employment, temporary/permanent jobs, job quality, multiple job holding and
variability in income) of the primary and secondary caregivers relate to
household food insecurity? The investigator will incorporate information on
distances traveled to important locations such as parents? work, childcare, and
supermarkets to determine if these relate to food insecurity and if they
interact with employment characteristics to influence food insecurity. Data will
come from the Family Life Project, which features a purposive sample of rural
low-income families with young children from Pennsylvania and North Carolina.
The data are longitudinal, following a cohort of families from the birth of the
study?s target child until that child is aged three. The investigator will use
the panel data and event history analysis to model transitions into and out of
food insecurity. Latent class analysis will be used to identify patterns in food
insecurity over time. These techniques will contribute to understanding how
changes in work characteristics predict changes in food security status, while
controlling for competing explanations. The research will improve our
understanding of the predictors of food insecurity and help document the effects
of nonstandard work arrangements. Policy impacts will result from identifying
ways that existing programs, especially the federal Food Stamp Program, can
better meet the needs of households with frequent changes in income due to their
employment characteristics. By incorporating distance and location data, the
analysis will aid in developing policies directed to meeting challenges related
to distance and isolation faced by young families living in rural areas. Panel
data allow for a determination of relationships between food insecurity, work
arrangements and other predictors. To date, most food insecurity research has
identified characteristics of food insecure households, the proposed research is
important because it will identify factors that relate to transitions into food
insecurity and out of food insecurity. Understanding these predictors will
assist policy makers and practitioners in preventing the onset of food
insecurity, as well as alleviating food insecurity once it is experienced.