* 0825873
* Biomechanics of Actin Networks Regulated by Physical Mechanisms
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Jay Tang, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Robert Carter
* 08/31/2012
* USD 306,000.00

Biomechanics of Actin Network Regulated by Physical Mechanisms

This program seeks to characterize physical properties of an essential type of
protein filament, F-actin, and the network they form to mimic that in cells. The
research aims at defining and assessing the interactions between the negatively
charged protein filaments from two physical origins: orientational ordering and
solution electrostatics. Specifically, experiments are planned to quantitatively
determine the effects of phase transitions and weak electrostatic interactions
on the morphology, motion, and rheological properties of F-actin under
physiologically relevant concentrations. The planned research serves several
related missions. From a biological perspective, it promotes understanding of
the molecular properties and the physical principles that drive protein assembly
and interactions. The knowledge acquired may lead to biomedical applications by
manipulating properties related to protein aggregation. From the fundamental
physics perspective, various interactions that are of physical nature will be
quantitatively defined. The experimental data to be obtained will be crucial for
testing predictions from theoretical treatments and computer simulations that
are applicable to an important class of systems involving the hierarchical
assembly of filamentous macromolecules. From a material science perspective, the
insight acquired through this particular system of study is also useful for
interpreting similar physical properties in other systems involving solutions or
gels consisting of charged and semiflexible polymers. The program, therefore,
contributes a general strategy to the characterization of a range of soft
materials. Finally, the program provides training in multidisciplinary research
at the interface between the nanoscale mechanics and biological science. A
collaborative approach is taken to provide research opportunities to selected
science students and teachers from local schools.