* 0825547
* Collaboration in Mathematical Geosciences: Nonintegrable Hamiltonian Systems in Geophysical Fluid Dynamics
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* Huseyin Kocak, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2014
* USD 763,266.00

This study will apply results of Kolmogorov-Arnold-Moser (KAM) theory and the
structure of stable and unstable manifolds of generally nonstationary hyperbolic
points in nonsteady flows. These manifolds are often referred to as Lagrangian
coherent structures, or LCSs, in fluid dynamical applications. KAM theory and
manifold structure are intimately linked. Applications are: (i) the connections
between jets, transport barriers and potential vorticity barriers in the Earth?s
oceans and stratosphere; (ii) LCS climatology associated with the general
circulation of the ocean and the connection between these structures and the
predominant Eulerian features of the general circulation; (iii) biological
applications of oceanic LCSs including problems involving harmful algal blooms,
plankton patchiness, and understanding observed biogeographical boundaries; and
(iv) problems involving a dynamical systems approach to wave propagation in
random inhomogeneous media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will be potentially
beneficial to the society in several ways. First, it addresses transport of
properties in the ocean. Applications include transport of fish larvae, plankton
distributions including harmful algal blooms, toxins, and pollutants. Some of
these substances have potentially significant human health implications. The
transport of fish larvae is relevant to management of fishery stocks and the
design of marine reserves. Search and rescue operations at sea are also
intimately linked to ocean transport. Second, the findings on transport barriers
in the stratosphere will have implications for global warming because such
barriers strongly influence the distribution of greenhouse gases (including
ozone) in the atmosphere. Also, it is critically important to understand such
barriers, if considering geo-engineering measures to counteract greenhouse-
induced global warming. Third, there are potential industrial applications of
our work. In most industrial applications involving transport, the objective is
to efficiently mix two or more fluids.