* 0825532
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: European Union Accession and Wheat Diversity in Neoliberal Turkey
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Becky Mansfield, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Ezekiel Kalipeni
* 08/31/2010
* USD 12,000.00

The global implementation of market-oriented policies is remaking ecosystems and
livelihoods. Transformations are especially significant for agricultural
biodiversity, the part of biological diversity related to food and agriculture,
which is maintained in farmers' fields in the form of landraces. For almost
10,000 years farmers in Turkey have relied on and maintained wheat landraces to
adapt to socio-economic and environmental changes. However, extensive political
and economic transformations in Turkey since the late 1990s are beginning to
affect farmers in ways that threaten biodiversity of wheat. These
transformations derive from a general process of neoliberal reform, and
commitments to various international organizations, including the World Bank,
International Monetary Fund, World Trade Organization, and especially the
European Union. This doctoral dissertation research project explores the
linkages and articulation between neoliberalism, the state and agricultural
biodiversity. The project asks three primary questions: 1) What is the role of
the Turkish state in articulation of neoliberal agricultural policies and
conservation of agricultural biodiversity? 2) How will recent agricultural
policies affect access to and distribution of crop genetic resources? 3) How do
farmers respond to current legislative and agricultural policy changes,
especially to those that directly affect the grains and seed sector? The
investigators will identify the goals and the articulation of the state's
policies on agriculture through analysis of 1) documents on agriculture produced
by the state and by international organizations, and 2) semi-structured
interviews with state officials and international experts. The project will also
include local ethnographies at two separate research sites in Turkey, in
northwestern and central Anatolia, to understand responses of farmers and
farmers' organizations to changes in agriculture.

This project on how state projects of neoliberalism affect farmers' ability to
grow and maintain wheat landraces makes multiple contributions. In terms of
theoretical advances, the research brings together scholarship on the neoliberal
state and on agricultural biodiversity. In so doing, the project will broaden
and deepen understanding of the relationship between neoliberalism and nature.
In terms of practical advances, the results will offer theoretical, empirical
and practical insights that will provide important and timely data to state,
non-governmental, and farmers' organizations, which can be used for formulation
of in situ conservation policies. Turkey is the only country in the Middle East
region that as a collaborator of an international program develops disease-
resistant and high-yielding winter wheat varieties and distributes them
internationally. Therefore, understanding linkages between neoliberalism and
agricultural biodiversity in Turkey has potential implications for food security
and crop improvement, for not only Turkey and the Middle East, but the world in
general. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also
will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
independent research career.