* 0825572
* Femtosecond-Laser Processing of Hybrid Micro- and Nano-Structures in Glass
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Subhash Risbud, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2012
* USD 399,373.00

The research objective of this award is to use femtosecond (fs)-laser processing
to tailor-make nano-and microstructures in glass with a degree of precision and
resolution unattainable by, for example, conventional patterning and lithography
techniques. The approach is based on controlling the laser processing and
subsequent heat treatment conditions to independently control the creation of
structures on a range of length scales. Processing-structure relationships will
form the central theme of this research project. The effect of fs laser
processing variables on the bulk and interfacial structure of the beam-exposed
zones will be investigated. Experiments will involve characterization of the
structural modification using SEM and TEM as well as confocal Raman and
fluorescence microscopy. An optimized set of processing parameters will be
determined and used to fabricate merged three-dimensional architectures with
features on micrometer and nanometer scales.

Developing the fundamental understanding of this hybrid fabrication process will
lead to applications in optical device engineering (e.g. waveguides, couplers),
while also making a positive impact on the broader field of nanomanufacturing
(e.g. ablation machining, precision drilling) and microelectronics (e.g. ion-
implanted semiconductors, photomask repair). This project will be highly
synergistic in both the research and education components. On the one hand
research students will focus on experiments that will build the foundations of
fs-laser processing as a versatile tool to engineer micro and nano-scale
architectures in glasses. On the other, the project will produce highly trained
graduate students well prepared to work in a cross- disciplinary setting who
will have received training in optical materials processing and engineering as
well as sophisticated instrumentation, including ultrafast lasers and state-of-
the-art electron microscopy.

This project is jointly funded by the Materials Processing & Manufacturing (MPM)
Program, of the Civil, Mechanical, and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI) Division,
by the Thermal Transport Processes (TTP) Program, of the Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems (CBET) Division, and by
funding provided from the Directorate for Engineering (ENG) to support Inter
Divisional Research.