* 0825589
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: African Oil Palm Plantation Expansion and Geographies of Hope in the Ecuadorian Choco Region
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2010
* Julianne Hazlewood, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 07/31/2010
* USD 7,800.00

In the last decade, northern countries concerned with the relationship between
carbon emissions and climate change have committed to increased use of biofuels
and carbon trading. Policy frameworks such as the Kyoto Protocol's Clean
Development Mechanisms motivate investment in African oil palm plantation
expansion in the global South to 'store' carbon in these 'forests' and to
produce palm oil-based biodiesel to substitute for 'fossil' fuels. This research
examines the motivations and consequences of greatly intensified African oil
palm cultivation in the canton of San Lorenzo in the Chocó region of coastal
Ecuador. There, Afro-Ecuadorian and Indigenous peoples confront the effects of
extensive landscape change, as rainforest is replaced by monoculture oil palm
plantations. The project's research questions investigate intersections of the
following: 1) global climate change policies; 2) Ecuadorian state development
plans to increase African oil palm cultivation; 3) the environmental, social and
economic effects of African oil palm plantation expansion for local people; and
4), the strategies that the region's residents are mobilizing to secure their
livelihoods in the face of expanded cultivation of oil palms. These research
inquiries engage with political ecology literature and connect to scholarship on
geographies of hope and ethnodevelopment. They are also framed by the broad
climate change and alternative fuel policy literature. The methods employed
include archival research, policy analysis, interviews, and in depth qualitative
research in two differently impacted communities in San Lorenzo. The overall
research objective is to produce and analyze original empirical data that will
enable a better understanding of the following: one, how global climate change
mitigation efforts, together with national-level policies, are transforming
local landscapes; and two, how local communities are developing strategies to
counter aspects of these ongoing changes and are generating their own
geographies of hope. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project's significance
lies first, in its timeliness. Climate change, increasing production of
biofuels, and policy frameworks like the Kyoto Protocol are of critical
importance to scientists, policymakers, and human communities in general. For
those directly impacted, such as people living in the Chocó region of Ecuador,
these are very immediate, everyday concerns. This research, focused on two
impacted communities, contributes to an innovative social science agenda that
explores and highlights the myriad ways in which communities, groups, and
individuals respond to multi-scalar economic and political processes. It takes
seriously the experiences and perspectives of these historically marginalized
people. By focusing on how communities potentially take control of their own
lives in light of extensive palm plantation expansion, this work questions
fatalistic discourse on global capital and climate change. Overall, the research
will enable a rich, empirically solid contribution to deliberations over the
local costs and benefits of prevailing global climate change mitigation
strategies. &lt;br/&gt;