* 0825787
* Collaborative Research: Temporal evolution of submarine Mauna Loa provides insights into the nature of the Hawaiian plume.
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* John Rhodes, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 08/31/2011
* USD 145,321.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to document the growth and long-
term magmatic evolution of Mauna Loa volcano on the western, Loa side of the
Hawaii plume to reveal physical, chemical, and temporal variations across its
entirety. The long-term magmatic evolution of a volcano along the Kea trend of
the plume has been well-documented by the Hawaii Scientific Drilling Project
(HSDP) studies. There is no comparable long-term magmatic history of a volcano
on the Loa side of the plume. The P.I.s propose to obtain a magmatic record for
the Loa side from samples that have been collected along a 1.6 km thick sequence
of lavas exposed by a giant landslide scarp that dissects Mauna Loa's submarine
south-west rift zone. They request funding to undertake an intensive 40Ar/39Ar
investigation of lavas from these sections and adjacent dredge
hauls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This study includes
several national and international partnerships and the training of graduate and
undergraduate students. It also will improve understanding of the stability of
the flanks of Hawaii volcanoes. Failure of the flanks of volcanoes is thought to
pose a serious hazard to the population of the islands.