* 0825577
* Global Controls on the Carbon Isotopic Composition of  Carbonate Platforms: Unrelated to the Glocal Carbon Cycle
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2013
* Peter Swart, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 08/31/2013
* USD 307,895.00

The PI will test the hypothesis that over the past 25 yrs the variations in the
carbon isotopic composition of marginal platform carbonates are not related to
changes in the global carbon cycle as widely believed, but are instead related
to the variations in global sea-level fluctuations and reflect the relative
input of isotopically enriched carbonate produced in shallow water on the
adjacent platforms. This hypothesis will be tested by analyzing the ä13C in bulk
carbonate material sampled from DSDP and ODP sites cored adjacent to modern
carbonate platforms. PI?s preliminary data has shown that (i) the ä13C of bulk
carbonate sediments retrieved from such sequences cored at a number of sites
adjacent to carbonate platforms such as the Bahamas can be correlated with each
other, but that these variations are unrelated to changes in the global carbon
cycle, and (ii) similar change can be recognized at locations in the Maldives
and Australia over the past 10myrs. The PI will further investigate this
phenomenon, by (i) extending the study to additional sites, (ii) extending the
time range of samples back to 25 Ma, (iii) investigating the phenomenon over
high amplitude glacio-eustatic changes in sea level, (iv) adding variations in
the ä13C of organic material as a proxy of production from shallow-water
carbonate platforms, and (v) developing a model combining the notion that input
from shallow marine carbonate platforms alters the ä13C with changes in calcite-
aragonite seas, and the varying burial of organic material.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Recognition that other factors than the
carbon cycle can control the ä13C of carbonates will improve the understanding
of the history of the burial of organic carbon, but also lead to understanding
of how such records relate to the present anthropogenic experiment of increasing
the pCO2 of the atmosphere and transferring carbon from the organic to inorganic
reservoirs. The project will support a Ph.D. thesis as well as the interaction
of undergraduates, high-school students, and high-school teachers in the
geochemical laboratories at RSMAS.