* 0825574
* Research Trends in Novel Magnets for Electromagnetic Applications; Santorini, Greece; September 3-5, 2008
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2009
* George Hadjipanayis, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Alan Ardell
* 06/30/2009
* USD 10,000.00

TECHNICAL: The aim of the Workshop is to review the current status of high
technology magnets and their applications, to identify current and future needs
in high performance magnets and discuss/propose research initiatives that will
allow us to develop the next generation magnet materials with the desired
properties. The conference would bring together leading researchers on magnetic
materials, primarily from USA and Europe, to discuss the ?alarming downtrend? in
advanced magnets, and ways to reverse this trend. The workshop would provide a
5-7 years roadmap for high performance magnets, and promote collaboration
amongst universities, national labs, and industry. The workshop would discuss
fabrication, processing, and consolidation of high performance magnets. NON-
TECHNICAL: High performance magnets, both permanent magnets and soft magnetic
materials, are currently being used in many military and commercial
applications, and are considered to be essential and critical not only for DOD
but also for the US economy. The demand for advanced magnets is very high with a
growing number of applications demanding better properties (better performance
and higher operating temperatures and frequency) that are not available with the
current materials. However, research and development of these materials have
been in decline in recent years in United States and Europe despite their
importance and the fact that they have been instrumental for most of the modern
technology advances. The Workshop will focus on high performance hard and soft
magnets.