* 0825977
* Probing the Role of Surface Defects and Disorder on the Tribology of Nanoscopic Contacts
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* James Batteas, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Robert Carter
* 06/30/2012
* USD 217,075.00

&lt;br/&gt;It has been estimated that $100 billion is lost annually in the US
due to energy losses through mechanisms of adhesion, friction and wear. The
objective of the research supported by this award is to generate a clear
understanding of how defect nucleation (e.g. bond breaking and molecular packing
defects) at native and organosilane functionalized oxide surfaces, influences
friction, adhesion and wear of interfaces. Wear of materials such as silica and
alumina will be studied using atomic force microscopy (AFM). These studies will
enable us to directly follow defect nucleation on the atomic scale and develop
predictive models for wear. Additionally, as friction and adhesion between real
surfaces in sliding contact are dominated by the interactions of nanoscaled
surface asperities (ca. 10 50 nm), a measurement platform based on silica
nanoparticles of controlled size will be developed. The interactions of an AFM
tip with these well defined surfaces asperities will readily mimic the
conditions found at true asperity-asperity contacts, allowing for the influence
of asperity size on the efficacy of organosilane based lubricants under varying
environmental conditions to be determined. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful,
this work will guide the engineering of new molecular based lubricants and
enhance microdevice design capabilities. Students participating in the project
will gain broad education and training in areas critical for the continued
development of US technological competitiveness, including materials science,
engineering and surface chemistry. The work will be disseminated broadly through
presentations by the PI and students via informal public science talks,
conferences and departmental seminars. Training will be augmented by
collaborations with national labs such as NIST, providing students with a
diverse educational experience. Aspects of the work will also be incorporated as
demonstrations for elementary school students and in a graduate level
instrumental methods boot camp for chemistry, materials science and engineering
students.