* 0825308
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Testing Differences: The Transfer and Transformation of HIV Testing from the West to Sub-Saharan Africa
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Mark Regnerus, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2009
* USD 7,500.00

PI: Mark Regnerus&lt;br/&gt;Co-PI: Nicole Angotti&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title:
Doctoral Dissertation Research: Testing Differences: Health Screening Across
Countries&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Utilizing
historical and field research methods, this dissertation addresses two research
questions: (1) How did particular Western norms, in this case HIV testing
practices, become a global standard?; and (2) Have HIV testing practices been
transformed from their Western design in the process of their cultural diffusion
in sub-Saharan Africa, and if so, by whom and in what ways? The site of the
African case study for this project is Malawi: a poor, largely rural, country of
sub-Saharan Africa, where HIV prevalence is eighth highest in the world. This
research addresses questions with broad significance for social science and
global health policy. First, while much research has documented that the
institutionalization of global norms does occur, little research has addressed
how it occurs. Second, most studies of HIV testing have evaluated it solely in
terms of its efficacy as a public health intervention. No research, however, has
focused on the multiple interpretations of HIV testing norms from among the
various institutional and social actors who inform the HIV testing encounter
(international and national policy makers, HIV health providers, and the clients
they serve), differences that invariably affect the way in which testing is
provided. Findings from this research will be disseminated to the academic
community via publications and professional conferences, as well as to Malawian
health officials and providers, and the local, national and international
organizations that assist them.