* 0825306
* Economic optimization of chemical processes with feedback control
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* James Rawlings, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 07/31/2011
* USD 324,937.00

James Rawlings &lt;br/&gt;0828306&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current paradigm in
advanced process control systems is to decompose a plant's economic optimization
into two levels. The first level performs a steady-state optimization. This
level is sometimes referred to as real-time optimization or RTO. The RTO uses a
steady-state model and optimizes the plant's steady-state operating point based
on current operating costs, raw material costs, and product prices. The RTO
determines the economically optimal plant operating conditions (setpoints) and
sends these setpoints to the second level, which performs a dynamic
optimization. The dynamic optimization is usually referred to as the advanced
control system. Almost all advanced process control systems use some form of
model predictive control or MPC. The MPC uses a dynamic model and regulates the
plant dynamic behavior to meet the setpoints determined by the
RTO.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, we will explore the PI will depart
from this paradigm for two reasons:&lt;br/&gt;1. The steady-state model and the
dynamic model used by the two levels often conflict. Methods to resolve
conflicts between the steady-state models and dynamic models require significant
maintenance and have not met with industrial acceptance and widespread
use.&lt;br/&gt;2. The time-scale separation between the two levels is
shrinking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop a new MPC
regulation/estimation problem formulation that optimizes dynamic economic
performance in real time. This new formulation changes the classical setpoint
regulation approach that has been used in this layer of the chemical process
plant automation systems. Because of the increasing speed and memory, and
decreasing cost of computational hardware, one is able to address for the first
time the dynamic economic optimization of industrially relevant process models
in real time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit in lies in the development of new systems theory, to
complement and extend MPC theory of constrained systems. The approach admits
unbounded cost functions and establishes the asymptotic stability (convergence)
of the closed-loop system to the optimal steady state under this new type of
feedback control. This extensions will enable model predictive control to
address dynamic optimization of process economics subject to settling at the
optimally constrained steady state. The theory will be implemented in the high-
level, freely available computational language Octave, thus enabling industrial
practitioners to evaluate the new theory with low costs and technical risks
associated with software installation, maintenance, and future
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project offers an improvement for optimizing the economic performance of large
scale manufacturing in the process industries. Rather than optimizing distance
from an optimal steady state, the method enables direct, dynamic optimization of
the process economics. The systems theory and algorithms developed are
completely general and can be applied to any dynamic manufacturing process
instrumented with sensors and actuators. Using feedback control to directly
optimize economic performance rather than simply maintaining steady operation
has broad implications across all automated manufacturing sectors of the
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;