* 0825788
* Collaborative Research: Chemical, pressure, temperature, and flow constraints on hydrologic horizons in the Costa Rica Subduction zone, ODP Sites 1253 and 1255
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Charles Wheat, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Brian Midson
* 08/31/2011
* USD 170,093.00

During Leg 205 of the Ocean Drilling Program (ODP) two boreholes were drilled
into active hydrologic formations on the Costa Rica margin west of the Nicoya
Peninsula. One borehole penetrated through the overriding plate into the
décollement at ODP Site 1255. The other borehole penetrated through the
subducting sediment section and plate into permeable igneous basement at ODP
Site 1253. These two boreholes were sealed and instrumented with a borehole
observatory (CORK), allowing pressure, temperature, fluid flow velocity, and
fluid chemical composition to be measured within the formation. The 1.5-yr
pressure and two-year temperature, fluid velocity, and fluid chemical
composition records collected to date have provided a basic knowledge of
formation properties, although fluids within the boreholes had yet to reach
steady state with the surrounding formations. The data also provide evidence
that tectonic forcing related to subduction results in measurable transients in
pressure, temperature, fluid velocity, and fluid composition within the
décollement. While the initial data provide a baseline for approaching several
important scientific and technical questions, they have raised new key questions
that will be addressed from additional continuous borehole data. The
investigators will a 6-day submersible operation to retrieve instruments and
stored data that will provide a continuous record of formation temperature,
pressure, fluid flow rate, and chemical composition for an additional five
years, from the time of the last visit in 2004 to 2009. This project will result
in an extremely valuable long-term synchronous record of hydrologic,
geochemical, and geodynamic activity at this subduction zone, and establish a
technical and scientific foundation for future borehole studies in a broad range
of tectonically and hydrologically active settings.