* 0825154
* Quantifying and Predicting Microscale Patchiness of Plankton
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Peter Franks, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 07/31/2012
* USD 365,580.00

Over the past decade the PI of this project has developed planar laser imaging
fluorometery (PLIF) systems that provide two-dimensional images of plankton,
undisturbed, in situ. He has collected over 10 Tb of data containing vertical
profiles of the number, size, and spatial distribution of phytoplankton,
zooplankton, and aggregates in the ocean off Southern California. These images
are complemented by extensive coincident auxiliary measurements of physical and
chemical properties of the environment. This project will use the archived data
to quantify the spatial distribution patterns of individual plankters spanning
scales from 95 um to 55 m in situ, and relate those distributions to the
underlying turbulent structures, density gradients, vertical shear, and chemical
gradients. The analyses will allow us to resolve the scales and dynamics that
govern the change in plankton distributions from random at small scales to
persistent gradients and layers at larger scales, as well as the relationship of
particle concentrations to turbulent structures (vorticity and strain). These
analyses will yield a more quantitative understanding of the physical-chemical-
biological interactions that structure planktonic communities, the foraging
environment for zooplankton, and the processes controlling local diversity of
the plankton community. Combining the data analyses with models of the
underlying dynamics will enhance our ability to predict the spatial and temporal
patchiness of planktonic distributions, and increase our understanding of the
factors influencing trophic interactions and biogeochemical cycling in the
marine environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;This project
will advance discovery and understanding while promoting teaching and learning
by incorporating elements of the proposed research into high-school and graduate
courses. The PI and graduate student will mentor REU students, and involve them
in the data analyses. The proposed work will form the core of the PhD thesis of
an interdisciplinary female graduate student. They will broaden the
participation of underrepresented groups by teaching a summer course through to
underrepresented high-school students, and by mentoring and officiating for the
National Ocean Sciences Bowl. They will enhance research infrastructure by
adding value to data collected in collaboration with academia, industry and
international partners, representing multiple scientific disciplines. They will
broadly disseminate our results in conference presentations at and publications,
as well as work with journalists and institutional public information officers.
Benefits to society will be realized through improved understanding of important
of processes in the marine ecosystem, ultimately yielding greater understanding
of oceanic response to climate change. Indeed, the quantification of the
importance of microscale patches to ecosystem functioning and biogeochemical
fluxes may help us understand their role in regulating climate and moderating
anthropogenic perturbations.