* 0825004
* Approximate Dynamic Programming for Perishable Asset Management with Applications in Dynamic Pricing, Capacity Allocation and Revenue Management
* NONE,NONE
* 12/01/2008,11/30/2013
* Huseyin Topaloglu, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Edwin Romeijn
* 11/30/2013
* USD 320,942.00

Many industries face the problem of managing multiple types of perishable
physical assets in an environment where the demand for the assets is random and
the different assets interact with each other. Examples are many. Fashion good
retailers make stocking decisions for clothing items that act as substitutes.
Airlines price millions of itinerary products that use the aircraft capacities
over the same airline network. Health clinics allocate appointment and operating
room slots to the patients with different priorities. Despite the recurrent
nature of these asset management problems, the optimization models and
algorithms for simultaneously managing the inventories of multiple perishable
assets are largely limited to either deterministic approaches that ignore the
uncertainty altogether or static approaches that ignore the evolution of the
system over time. This grant provides funding for the development of
sophisticated models and algorithms for large-scale perishable asset management
problems that arise in a variety of settings.

The results of this research will be particularly useful for pricing, capacity
allocation, product assembly and revenue management problems. The goal is to
develop optimization models and algorithms that (i) appropriately capture the
randomness in the system, (ii) scale easily to handle realistic problem sizes,
(iii) apply independent of the particular application setting, (iv) provide
performance guarantees, and (v) make reasonable assumptions about data
availability. The plan is to demonstrate that asset management problems share
common features and one can develop a unified approach for them. The course
offerings on decision-making under uncertainty will significantly benefit from
this research. Management simulation games, which put the students in command of
a realistic asset management scenario, will be programmed and incorporated into
the courses. High school and undergraduate students will gain early research
experience. Data sets for pricing and revenue management problems will be
developed and made available to the research community.