* 0825095
* A sulfur hexafluoride section in the North Pacific Ocean:  Application of a dual tracer approach
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2013
* Rolf Sonnerup, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 06/30/2013
* USD 282,137.00

The North Pacific Ocean plays an important role in the uptake and storage of
anthropogenic CO2. According to past research using chemical tracers, the North
Pacific Ocean has been identified as a critical region where climate variability
is causing changes in oceanic CO2 ventilation rates. Chemical tracers used in
previous research, have resulted in data describing only a portion of CO2
transit timescales and were strongly affected by oceanic mixing. To enhance the
use of tracer results, two ocean chemists from the University of Washington plan
to utilize dual chemical tracers to provide more accurate determinations of
thermocline ventilation, oxygen utilization, and anthropogenic CO2 uptake rates.
By combining the use of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and sulfur hexafluoride (SF6)
as the tracers in a dual tracer approach, the results from this research would
refine CO2 transit time distributions (TTD) and implicitly account for ocean
mixing while calculating more accurate CO2 ventilation rates. The estimations of
these acidification and ventilation rates are of significance to the
understanding of the implications of global climate change including
anthropogenic CO2 uptake by the oceans, ocean acidification, biological export
rates, and decadal climate variability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As regards broader
impacts, one graduate student would be supported and trained as part of this
project. One undergraduate student would participate in the cruise, learn how to
measure trace gases, and the data would provide the basis for his/her
undergraduate research project. &lt;br/&gt;