* 0825020
* An Evaluation of Postdepositional Controls on the Preservation of DNA in Marine Sediments
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Marco Coolen, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2012
* USD 592,093.00

Recent studies have demonstrated that preserved phytoplankton-derived DNA
suitable for molecular biological analysis can be recovered from anoxic
lacustrine and marine sediments. This is an extremely exciting finding because
it opens up the possibility for the reconstruction of past water column
microbial community structure at the species and even strain level. This new
field of "sedimentary paleogenomics" may offer an unprecedented window into past
changes in the ocean primary productivity and its link to other factors, notably
climate. It also provides an important means to validate and aid in the
interpretation of the more traditional lipid biomarker-based paleo-proxies.
However, the extent to which DNA is preserved under different marine settings,
the factors that influence the survival of DNA, the fidelity of the resulting
sedimentary records, and relationships to lipid-based molecular stratigraphic
records, remain largely unknown. These issues, which must be resolved before
paleo-DNA records can be broadly applied in paleoecological and
paleoenvironmental studies, lie at the heart of this proposal.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, researchers at the Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution will (i) analyze the early post-depositional fate of
DNA from key phytoplankton members together with their corresponding lipid
biomarkers within sediments from various anoxic marine settings of great
paleoceanographic interest. (ii) Determine the main sedimentary conditions that
are conducive to the long-term preservation of the phytoplankton DNA in marine
sediments. Specifically, they will: (a) perform a quantitative down-core
intercomparison between lipids and DNA derived from the same precursor organisms
as a measure for the level of preservation under in situ depositional
conditions; (b) perform laboratory degradation experiments to study the early
fate of phytoplankton DNA vs. lipids under sedimentary sulfate-reducing
conditions; and ( c) investigate the sorption kinetics of DNA on marine sediment
matrices and compare the preservation potential of sorbed DNA of different
phytoplankton classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. The project will
provide support for a graduate student and an undergraduate Summer Student
Fellow (SSF). This cross-disciplinary project will introduce the graduate
student and the SSF to state-of-the-art microbiological and organic geochemical
methods. The WHOI SSF program has significantly broadened participation of
underrepresented groups (women, minorities, international students) in research.
Since sedimentary paleogenomics, and more broadly paleogenomics are relatively
new subjects, the researchers will make general information about the employment
of DNA in paleoecology and paleoclimatology available to secondary science
teachers through the established MBL/NASA Astrobiology website,
(http://www.mbl.edu/microscope). This website is a central educational
repository for students and teachers interested in astrobiology and microbial
diversity.