* 0825438
* GOALI: Modeling Product Variety Induced Manufacturing Complexity for Assembly System Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2008,05/31/2013
* S. Jack Hu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 05/31/2013
* USD 349,767.00

This objective of this award is to develop mathematical models on product
variety induced manufacturing complexity in multi-stage, mixed model assembly
systems and gain insights on the impact of such complexity on system
performance. This research will be pursued collaboratively by faculty and
students at the University of Michigan and research engineering staff at General
Motors R &amp; D Manufacturing Systems Laboratory with active participation from
GM vehicle assembly plants. Specifically, multi-stage models will be developed
to characterize the propagation of complexity by considering the choice
complexity induced at each station and the transferred complexity from the up-
stream stations. Bayesian network (BN) models will be developed to quantify the
impact of the complexity on the system performance, including quality and
operator productivity. When validated, the developed complexity models will be
applied to improve assembly system design and synthesize guidelines for managing
complexity in manufacturing system development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Product
variety induced manufacturing complexity is a critical problem faced by all
manufacturers in today?s competitive environment as manufacturers are developing
customized products to respond to individual needs. As such, the proposed
research will have broad potential benefits in that the developed models,
algorithms, and guidelines will be able to assist manufacturing system designers
in managing complexity when designing manufacturing systems, which will result
in improved operator and system performance. Students will serve as interns at
GM, thus directly assisting in the transfer of technology. Research results will
also be developed into modules for a graduate course in ?Assembly Modeling for
Design and Manufacturing?, offered globally through the University of Michigan
technology enhanced learning program.&lt;br/&gt;