* 0825538
* RUI: Photobiogeochemistry of resuspended sediments in coastal environments:  Impacts on organic matter and trace metal cycling
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Robert Kieber, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2012
* USD 582,468.00

Estuarine and riverine sediments are naturally resuspended and mobilized by
wind, waves, and water currents. In typically shallow estuaries and coastal
waters, sediment-water interactions can significantly impact a variety of
important biogeochemical processes such as trace metal mobilization, nutrient
and organic matter cycling, and release of anthropogenic contaminants. While
earlier studies have demonstrated the importance of dark release from
resuspended estuarine sediments, they have not addressed the potentially more
significant role that photochemical transformations play in the mobilization of
organic matter and metals from these sediments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientists
from the University of North Carolina, Wilmington plan to carry out a series of
field and laboratory experiments to examine the mechanisms of
phototransformations and the impacts they have on the mobilization of organic
nitrogen, organic carbon, copper (Cu), and lead (Pb) from resuspended sediments
in two organic-rich coastal plain estuaries, one of which is impacted by
anthropogenic activities. Specifically, the study plans to address the following
questions: (1) How much dissolved organic nitrogen (DON), dissolved organic
carbon (DOC), Cu, and Pb are produced upon photolysis of resuspended estuarine
sediments and how do the photochemical fluxes vary seasonally and by location?;
(2) What is the bioavailability of the DON and DOC produced and how does that
vary by season and location?; (3) How is the photoreactivity of resuspended
sediments impacted by the inorganic and organic composition of the source
material and irradiation wavelength?; and (4) How do fluxes of DON, DOC, Cu, and
Pb change as the dominant organic matter remineralization processes (sulfate
reduction vs. methanogenesis) in the resuspended material change?. Results from
this research addresses fundamentally important and globally significant
questions because it considers how fluxes of organics and metals respond during
changes in salinity, such as those that could occur in rising sea levels. In
addition, the work would provide information regarding the role of light-induced
reactions on the distributions and speciation of organic nitrogen, organic
carbon, and trace metals in estuarine systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educational
impacts associated with this project include support and training for a postdoc,
as well as graduate, undergraduate, and high school students. In addition, it is
anticipated that a high school teacher would participate in the study during the
summer months.