* 0825373
* Understanding the Structure and Durability of Nano-Anatase TiO2 Cement-Based Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2012
* Kimberly Kurtis, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 06/30/2012
* USD 324,535.00

Ordinary construction materials, including concrete, can now be made
photocatalytically active by the introduction of nanocrystalline titanium
dioxide (TiO2), particularly in the tetragonal anatase form. In the presence of
water, oxygen, and ultraviolet or near-ultraviolet light, a series of reactions
occurs on the TiO2 surface, imparting self-cleaning, biocidal, and smog-abating
qualities to the surfaces of the materials which contain it. In particular, the
potential for passive smog-abatement by photocatalysis has attracted much
attention. This research will characterize the long-term compatibility between
photocatalytically active materials and their cement-based substrates. A
comprehensive research plan, which relies upon microchemical analysis and
nano/micro-scale and bulk measures of mechanical properties (e.g.,
nanoindentation, microhardness, compressive strength), will be used to better
understand the initial material structure and properties, characterize the
influence of photocatalysis on surface and bulk properties, and describe the
influence of material variables and environmental parameters on performance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Verification of, and potential improvements to, the long-
term performance of cement-based construction materials with smog-abating
capabilities is an intrinsic broader impact of this research. Additional impact
will be made through the mentoring and training of a diverse group of graduate
and undergraduate researchers in a multi-disciplinary research environment, the
publication of research findings, and by the research team?s participation in
international research conferences. Finally, the research team will develop
high-school appropriate tutorials on the topic of photocatalytic construction
materials and will seek to make these publicly available through existing web
portals at Georgia Tech.&lt;br/&gt;