* 0825488
* Predicting the Torsional Dynamics of DNA
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Noel Perkins, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 07/31/2012
* USD 360,000.00

While the double-helical form of DNA is well-known, fundamental questions remain
concerning how its biological functions are influenced by its structure. By
structure, we refer to the time-dependent shape and stress of this amazingly
long and flexible biopolymer. Understanding DNA structure-function relations
rests on quantifying the torsional dynamics of the molecule as torsion is
implicated in all major DNA functions including compaction, transcription,
replication, gene regulation, gene repair, etc. Our project addresses this need
by proposing new experimental and theoretical methods for revealing the
torsional dynamics of DNA at the single molecule level. In particular, we
introduce a novel detection method employing a magnetic, optically modulated
bead (mag-MOON) to measure the dynamic twisting of DNA molecules tethered to
these beads. Simultaneously, we extend a computational rod model describing the
coupled nonlinear dynamics of the tethered DNA-bead system that enables model
validation from the companion single-molecule DNA
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our research on DNA torsional dynamics has
broader implications for the medical and physical sciences. Consider that
specific anti-cancer drugs (e.g., Topotecan) target proteins (e.g.,
Topoisomerase I) that relieve the build up of torsional stress and supercoils
during DNA replication. By essentially blocking the torsional relaxation of DNA,
these drugs inhibit the division (hence propagation) of diseased cells.
Increasing the efficacy of these chemotherapeutic drugs rests on first
understanding their action on torsionally-stressed DNA. We assert that such
understanding may ultimately grow from fundamental knowledge of the torsional
mechanics of DNA as achieved through systematic experimental/theoretical
efforts. Our experiments also introduce a novel molecular ?twist detector? in
the form of a mag-MOON bead. While clearly advantageous for single-molecule DNA
studies, this novel technique may translate to uses in other biomolecular
systems or nano-scale devices where molecular rotation plays a major role (e.g.,
molecular motor proteins, molecular wheels, rotaxanes, bacterial flagella, ATP
synthase, RecA). &lt;br/&gt;