* 0825846
* Fucoid inducible defenses: the causes and consequences of intraspecific variation
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2008,05/31/2010
* Jeremy Long, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* David L. Garrison
* 05/31/2010
* USD 279,843.00

Numerous prey species exhibit inducible changes in traits such as morphology and
chemistry in response to consumers. Such inducible defenses are thought to be
adaptive because they reduce the vulnerability of the responding species to
consumption. Although we appreciate the taxonomic ubiquity of inducible
defenses, we have a poor sense of the variation in inducible defenses within a
species. This is problematic because interactions involving the same prey-
consumer species pair often occur over broad geographic ranges and the dynamics
of these interactions may strongly depend on the local environmental context.
Attention to this issue is critical if we are to better understand the role that
inducible defenses play in structuring natural communities.

This project examines large-scale variation in the inducible defenses of two
seaweeds (Ascophyllum nodosum, Fucus vesiculosus) in response to grazer cues
from two herbivorous snails (Littorina littorea, Littorina obtusata) that are
common on the rocky intertidal shores of the Gulf of Maine. Both seaweeds
provide essential thermal buffering for the intertidal community during low
tides and both of their primary consumers play a key role in rocky shore
community dynamics. Hence, by focusing on these seaweed-herbivore interactions,
the investigators expect to obtain considerable insight into the role that
inducible defenses have in structuring rocky shore communities and how this role
may vary geographically. Indeed, their previous work with Gulf of Maine seaweed
populations, and that of others on European populations, suggests that there are
considerable differences in the capacity of these seaweeds to exhibit inducible
defenses. This project will combine laboratory and field approaches to address
the following questions: 1. Do seaweeds display geographic variation in
inducible defenses in response to herbivores? 2. Does the degree of seaweed
inducible defense correlate with overall grazing intensity or grazing
variability? 3. How are the costs and benefits of seaweed inducible defenses
shaped by herbivore tolerance?

The research will make significant novel intellectual contributions to community
ecology and the evolutionary ecology of inducible defenses by exploring the
nature of seaweed-herbivore interactions across an unusually broad spatial
scale.

This project will significantly enhance the research and educational
opportunities of undergraduate, and junior high school students. Graduate
students will participate directly in all aspects of this research, including
experimental maintenance, data analysis, and manuscript development. The
principal investigators will continue a strong commitment to undergraduate
education by having undergraduate students (via the Three Seas Program assist
with the execution of our experiments. The project will also involve junior high
students in the research by interacting with the Marine Science Center's
Outreach Program. This program targets Boston Public Schools where the majority
of students are from under-represented groups. In collaboration with the
Outreach Program, the investigators will design new lesson plans that align with
the Massachusetts Life Science Standards. By developing lesson plans with
outreach, the investigators have the ability to educate a broad and diverse
group of students. Interactions with Outreach students will further enhance
their enthusiasm for marine science as well as the teaching and research
experience offered by the MSC's Outreach Program.