* 0825741
* Using the Peptide Hormone Conopressin to Characterize a Reproductive Central Pattern Generator
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* William Kristan, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 08/31/2010
* USD 155,543.00

Hormones have strong effects on behavior. The sex hormones estrogen and
testosterone, for example, are responsible for major differences in the
behaviors of men and women. The Kristan laboratory studies how hormones initiate
and control behavior. To get a precise understanding of these mechanisms, they
work with an animal, the medicinal leech, which produces a variety of complex
behaviors with a relatively simple nervous system. Studying the control of
swimming, crawling, and feeding, they have elucidated how leeches produce
behaviors and choose among them. Understanding gained from these studies has
informed experiments on more complex animals, including humans, which employ the
same mechanisms to decide among possible behavioral responses. The Kristan group
will use the same electrophysiological, pharmacological, and behavioral
techniques that have proven so successful for them in understanding behavioral
choice to study the cellular basis for behavioral modulation by hormones. They
will determine how an analog of vasopressin causes courtship, copulation, and
egg deposition in medicinal leeches. Vasopressin is a peptide hormone that is
broadly distributed across the animal kingdom. All animals, from snails to
humans, use vasopressin to induce and modify reproductive and parenting
behaviors. Treating leeches with a homologue of vasopression reliably elicits
leech reproductive behavior. The Kristan group will characterize activity in the
nervous system before and during conopressin treatment. Their studies will show
how this hormone causes individually identified neurons to change their activity
and induces the animal to produce the constellation of behaviors that are
essential for successful reproduction and, thereby, the continuation of the
species. This project, from its beginning, has been conducted primarily by
undergraduates, and a major component of the project will continue to give these
students an opportunity to take part in cutting-edge research.