* 0825630
* Collaborative Research: Investigating Bacteria-Surface Interactions by Surface Engineering and Mathematical Modeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2008,09/30/2008
* Qi Wang, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 09/30/2008
* USD 99,999.00

Bacterial biofilms are ubiquitous highly hydrated structures with bacterial
cells embedded in a secreted polysaccharide matrix and attached to a surface. It
is well documented that biofilm cells are up to 1000 times more tolerant to
antibiotics and disinfectants compared to their free-swimming counterparts.
Consequently, deleterious biofilms cause serious problems in both industrial
(persistent biofouling) and medical (chronic infections) settings. The research
objective of this award is to investigate bacteria-surface and biofilm-flow
interactions using integrated experimental approaches and mathematical modeling.
Surfaces will be engineered with self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) presenting
different functional groups to guide biofilm formation in different patterns.
The surface roughness and flow condition will also be rigorously controlled. The
experimental study in such well-defined systems will be integrated with
mathematical modeling to obtain critical information about biofilm formation
mechanism. These data will help develop new methods to control bacterial
adhesion and biofilm formation, probe biofilm growth dynamics in a flow field,
and investigate the roles of some important genes in biofilm formation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research can help address some important challenges
such as prevention of persistent biofouling and corrosion in industrial
settings, as well as control of medical device-associated infections in health
care. The outcome of this study will improve our understanding of biofilm
formation and help design better antifouling surfaces. This project will also
provide a good opportunity to train students across multiple disciplines, and to
recruit and retain young talents (especially the underrepresented groups) in
science and engineering careers. The PIs will also create opportunities to get
high school students and teachers involved in biofilm-related scientific
activities. &lt;br/&gt;