* 0825550
* Eddy Mean Flow Interactions in the Kuroshio Extension
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Steven Jayne, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2009
* USD 61,181.00

&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study was motivated by the
Kuroshio Extension System Study (KESS), which provides an unprecedented suite of
observations uniquely suited to study the jet, its eddy variability, and their
interactions. The goals of the study are to characterize eddy-mean flow
interactions in the Kuroshio Extension (KE) from the KESS and supporting
observations, to examine eddy-mean flow interactions in idealized configurations
relevant to WBC jet extension systems, and finally to test the relevance of the
theoretical understanding derived from these idealized studies to the oceanic
system. This work WILL result in new insights into a mechanism by which eddies
from a localized forcing can drive recirculation gyres of a strength consistent
with the deep recirculation velocities observed in the KE and Gulf Stream, as
well as support for the hypothesis that the recirculation associated with these
jet systems are, at least partially, eddy-driven. In addition, new insights will
be gained into what may determine the properties of the mean jet and its
recirculation as they evolve downstream as a consequence of the nonlinear
dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Eddy energies are orders of magnitude larger
along the mean paths of WBC jets compared to most other regions of the ocean and
we expect eddy variability to play an important role in the dynamics of these
systems. The KESS data set provides a unique opportunity to extend our present
understanding of the nature and importance of this role, in particular, allowing
us to understand how theories about eddy-mean flow interaction in unstable jets
apply to the actual ocean. One anticipated result of this research is improved
understanding of the processes that govern the strength and structure of the
recirculation gyres that flank WBC jets. Recirculation gyres fundamentally alter
the dynamical structure of the jet and add significantly to the net transport of
these currents. They also are important as the sites of subtropical mode water
formation. This work will test the hypothesis that these recirculation zones are
eddy-driven and seek to determine the relative importance of barotropic and
baroclinic instability in this process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this
work promise an improved understanding of WBC jets, as eddy-mean flow
interactions in these systems are likely critical to their overall dynamics.
WBCs are one of the foremost components in global heat transport and thus in
regulating the global climate. As such, the lessons learned here will have
important application to the evaluation of realistic ocean general circulation
models required for climate studies, and also to the design of an efficient and
effective monitoring strategy in the KE region for eventual achievement of
CLIVAR goals. This work likely has implications for ocean modeling. It may lead
to an improved understanding of the impact and importance of having various eddy
processes resolved in these systems. The insights into the dynamical mechanisms
that are sought may suggest suitable parameterizations for the effects of
unresolved eddies. &lt;br/&gt;