* 0825686
* IGMS: Dynamic Models in Synthetic Biology
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2010
* Ruth Williams, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 02/28/2010
* USD 100,000.00

Synthetic biology is an emerging field lying at the interface of engineering,
science and mathematics. It is concerned with the design, construction and
analysis of novel biological systems, with the ultimate goal of enabling
beneficial applications in health, materials and energy. One approach to
synthetic biology begins with understanding basic components and systematically
increasing complexity, one step at a time, first understanding simpler networks
before integrating that knowledge into understanding the functioning of more
complex ones. A key element of this approach is the development of mathematical
models that can be used in analysing and predicting the dynamic behavior of
fundamental components, as well as in understanding how components interact when
combined in a more complex system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI, Dr. Ruth
Williams, a Professor in the Mathematics Department at the University of
California, San Diego, has extensive experience with mathematical analysis and
control of complex stochastic network models arising in non-biological
applications such as manufacturing, computer science and telecommunications.
Under the IGMS grant, the PI will spend a year visiting the Systems Biodynamics
Lab in the Bioengineering Department at UCSD. Her hosts will be the leaders of
the lab, Drs. Jeff Hasty and Lev Tsimring. Being physically based in the Systems
Biodynamics Lab will allow the PI to interact on a day-to-day basis with
researchers there. Especially important in this regard will be the opportunity
to interact with those performing experiments, so that mathematical models and
associated analyses can be informed by the results of experiments and conversely
the design of experiments can be informed by the analysis of mathematical
models. The IGMS grant will enable the PI to acquire the new knowledge and
experience to expand her research to applications in synthetic biology. In
particular, it will enable her to participate in interdisciplinary research in
synthetic biology, to mentor undergraduate and graduate students in synthetic
biology, and to direct mathematics Ph.D. students on projects with applications
in synthetic biology.