* 0825229
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Correlates and Consequences of Social Participation Across the Life Course
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2009
* Jane Piliavin, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* marie cornwall
* 07/31/2009
* USD 7,456.00

PI and Co-PI: Jane Allyn Piliavin and Erica Siegl, University of Wisconsin-
Madison

Doctoral Dissertation Research: Correlates and Consequences of Social
Participation Across the Life Course

Abstract

This research project will examine patterns of social participation and their
relationship to outcomes in the areas of education, civic engagement and health.
The investigators ask the following questions: how long do high school
activities influence events in adulthood? How is the influence carried out? Do
different types of participation produce different effects? Does participation
affect everyone in the same ways? The investigators will apply a novel set of
longitudinal panel data, the Wisconsin Longitudinal Study (WLS), to address
these questions. The WLS data provide measures of social participation in high
school, midlife and early retirement. The investigators will collect additional
data for the sub-sample of the WLS participants (about 15%) who attended college
in or near Wisconsin. These data will add significantly to the value of the
proposed research, by informing questions about continuity of participation and
mechanisms for explaining observed effects. Data collection activities will
engage a team of graduate and undergraduate students and provide opportunities
for a hands-on introduction to research. All new data collected using funds from
this grant will eventually become available to other researchers through the
public collection of data housed by the Wisconsin Longitudinal Study. Results
from the analyses will be disseminated through conference papers, academic
publications and reports made to WLS participations. Social participation holds
unique potential for addressing socioeconomic inequalities and health
disparities because social participation levels are more easily changed than
other influential factors, such as family background or occupational status.
Therefore, understanding direct and indirect relationships with social
participation supports efforts to uncover solutions for pressing issues of
health and status inequalities. This study furthers such an agenda by
considering the interrelationships between health, socioeconomic status, and
social participation using novel panel data from the Wisconsin Longitudinal
Study.