* 0825192
* Effects of Ocean Acidification on Nutrient Availability and Requirements in Phytoplankton
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2013
* Francois Morel, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 07/31/2013
* USD 1,095,993.00

The most certain effect on the ocean of the ongoing build up of atmospheric CO2
is an increase in the CO2 concentration, dissolved CO2 activity ([CO2]), and a
decrease in the pH of surface waters. This "acidification" will likely affect
the availability of nutrients to phytoplankton as well as the physiology of the
organisms. Thus, from a biological point of view, the chemical changes in ocean
chemistry brought about by the CO2 increase will interact with the physical
changes, which are expected to modify the input of nutrients to the surface. The
net effect on primary production and the export of organic matter to the deep
represents a potential feedback to the increase in atmospheric
CO2.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, researchers at Princeton University
will quantify the effects of the ongoing increase in [CO2] and the decrease in
pH in surface seawater on the requirements and availability of macro- and micro-
nutrients in marine phytoplankton, and the resulting changes in the growth and
elemental composition of the organisms. Based on what we know of the physiology
of phytoplankton and some preliminary data, an increase in [CO2] likely to
increase the efficiency with which the organisms utilize Fe and N, two of the
principal limiting nutrients in the ocean. A decrease in pH is likely to change
the availability of essential trace metals, particularly Fe, by changing their
chemical speciation in the medium, and the uptake of macro-nutrients from
organic sources by decreasing the activity of extracellular
enzymes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To unravel the complex effects of ocean
acidification on phytoplankton they will pursue initially three avenues of
research based on three distinct hypotheses: 1) acidification lowers the rate of
Fe uptake by phytoplankton cells and simultaneously increases their Fe use
efficiency (the former because of low pH, the latter because of high [CO2]); 2)
acidification increases the C:N ratio of N-limited phytoplankton because of an
increase in N use efficiency and the storage of C-rich compounds; and 3)
acidification decreases the ability of phytoplankton to use organic sources of P
because of a decrease in the specific activity of alkaline phosphatase and in Zn
availability for synthesis of the enzyme. The plan of work consists of mutually
reinforcing laboratory and field experiments to test the various hypotheses and
to elucidate the underlying biochemical mechanism so that the results can be
extrapolated. Further work will depend on initial results.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project addresses an issue of great
concern to society and the results of the research are thus expected to generate
wide interest. Beyond the usual research and educational activities that are
naturally embedded in such a project, a specific goal is to enhance scientific
understanding and education more broadly within and outside the scientific
community. Through multiple collaborations, this project will serve to bridge
different communities interested in diverse aspects of the interactions between
CO2 and marine phytoplankton-- from modelers and seagoing oceanographers to
algal physiologists and biochemists. The topic of this project should also be
effective for outreach activities designed to improve the education of science
school teachers and provide them with material to enhance the effectiveness of
their teaching. An internship program will provide hands-on research experience
to students from community colleges in New Jersey.