* 0825773
* Collaborative Research: Forests of Magnetic Nanofibers for Liquid Transport and Manipulation
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Konstantin Kornev, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 07/31/2012
* USD 236,020.00

This particular project is aimed at the development of novel manufacturing
techniques for fabrication and surface functionalization of arrays/forests of
high-aspect-ratio composite magnetic nanofibers (nanowires) with variable
(optimized) density. These materials promise numerous micro and nanofluidic
applications involving the transport of liquids, suspensions and particles,
microfluidic agitation and mixing, alternation of wetting and adhesion. As a
strategic goal of this proposal we envision the assembling of hybrid magnetic
nanofibers into ordered nanostructures by combination of: (a) Template method
for nanofiber fabrication, (b) Colloidal lithography for regulation of nanofiber
density in the forest, and (c) Surface functionalization of nanofibers to
achieve controlled interactions with the surrounding environment. The uniqueness
of the materials to be developed is revealed in that the nanofibers should have
a core-sheath morphology with a flexible magnetic metallic core and an organic
sheath, and also in that the density of the nanofibers in the arrays is
optimized. Development of the proposed approach will directly impact the
implementation of recent advances in nanoscience and nanotechnology to
industrial technologies with broad applications, including analytical chemistry,
medicine, bionanotechnology, optics. Another priority of the proposed project is
the involvement of the brightest high school, undergraduate and graduate
students in modern nanotechnology oriented research. The project will result in
the training of these students in the areas of nanofabrication and various
micro- and nanoelectromechanical systems, and surface science. Students will
greatly benefit from the interdisciplinary nature of this project. Significant
effort will be directed toward increasing the numbers of students--especially
minorities and women--who are pursuing advanced degrees in science and
engineering.