* 0825345
* Collaborative Research:  Novel NDE/SHM Approach Based on Highly Nonlinear Dynamics
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Chiara Daraio, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2011
* USD 232,000.00

This research will develop an experimental research program to create a new
paradigm for Non Destructive Evaluation and Structural Health Monitoring
(NDE/SHM) of materials and structures based on Highly Nonlinear Solitary Waves
(HNSWs). The proposed research leverages on the tunability provided by highly
nonlinear systems to open up a new field of theoretical and experimental
investigations aimed at: a) understanding the coupling between a highly
nonlinear oscillators and linear structures; b) detecting defects across scales:
from the micro- to the macro-scopic level; c) evaluating applied stress in a
given system; d) characterizing the mechanical properties of materials tailoring
the pulse properties during propagation (inverse approach) aided by numerical
modeling, and e) designing new, and therefore patentable, actuators/sensors
technology for stress wave generation and detection. In the last two decades
researches and applications of elastic stress waves (both in the sonic and
ultrasonic range) for NDE/SHM have thrived owing to their capability of
assessing the elastic properties of materials and the presence of damage. The
recent discovery and development of the highly nonlinear wave theory and its
numerical and experimental validation offer a new tool to the NDE/SHM community.
The soundness of engineering systems is essential to avoid catastrophic failures
that may be accompanied by severe consequences for the environment, can lead to
the loss of human life, and produce tonnage of demolition waste. It is therefore
of paramount importance to the nation?s sustainability, economy growth and
safety that NDE/SHM, to be able to accurately detect defects at early stages or
to characterize the mechanical properties of a given structure. With the
proposed research we plan to delve in the fundamental understanding of highly
nonlinear waves coupling with materials and structures, offering a direct
opportunity to transfer the technology in viable commercial applications much
improved over the state-of-the-art actuating/sensing technology for NDE/SHM. The
work builds on complementary expertise at the University of Pittsburgh and the
California Institute of Technology Caltech and will establish a solid research
collaboration between the two institutions. The program will train graduate and
undergraduate student to a new approach to sustainable engineering solutions.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;