* 0825578
* Application of a novel geochemical approach to the alkalinity anomaly method of estimating coral reef calcification rates: implications of ocean acidification
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* David Kadko, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 09/30/2012
* USD 564,656.00

With the recent awareness that the surface oceans are becoming more acidic due
to the uptake of anthropogenic CO2, and that the resulting decrease in the
carbonate mineral saturation state causes a decline in the calcification rate of
many organisms, including corals, there is a pressing need to establish baseline
calcification rates of coral reefs against which future changes can be measured.
The standard method for measuring coral reef calcification requires knowledge of
the alkalinity depletion relative to the offshore source water and the residence
time of the water over the reef. To compute the residence time it is generally
necessary to measure or model the flux of water into and out of the system. This
can require a great deal of time and money and greatly limits the utility of
this otherwise powerful method.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, two
researchers at the University of Miami -- a coral ecologist and a radioisotope
geochemist -- will use a novel radiochemical method based on the cosmogenic
radioisotope 7Be to estimate the residence from a simple set of inexpensive
measurements. The isotope 7Be has an atmospheric input to the ocean via
rainfall. Rainfall events act as natural "tracer release" experiments, whereby
in shallow coral reef waters this flux results in a highly concentrated 7Be
activity, while in offshore waters the same flux is distributed over a much
deeper mixed layer resulting in a much lower 7Be activity. With knowledge of the
input flux (via precipitation), the persistence of this activity contrast can be
used to establish the residence time of water over the reef over a timescale of
1-20 days. This is the range within which most reef systems should fall. The
team will employ the method to determine how calcification rate varies spatially
and temporally at three well-studied reef systems in the Caribbean and Western
Atlantic.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: Coral reefs are one of the
ecosystems most likely to show the first signs of stress in response to global
warming and ocean acidification. Lab studies have shown that coral calcification
declines linearly with the decline in saturation state that is resulting from
the increase in atmospheric CO2. However, lab studies have also shown that the
response can be non-linear when combined with rising temperature. There is a
real possibility that calcification on coral reefs will fall below the threshold
rate needed to sustain themselves against normal erosive forces in the next
50-100 years. In order to ascertain the impact of climate change new methods are
needed to extend the spatial and temporal coverage of coral reef studies so that
it can be judged whether the changes are global in scope and temporally coherent
with observed changes in climate and ocean chemistry. This project would feature
the development, application, and evaluation of a method that would advance the
synopticity of reef metabolic studies. As an aside, this is a potential tool for
evaluating flushing of pollution events over reef systems and could be
beneficial in remediation efforts. The project will also support a graduate
student. This will be a true interdisciplinary opportunity, as the PIs will be
able to provide training in geochemical tracers and coral ecology.&lt;br/&gt;