* 0825780
* GOALI: Six-Sigma Based Robust Process Design Under Tool Deterioration for Giga Fatigue Life of Precision Machined Components in Hard Turning
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2008,12/31/2012
* Changsheng Guo, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 12/31/2012
* USD 337,783.00

The overarching research objective of this award is to reveal the basic
evolution of fatigue life with tool wear progression in hard turning for
creating a six-sigma based robust process design. To realize the research
objective, a synergistic experimental and theoretical study will be conducted.
The research approaches are to: (i) Comprehensively characterize surface
integrity evolution versus cutting time and tool wear; (ii) Map the distribution
and variance of rolling contact fatigue life onto cutting time and the
corresponding tool wear progression; and (iii) Create a six-sigma based robust
process design tool for hard turning industry for fatigue life management while
maximizing tool life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the six-sigma based
design tool will allow the machining industry to manufacture reliable components
while maximizing tool life in production. The new knowledge created will
significantly advance the basic understanding of the linkage between process
parameters, surface integrity, and product performance. The developed
methodology of robust process design will also be useable in broad manufacturing
processes when fatigue performance is of concern. This research will benefit
machining economics by replacing expensive grinding by cheap and environmentally
friendlier turning and reducing the associated tool costs. The synergetic
university-industry partnership will afford a unique opportunity for faculty and
students through the conduct of research and practical experience in industrial
settings. The strong industrial participation will build a long-term research
infrastructure through collaboration, co-advising students, industrial seminars,
and rapid technology transfer.