* 0825667
* Ecology of injury in marine sedimentary habitats: Effects of repeated injury on infaunal condition and sediment bioturbation
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Sara Lindsay, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2012
* USD 381,823.00

The majority of the ocean floor is sedimentary, and marine sediments play a key
role in the flux of nutrients and organic matter in the ocean. Via their feeding
and other activities, organisms living in marine sediments influence benthic-
pelagic coupling by processing and redistributing organic matter supplied from
the water column and influencing the supply of nutrients. These activities also
influence recruitment and competitive interactions. Thus, factors that impact
infaunal activity can secondarily impact sediment biogeochemistry and benthic
communities. Non-lethal loss of body tissue is a common event for marine infauna
such as polychaetes, and numerous studies have investigated the immediate
effects of injury on individuals and predicted indirect effects on ecological
interactions in marine soft-sediment habitats. Accurate predictions of the
effect injury has on marine infaunal communities require knowing the frequency
at which infaunal organisms are injured, whether injured individuals can
regenerate and the speed at which they do so. But comprehensive, accurate
assessments of injury rates among soft-bodied infauna are difficult because
current methods underestimate injury rates by counting only individuals that are
visibly regenerating lost tissue. Past injury may be masked by rapid
regeneration in some species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RESEARCH SUMMARY &amp;
INTELLECTUAL MERIT: This project will use a novel approach using a histological
stain in conjunction with field surveys to answer several important ecological
questions: How frequently are marine worms injured? How variable is the
incidence of injury in space and time? Are there species differences in the
frequency of injury? Surveys of infaunal injury will be repeated during the
spring and summer months over three years at two sites in Maine. This project
will also investigate the effect of repeated injury on infauna, an aspect of
injury that has been largely ignored. Comprehensive measurements relating
sediment activity, regeneration status and nutritional condition of infauna are
rare. Laboratory experiments will compare the effect of repeated injury on
survival, growth, fecundity, nutritional condition and sediment disturbance by
different functional groups such as spionid polychaetes (shallow tube-dwelling
interface deposit feeders with rapid regeneration rates), maldanid polychaetes
(head-down tube-dwelling conveyor-belt feeders), and arenicolid polychaetes
(head-down burrowers that subduct surface sediments to depth to feed). This
project will then use the data gathered in the proposed experiments and surveys
to create a more realistic model of the interacting effects injury has on
infaunal populations, sediment bioturbation, recruitment, and predator
populations. Effects of predation intensity on bioturbation and infaunal
populations will be explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: The project
includes a significant effort to improve ocean science literacy across the
nation by collaborating with the Centers for Ocean Sciences Education
Excellence-Ocean Systems team (COSEE-OS) to develop educational resources
describing the ways marine infauna link sediment and water column processes in
the ocean. Two graduate students and three undergraduates will receive diverse
training in marine organismal biology, physiology and ecology. All participants
will work with COSEE-OS educational experts to develop content and educational
activities that will be added to interactive concept maps of Oceans and Climate
and Ocean Diversity. Undergraduate and graduate students will be introduced to
the process of translating the knowledge and experience they gain during their
research into larger key concepts to be presented to a general audience.
Educational activities will be tested in the PI's marine science class and
interactive concept maps and ocean science educational activities will be widely
distributed by COSEE-OS via the internet. Materials will align with Ocean
Literacy Essential Principles and National Science Education Standards. After
internal evaluation at the University of Maine to evaluate student learning, the
materials will then be widely distributed by COSEE-OS and evaluated using
standard evaluation protocols for technology usability and end-user
effectiveness. By working directly with both a national network (COSEE) and a
national ocean literacy campaign with proven success, we can ensure that our
deliverables will reach a broad spectrum of learners, including those
traditionally underrepresented in ocean sciences.