* 0825151
* Supporting Continued Improvements to K-12 Computer Science Education
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Christine Stephenson, Association Computing Machinery
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 06/30/2011
* USD 443,097.00

This award provides funding to the Association for Computing Machinery for core
support of the activities of the Computer Science Teacher's Association (CSTA).
The award is jointly funded by the CISE Special Project program and the
Broadening Participation in Computing Program. Through collaboration with
leaders from all levels of education, government, industry, and partnering non-
profit organizations, the CSTA has begun reframing computer science within K-12
education as a true science. CSTA provides a voice to K-12 educations involved
in computing education. CSTA has launched national programs to conduct research,
develop curriculum standards, provide professional development, and create and
disseminate new resources for teachers nationwide. Through these activities,
CSTA is building a community of individuals and organizations who collectively
work together to address issues in K-12 computer science
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit lies in the efforts to
establish K-12 computer science as an essential academic discipline and to
conduct fundamental research to document and support the emergence of K-12
computing education as a viable area of research and study. The CSTA relies on
its leaders and volunteers, all recognized experts in the field, to develop and
carry out many far-reaching programs and initiatives which solidify the
discipline and provide an intellectual basis for core integration of computing
into K-12 education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts lie in the
potential of the CSTA initiatives to impact computing education and thus the
nation's technological workforce in an area of national need. Through multi-
level collaboration with key stakeholders, the CSTA supports the implementation
of curriculum and teaching certification standards that will ensure the quality
and consistency of student learning. CSTA conducts and disseminates research and
best practices that can facilitate the flow of knowledge from researchers to the
practitioners in the classroom. The CSTA goals and activities support ensuring
greater participation of underrepresented groups in the computing workforce.
Thus, CSTA offers a broad range of programs and activities that provide a broad
spectrum of impact on the nation, K-12 education, and the computer science
community.