* 0825182
* Collaborative Research: Project IBORC: Interaction between Building and Occupant Responses during Collapse
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2013
* Benigno Aguirre, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 09/30/2013
* USD 357,000.00

Collaborative Research: Project IBORC: Interaction between Building and Occupant
Responses during Collapse &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of this project is to conduct a
multidisciplinary investigation ? at the intersection of structural engineering,
social science, and computer science ? of how building occupants respond to
signals issued by a building during and immediately after a compromising event
that threatens its integrity. Other secondary objectives are to investigate: 1)
how the response of victims is modulated by their social conditions at the time
of the incident; and 2) the influence of a building?s structural system on
building collapse response and occupant survival rates. Computational simulation
models will be developed to represent building collapse and Agent Based Models
(ABMs) will be used to model human response within the building models. Existing
information will be sought in an effort to formulate basic rules that govern
human response during times of extreme danger. The developed models will be
calibrated and validated by comparisons to well documented events that involved
building collapse. The developed models will then be used to clarify how
building occupants respond during emergencies through extensive parametric
simulations. The models will also be used to investigate how buildings collapse
and to identify the means by which to mitigate building failure and its effects.
This project will lead to the education of a new generation of researchers
skilled in inter-disciplinary research. The project will furthermore contribute
to the state-of-the-art in hazards research by developing knowledge that could
form the basis of public education and awareness programs to help building
occupants, their rescuers and city officials respond appropriately during
extreme events.