* 0825960
* Collaborative Research: Reliability Analysis of Spatial Systems with Local Interactions
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Haijun Li, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Sheldon Jacobson
* 06/30/2012
* USD 154,063.00

This grant provides funding for the development of a modeling framework for
spatial reliability/risk analysis of modern engineering systems and business
processes, such as micro/nano integrated circuits and large-scale logistics
systems. In a spatial reliability system, defects are featured by their spatial
location, shape and size. Spatial defects often exhibit local interactions with
their neighboring defects, arising from structural, environmental, geographical,
or economic constraints. Clusters of interactive defects evolve in space over
time and interact with the network topology, and thereby affect the entire
system performance. A spatial Markov point process with local interactions will
be used to depict the distribution of spatial defects at a fixed time epoch and
over a finite time horizon. A dependence theory of random sets, which are used
to model spatial defects, will be developed to determine structural properties
of reliability/risk measures and to construct their computable bounds. The
algorithms for defect cluster classifications and their statistical properties
will be investigated. Simulation/computation procedures will be implemented in
the context of the developed spatial reliability/risk framework for accurate
estimation of spatial reliability measures. The models and methods will be
validated using available micro integrated circuits and supply chain data sets.

If successful, this research will lead to a new spatial reliability/risk
modeling framework as well as a new analytical and computational tools that can
be applied in diverse fields such as nano/micro integrated circuits, supply
chain networks, financial/credit markets and the Internet. Successful completion
of the project will contribute new spatial reliability/risk models and methods,
and lead to efficient and accurate reliability estimation and prediction of
spatial system performance, which in turn will aid system/process design,
improve system reliability and mitigate risk.