* 0825225
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Imagining Yugoslavia: A Comparative Study of Post-Communist Collective Memories among Transitional Generations
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2008,11/30/2009
* Brian Steensland, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 11/30/2009
* USD 7,500.00

PI and Co-PI: Brian Steensland and Tanja Vuckovic
Juros&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Doctoral Dissertation Research: Imagining Yugoslavia:
A Comparative Study of Post-Communist Collective Memories Among Transitional Gen
erations&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0825225&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&l
t;br/&gt;The main goal of this project is to examine how the new generations in
a society (the young people) adapt to the radical social changes and how their
adaptation contributes to deeper structural changes in a society. This study
will answer these questions by comparing collective memories of the communist
Yugoslavia among two Croatian post-Yugoslav generations. Croatia was one of the
six republics of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. Its post-
communist transformation in the 1990s co-occurred with a war for independence
and nation-building under an authoritarian regime that sought to affirm its
legitimacy in opposition to Yugoslavia. But, the regime change in 2000 brought a
new liberalizing period, potentially opening up the public discourse on
Yugoslavia. This research will examine how different perceptions of the Yugoslav
past develop among two different post-Yugoslav generations. The first is the
transitional generation that has early childhood memories of Yugoslavia, but
that spent formative years in the authoritarian post-Yugoslav period. The second
is the post-communist generation that has no personal experience of Yugoslavia,
but that spent its formative years in the liberalizing period. First, using
textual analysis of the newspapers and the history textbooks, the researcher
will examine what narratives of Yugoslavia were available to these two
generations in the authoritarian and the liberal period of the post-Yugoslav
Croatia. Second, using in-depth interviews, the researcher will compare how the
transitional and post-communist generations negotiate Yugoslavia in their own
perceptions of the Yugoslav past and what they make of their family stories and
media and school accounts. Finally, with these data, the researcher will seek to
explain how the available public narratives, family stories and formative years'
experiences influence the personal narratives of communist Yugoslavia among
these two generations. This will illuminate the process of generational
transmission of cultural meanings, and it will also enhance the understanding of
the interacting influences of the political elites, the media and individuals
and the role this interaction has for the formation of cultural consensus.
Therefore, by examining the process of generational transmission of political
consciousness and the interrelations between personal experiences and
institutional frameworks, this study will contribute to the understanding of
comprehensive social changes and the role of culture in both restricting and
enabling societal transformations. Further, this research will shed light on how
the narratives of the old and unforgiven grievances get perpetuated or abandoned
by the young people. Considering that the perceptions of the past are often the
fuelling force for conflicts (ethnic conflicts in particular), as well as the
building blocks for social integration, these insights can help policy-makers
pave the road for the reconciliation, both in the region and beyond.
Additionally, these findings can also be applied to other areas of societal
conflict, and therefore they will be of interest to policy-makers interested in
programs aimed at mitigating various other society-wide divisive issues (e.g.
immigration issues, race, post-conflict resolution) and in the programs of
reconciliation and integration.