* 0825531
* Graphene on Heterepitaxial Silicon Carbide - Steps towards a Manufacturable Process
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Roya Maboudian, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 06/30/2012
* USD 328,381.00

Graphene, a single sheet of carbon atoms arranged in a honey-comb lattice,
possesses many novel properties, such as ballistic electron transport at room
temperature and micron-scale coherence lengths. Moreover, its planar nature
makes it much more amenable to integration into thin-film based technologies
such as integrated circuit fabrication. This reseach aims to develop a novel
synthesis and scale-up process and nondestructive wafer-level metrology scheme
for device-enabling epitaxial graphene substrates. The approach is based on SiC
thin film epitaxially grown on Si wafers. The heteroepitaxial SiC film is
subsequently used to create the graphene layer. The advantages of this scheme
include: i) highly uniform and reproducible SiC films are used as the starting
material; ii) the process is scalable to large-area wafers and much more cost
effective since the films are batch deposited on Si wafers (rather than SiC
substrates).

The broader impact of the research lies in its promise to develop a scalable
process for producing epitaxial graphene sheets with high quality and
reproducibility, and in principle, over a large area. These in turn will enable
the full utilization of graphene's extraordinary properties in such applications
as ultra-high speed, ultra-low power electronics and robust highly sensitive
chemical and electrochemical sensors. Additional significant impact will be on
human resource development and outreach activities, including training of
students and dissemination of the results in the archival literature and through
talks given to the general public by the PI.