* 0825932
* Collaborative Research:  DRU:  An Improved Model of Endogenous Technical Change Considering Uncertain R&amp;D Returns and Uncertain Climate Response
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* David Popp, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Mary Rigdon
* 08/31/2012
* USD 105,756.00

Designing a response to global climate change requires analysis tools that can
help decision makers understand the tradeoffs between the cost of a policy and
its benefit in the form of avoided climate change. Both the costs and the
benefits, however, are uncertain. To date, models used in studies of climate
change have not represented all the critical uncertainties. One important
omission is the representation of uncertainty in returns to research and
development (R&amp;D) directed to the improvement of energy technologies.
Studies on R&amp;D have shown that such returns are uncertain and highly skewed
(i.e., have a small probability of a very large breakthrough). Ignoring this
uncertainty and focusing on the average effect will produce biased estimates of
the emissions reductions required to meet particular targets or the relative
balance between near-term emissions constraints and investments in energy
technology R&amp;D. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will improve the
analysis tools available to decision makers by developing a model framework that
explicitly represents the uncertainty in the returns to R&amp;D. The
representation of technical change and its relation to R&amp;D expenditure will
be calibrated to historical experience with U.S. patents. The model will also
improve the representation of the uncertainty in the climate response to
greenhouse gas emissions by constraining that uncertainty to a range consistent
with 20th century climate. These components will be integrated into a single
framework that can be used to explore decision making about emissions reductions
and R&amp;D expenditures under uncertainty. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of
this research will improve the analysis facilities that are applied to climate
change assessment. The new tools are expected to give improved guidance in the
timing of emissions reductions and investments in technology R&amp;D by
eliminating biases in current models.