* 0825790
* Collaborative Research: Integrating Geochemistry and Proteomics to  Assess Protein Sources and Their Fate in Marine Systems
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* David Goodlett, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2012
* USD 519,204.00

Proteins represent the major source for organic nitrogen in the ocean. Yet the
identification of individual proteins and important mechanisms controlling their
preservation has been stalled by the analytical and mathematical challenges in
deciphering the vast suite of possible structures and complex suite of
degradation products. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this study, researchers at the
Chesapeake Biological Laboratory and the University of Washington will conduct a
novel interdisciplinary study to harness and integrate recent developments and
advances in biomedical proteomics and bioinformatics to follow the geochemical
fate of proteins in marine systems. The integration of proteomics approaches to
geochemical analysis is expected to allow the research team to identify
individual proteins in both living materials and their detrital products -- the
process involved in transforming proteins into biomarkers of both organic
sources and the catalytic (i.e. enzymatic) agents responsible for their
degradation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has three major goals:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Identification of the dominant proteins expressed in
autotrophs prior to becoming detritus. These proteins represent the primary
precursors for long term protein preservation and knowledge of their amount,
distribution and amino acid signatures are needed to follow subsequent
alterations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Identification of peptides and modified
products resulting from algal protein degradation and their interaction in the
complex matrices of particles and sediments. With these observed sequence tags,
the researchers propose to assign individual protein homologies, functions, and
sources across a range of environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Application of
advances in proteomics (including database mining and bioinformatics) to
identify specific structures (e.g. á-helices, â-sheets, hydrophobic cores) or
chemical modifications (glycation, phosphorylation etc.) that are selectively
retained during the degradation process and act as mechanisms for long term
preservation of organic nitrogen. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This
project will feature several approaches to provide for interdisciplinary student
training in marine chemistry and proteomics as well as disseminate results to a
broad audience. In the more traditional role, this project will support a
doctoral student and key postdoctoral fellow. Undergraduate students will be
involved in the summer at CBL through an active on-site REU program. The team
will expand the impact of this work to the broader educational community through
science teacher training. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;