* 0825045
* High-Resolution Gravity, Tomography, and Seafloor Roughness
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* David Sandwell, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 08/31/2011
* USD 166,505.00

Intellectual Merit: Over the past 5 years an improved global marine gravity and
bathymetry grids has been constructed with 1-minute resolution. Raw satellite
altimeter waveforms from 1 year of ERS-1 and 1.5 years of Geosat were re-
tracked, which has resulted in a 40% improvement in the accuracy of the global
marine gravity field, enabling new scientific investigations of transform
faults, seamounts, seafloor fabric, and ocean mixing. The improved gravity,
combined with a new assembly of global depth soundings, is resulting in a new
global bathymetry grid at 1 minute resolution. The present project involves
merging the 1-minute resolution marine gravity model with a soon-to-be-published
global gravity model (EGM08) complete to spherical harmonic degree 2160 (5
minute resolution), resultig in a seamless gravity field across the shorelines.
A grid of uncertainty in the marine gravity will be constructed, based on
altimeter data density, altimeter noise, and comparisons with shipboard gravity.
A matching bathymetry/topography grid will be generated, with a focus on shallow
ocean (&lt;1000 m) areas where new soundings are rapidly becoming available. A
1-minute data source grid will be developed that provides the link to the
original sounding data. Web access will be provided to all of these data
products including: grids, cleaned soundings, and images/maps. These new data
resources will be used to investigate the effects of spreading rate on ridge
segmentation, lithospheric strength, and crustal structure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These improvements to the global marine gravity and
bathymetry grids will benefit scientific and petroleum exploration studies of
continental margins. These data are foundational to many scientific studies
supported by NSF and benefit a wide range of ocean science investigations. This
project will ensure the data are freely available to
everyone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Global bathymetric charts are
used in many areas outside of the scientific community including: K-12 teaching
of earth science and seafloor geography; undergraduate-level earth science and
plate tectonics; law of the sea; mineral exploration; planning of fiber-optic
cable routing and general interest by the public. This information is available
on our web site http://topex.ucsd.edu in a variety of formats for expert,
intermediate, and novice users.