* 0825165
* Data Integration and Model Development to Mitigate Urban Flooding Hazards Linked to Sea Level Rise
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Brett Sanders, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 07/31/2012
* USD 373,003.00

The goal of this project is to create new, state-of-the-art, physics-based
models that exploit the modern datasets of urban areas commonly stored in
Graphical Information Systems (GIS). Sea levels naturally rise and fall each day
with the tides and are affected by other factors such as storms. But if mean sea
levels are higher overall due to global warming, then the highest high tides
will be higher than ever before. Along the Southern California coastline, which
is the focus of this study, there are many urbanized harbor areas where the
ground height is near sea level. To protect these areas from flooding by high
tides and waves, infrastructure including sea walls (also known as bulkheads)
and pump stations are often used. And today coastal communities are beginning to
ask what else should be done to provide protection for the future. Options to
consider include structural measures such as stronger coastal defenses as well
as non-structural measures such as policy changes that reduce the value of
assets in flood-prone areas. To evaluate these options and enable site-specific
flood risk management, flooding simulations are needed and the aim of this
project is to create new simulation models that are uniquely tailored to
urbanized coastal landscapes. Basic research will be carried out to make
physics-based models run more efficiently, to couple flood inundation models
with storm drain models that account for subsurface pipe flows, and to account
for the impact of waves on coastal flooding. In addition, the project will
strive to implement these models within a GIS framework to support
infrastructure management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will work closely with
the City of Newport Beach to ensure that model output delivers the type of
information useful for decision making and to educate decision-makers about
correct uses and interpretations of model generated data. They will also hold
workshops for representatives of other coastal communities in Southern
California to disseminate the technological advances in a targeted way and
broaden the impact of the work. There is growing awareness of global climate
change in California, and public officials are increasingly willing to consider
pragmatic steps to address adverse impacts. However, leadership is needed for
coastal communities to take cost-effective action. The PIs aim to provide this
leadership, using Newport Beach as a case study to show how model generated
flood data can be integrated into GIS to support flood risk management. Local
governments have invested considerable resources in GIS staff and data, so the
models will provide added value to this investment. This project will also
advance the science of urban flood inundation modeling, answering questions
about the optimal use of new data types, the necessary level of coupling between
surface, subsurface and wave models, and strategies for efficient modeling.
These advances stand to improve urban flood risk management technology globally.
Lastly, this project will include efforts to develop flood modeling skills among
under-represented groups of undergraduate engineering students and to recruit
talented students for graduate study at UC Irvine.