* 0825812
* Collaborative Research: Investigating Tidal Influences on Subtidal Estuary-Coast Exchange Using Observations and Numerical Simulations
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Michael Whitney, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2013
* USD 345,545.00

The project will investigate tidal influences on sub-tidal momentum dynamics and
exchange at the interface between a rotation-influenced, stratified estuarine
system and the coastal ocean. Prominence of tidal processes challenges the
conventional view that circulation and exchange are dominated by gravitational
circulation. Emphasis is on discerning the importance and nature of three tidal
mechanisms for residual flow generation: (a) tidal correlations between axial
current vertical shear and vertical eddy viscosity, associated with strain of
the axial density gradient by vertically sheared axial tidal currents; (b)
tidal-mean secondary circulation from ebb-flood differences in differential
advection of the axial density gradient by laterally sheared axial tidal flow;
and (c) lateral tidal rectification due to lateral structure in correlations
between axial and lateral tidal currents. Diagnostic terms that appear in the
sub-tidal axial momentum equation for each mechanism will be investigated using
observations and numerical simulations. The site is eastern Long Island Sound
(LIS), a complex system, but one that is generally representative of wide, deep
estuaries. An extensive suite of archived observations will be exploited,
including several years of 8-times daily ferry-based acoustic Doppler current
profiler (ADCP) transects, time series of hydrographic casts from moored CTD
profilers, and year-round biweekly/monthly CTD surveys over the past ~15 years.
New fieldwork includes two additional years of ferry sampling, and small vessel
towed-undulator/ADCP surveys needed for tidal process identification. The
surveys will characterize the three-dimensional spatial structure and tidal
cycles of turbulence, shear, and stratification, so filling a recognized need to
advance understanding of estuarine physics. Numerical modeling emphasizes
realistic forcing functions and calibration of turbulence parameterization and
coefficient values such that gross observed features (lateral and vertical
structure; amplitudes and phases of tidal cycles) of measured velocity shear,
stratification, and turbulence are captured. Process-oriented runs of the
realistically configured model will be used to investigate the roles of tidal
mechanisms. Scalar fluxes and transport pathways will be investigated with the
model using both Eulerian and Lagrangian analysis methods.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding of estuary-coast exchange has applications
to water quality management. Findings will be relevant to decision makers at the
study site, an urban estuary heavily impacted by surrounding coastal
populations. An existing public-oriented educational display, in the passenger
area of the ferry serving as one platform for new observations, will be assessed
and redesigned by collaboration with URI Office of Marine Programs and Dept. of
Environmental and Natural Resource Economics. The display raises awareness of
estuarine physical oceanography, and its connection to water quality, among
~300,000 ferry riders per year. Two additional years of velocity and
hydrographical grid data products will be posted at the ferry project website
(www.gso.uri.edu/foster). A URI undergraduate and a University of Connecticut
graduate student will be trained. Results will be incorporated in University of
Connecticut oceanography courses for undergraduate and graduate classes.