* 0825260
* "Collaborative Research: Constraining the marine nitrogen cycle using a new approach to measuring nitrogen isotopes of chlorins"
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Rebecca Robinson, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2011
* USD 106,568.00

Given the hypothesized role for the marine nitrogen cycle in governing carbon
cycling, reconstructions of nitrogen biogeochemistry are critical to improve our
understanding of global geochemical cycles. Scientists from Harvard University
and the University of Rhode Island propose to complete their development of a
new analytical method to achieve reliable, high-throughput analyses of nitrogen
isotope composition (del15N) values of sedimentary porphyrins. Values of
porphyrin-del15N should reflect both the overall state of the nitrogen cycle,
and in particular, conditions of nutrient supply and demand in the surface
ocean. In addition, the scientists plan to measure the nitrogen isotopic
fractionation in prokaryotes and eukaryotes, Last Glacial Maximum-to-Holocene
sediments from sites characterized by different nitrogen dynamics, and analyze
Mediterranean sapropels and Cretaceous Ocean Anoxic Events. The goal of this
research is to help constrain the global importance of denitrification and
nitrogen fixation.&lt;br/&gt;As regards broader impacts, results from this
research will improve our understanding of water column biogeochemistry which
will be critical in predicting the response of the nitrogen cycle to climatic
events. One graduate student at Harvard University and one undergraduate student
from the University of Rhode Island will be supported and trained.