* 0825483
* Multiscale Meshfree Analysis of Failure in Geostructures Founded on or Containing Liquefiable Soils
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2008,12/31/2012
* Majid Manzari, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 12/31/2012
* USD 250,703.00

&lt;br/&gt;Analysis of liquefaction-induced instability and failure in slopes
and embankments is an important problem of geotechnical earthquake engineering.
While various empirically-based and/or simplified approaches have been developed
and used in practice, the current state of knowledge of stress-strain-strength
behavior of liquefiable soils, the wealth of observed response of soil slopes
and embankments during recent earthquakes, and the significant progress in
numerical modeling of engineering structures in recent years, have prepared the
ground for a more rigorous, yet realistic, approach to the analysis of
liquefaction-induced instability and failure. This project is to develop a
multiscale approach, which allows the soil response to be captured in both pre-
and post-failure stages with a unified constitutive model. Moreover, since the
traditional finite element (FE) approach for fully-coupled effective stress
analysis of soils is severely limited in handling the near- and post-failure
response of a geotechnical system, a meshfree method is proposed to overcome the
known difficulties of an FE approach, and to produce reliable and robust
solutions in all stages of a liquefaction analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of the project lies in the development and introduction of
two very powerful constitutive and numerical methods in the analysis of soil
liquefaction. The proposed methods will be implemented in a public domain open
source code, which can be used by researchers and practitioners. The developed
computational tool will be validated and verified against a series of
experimental and field observations on the responses of soil slopes and
embankments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the project include the
potential use of the techniques developed in this research in other fields of
engineering such as bio-poromechanics and hot rolling processes in metals and
alloys. The graduate students trained in the course of this project will have an
excellent opportunity to develop a thorough understanding of the mechanisms
involved in liquefaction and liquefaction-induced deformation and failure as
well as an expertise in modeling of geotechnical systems using two of the most
advanced methods of analysis and modeling in engineering mechanics. The depth
and breadth of such research training should be of significant value to
geotechnical engineering practice.&lt;br/&gt;