* 0825806
* Universal, Automatic, and Accurate Interferogram Analysis for Optics-based Experimental Mechanics and Its Open Source Implementation
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Zhaoyang Wang, Catholic University of America
* Standard Grant
* Martin L. Dunn
* 09/30/2011
* USD 124,248.00

Universal, Automatic, and Accurate Interferogram Analysis for Optics-based
Experimental Mechanics and Its Open Source Implementation

Abstract

Optics-based techniques, which are dominant in experimental mechanics field,
produce interferograms or fringe patterns that must be analyzed to obtain whole-
field mechanics descriptions. The objective of the research is to explore a
universal, automatic, and accurate interferogram analysis tool for optics-based
experimental mechanics, and apply the concept of open source from computer
engineering field to the interferogram analysis in experimental mechanics field.
The research involves exploring two techniques. The universal wavelet transform
technique, which is insensitive to various errors when detecting the local
characteristics of an interferogram, can automatically and accurately determine
phases and their gradients from a single interferogram. The universal phase
shifting technique can cope with all the practical problems and provide
accurate, fast, and automatic analysis for multiple phase-shifted
interferograms. The research also involves developing a corresponding open-
source software package/tool, which is to be available to the technical
communities through a forum-based Internet platform. This allows researchers to
share, maintain, and improve the important tool together.

The research would greatly enhance the capabilities of optics-based experimental
mechanics, and provide a much-needed tool to support the relevant efforts in
analytical and computational modeling. It has far-reaching significance for the
design and analysis of advanced engineering structures where accurate whole-
field experimental mechanics description is important and critical. The software
tool allows researchers, experimentalists or non-experimentalists, to conduct
many optics-based experimental mechanics measurements easily. The integration of
research with education aims to enhance backgrounds and abilities of students
with broader interdisciplinary knowledge, and it includes broadening the
participation of underrepresented groups.