* 0825155
* Collaborative Research: Multi-Scale Simulation of Low-Triaxiality Fracture and Ultra Low Cycle Fatigue in Steel Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Amit Kanvinde, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 09/30/2012
* USD 112,124.00

Fracture or fatigue (i.e. cracking due to large and repeated loads) in steel
structures often results in great damage to property as well as loss of life.
Recently, structural fracture has been observed in the I-35 bridge collapse in
Minneapolis and to over 100 buildings that experienced shaking in the 1994
Northridge Earthquake in the Los Angeles area. Motivated by these events, this
project will develop improved methods to predict fracture in steel structures
such as bridges, buildings, industrial facilities, or ships. The research focus
will be on understanding a special type of ductile fracture that originates on
the surfaces or corners of structures. The investigation will involve a program
of laboratory testing and complementary finite element computer analysis to
evaluate critical values of stresses and strains that cause surface fracture in
structural steel. The project will culminate in the development of computational
models that will enable engineers and scientists to accurately calculate and
mitigate the risk of fracture in steel structures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
models developed through this research will enable the design and construction
of buildings, bridges and other structures that are safer and more fracture
resistant. To disseminate and promote use of the research findings, the
principal investigators will educate engineers through workshops, training
courses and technical publications. In addition, the research project will form
the basis of doctoral theses for two graduate students who, equipped with the
advanced knowledge created during this research, will further develop and
disseminate the research findings. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;