* 0825786
* On-line Profile-to-Profile Process Adjustment for Robust Parameter Design Scenarios
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Enrique Del Castillo, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Edwin Romeijn
* 07/31/2012
* USD 230,000.00

The goal of this research award is to solve process control and optimization
problems where the response of interest of a system is a profile, that is,
values of a function of interest, as opposed to a single observation measured at
each of some given experimental conditions. Control of this type of systems
needs to be performed by adjusting the controllable factors in the presence of
uncontrollable noise factors, achieving in this way a process performance that
is insensitive, or robust, to noise factor variation. This class of Robust
Parameter Design (RPD) problem for profile responses abounds both in
manufacturing and in non-manufacturing. For example, in manufacturing, machining
settings result in geometric profiles of parts that are measured at several
positions over a plane or space, and a target geometry needs to be achieved by
varying the machine tool conditions in the presence of uncontrollable sources of
variability. The research will propose, test and implement new statistical
techniques useful when responses are profiles, based on the Statistics sub-
disciplines of Functional Data Analysis and Statistical Shape Analysis.
Manufacturing laboratories at both Penn State and at Politecnico di Milano,
Italy, will allow testing the methods developed in this project.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The main outcome of this research will be a new set of statistical
optimization and control techniques aimed at solving on-line RPD problems for
profile responses. To allow technology transfer, software that implements the
methods developed will be written and distributed at the PI's lab web site.
Research opportunities for a PhD student and for undergraduate students,
incorporation of the research results in courses at Penn State, and
dissemination via the technical literature and through the PI?s book on Process
Optimization will take place. Collaboration with industrial researchers (Intel,
GlaxoSmithKline) will provide practical expertise and valuable experiences for
participating students.&lt;br/&gt;