* 0825722
* Collaborative Research: Tissue Cutting Mechanics - Investigation of the Effective and Minimally Invasive Biopsy
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Kornel Ehmann, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 12/31/2012
* USD 231,826.00

The research objective of this award is to investigate the cutting mechanics of
biological tissue in needle biopsy procedures by viewing biopsy as a cutting
process with tissue as the work-material. This will be accomplished by testing
novel needle tip geometries using high speed tissue cutting test machines to
characterize the mechanics of tissue cutting and by modeling the mechanics of
tissue cutting. Advanced helical needle-tips and micro-grinding methods will be
applied to generate novel needle-tip geometries with sharp, burr-free cutting
edges. Two test machines, one for high speed orthogonal and oblique tissue
cutting and another for high speed needle insertion, will be built to
investigate the effects of cutting speed and needle tip geometry. Mechanistic
models will be built to predict the tissue cutting force related to the needle
geometry and cutting speed. Tissue fracture and tissue-needle tribological
phenomena in high-speed tissue cutting will be studied to develop the
fundamentals of tissue cutting mechanics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful,
the benefits of this research will be improved performance of the most commonly
used medical device - the needle. Tissue cutting efficiency will increase
thereby reducing pain and trauma in biopsy procedures. New biopsy machines with
advanced needles and optimized operating parameters will increase the volume of
tissue samples collected in each needle insertion and improve the accuracy of
pathology diagnoses in a wide range of biopsy procedures. Results of the
proposed research will also extend the traditional field of machining to
biomedical and health care applications and promote the emerging research
frontiers in biomedical manufacturing.