* 0825148
* Resolving Migratory Connectivity of Basking Sharks (Cetorhinus maximus) in the Western Atlantic Ocean: Integrating Novel Geochemical Tracers with Satellite Archival Tags
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Leah Houghton, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2013
* USD 856,772.00

Animal migrations represent one of nature's most spectacular and yet mysterious
phenomena. Movement patterns also have considerable biological significance,
determining gene flow among geographically separated populations over ecological
time scales and migratory connectivity among populations over ecological time.
Unfortunately studies of migration in ocean ecosystems have lagged behind those
in terrestrial environments due to the logistic constraints associated with
tracking aquatic animals that may travel vast distances in an opaque
3-dimensional environment. Recent research using electronic tags have, however,
revealed remarkable basin scale migrations in large pelagic fishes. Nonetheless,
limited by size and battery life, artificial tags cannot yet provide lifetime
migration histories of long-lived species. The investigators therefore will
combine electronic archival tags and natural isotope markers in vertebrae to
examine dispersal and migratory connectivity of basking sharks (Cetorhinus
maximus) in the western North Atlantic Ocean. The project will build on
preliminary archival tag data that has shown basking sharks moving from Cape Cod
Bay to waters off the coast of Brazil. The results will provide insights
relevant to conservation efforts directed at the world's second largest fish
species that is globally distributed but listed on the IUCN Red List of
Threatened Species as vulnerable due to overfishing throughout its
range.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stable isotopes have been used successfully to trace
migratory connectivity in birds and to examine natal homing in teleost fishes.
The investigators hope to transform the field by analyzing carbon and nitrogen
isotopes in specific organic compounds isolated from vertebral samples to
examine lifetime movement patterns of basking sharks. They will avoid
confounding movement and a change in diet by analyzing essential and non-
essential amino acids that differ in the degree of trophic fractionation for C
and N isotopes. Results from pop-up archival tags will be combined with a meta-
analysis of plankton carbon and nitrogen isotopes in the North Atlantic Ocean
and used to generate predicted stable isotope profiles that will then be tested
against observed patterns in the basking shark vertebrae. Fisheries and
conservation biologists have come to the realization that many of the biological
and physical processes that underlie population dynamics of marine-capture fish
species have important spatial aspects. The investigators will develop and apply
tools that will provide unique estimates of dispersal and migratory connectivity
in a large pelagic shark. The tools will be readily applicable to other large
pelagics that make basin-scale migrations and particularly those that take
advantage of high primary and secondary productivity in high latitudes during
summer months.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will support the PhD studies of
a PhD student in the Department of Fisheries Oceanography at UMASS Dartmouth.
The investigators will actively recruit under-represented students applying to
WHOI's summer student fellowship program to work on the project. Finally, they
will address K-12 education by way of a unique collaboration between WHOI and
Numedeon Inc. who have developed a dynamic online learning community (Whyville)
for students ages 8-15. The PIs will work with the education experts at Whyville
to develop an online activity that will lead students to better understand the
process of scientific research as well as explore specific concepts related to
fish migration and this research. Finally, fieldwork conducted during the study
will be documented for dissemination to the public through the web, television,
and other media by one of the world's leading underwater filmmakers.