* 0825418
* Collaborative Research: The Oleander Project: Sustained observations between New York and Bermuda
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* Charles Flagg, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2014
* USD 388,439.00

The Oleander project began in 1992 as an effort to conduct high-resolution
upper-ocean velocity measurements on a sustained multiyear basis. The Oleander
project was established to track near surface heat-fluxes in the Gulf Stream
region by taking continuous measurements over a long period of time. In the past
15 years of this project, upper-ocean velocity and near-surface temperatures
have been sampled by an acoustic Doppler current profiler (ADCP) mounted in the
hull of a container vessel (CMV Oleander) that operates weekly between New
Jersey and Bermuda. These transects include measurements taken in four distinct
and oceanographically important regions: the continental shelf, the Slope Sea,
the Gulf Stream, and the northwestern Sargasso Sea. In addition to creating a
long-term record of measurements, results from the Oleander project have been
used by a variety of researchers and in a range of oceanographic fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Currently, ocean scientists from the
University of Rhode Island in collaboration with an oceanographer from SUNY at
Stony Brook will continue in leading the efforts of the Oleander project. In
addition to maintaining the measurements for this long-lasting record, they will
be further analyzing the collected data to elucidate the long-term
climatological variability of the upper-ocean mass- and heat-fluxes, as well as
investigating the linkages between velocity and heat flux regimes in the Gulf of
Mexico and their connections to large-scale forcing fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The measurements from the Oleander
project have made valuable contributions to the CLIVAR (CLImate VARiability and
predictability) program and compliment the measurements taken by other research
initiatives such as the Ocean Observatory Initiative's Pioneer Array and the
deep western boundary current measurement program. The PIs will continue their
outreach program for high school students with Bayonne High School in new
Jersey. Funding from this research will support research and education
opportunities for graduate students.