* 0825453
* Collaborative Research: Regulation of Phytoplankton Dynamics in Mid-Atlantic Estuaries Subject to Climatic Perturbations.
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2013
* Ming Li, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 09/30/2013
* USD 801,467.00

Climatic perturbations by drought-flood cycles, tropical storms, and hurricanes
are increasingly important in Mid-Atlantic estuaries, leading to ecosystem-scale
responses of the plankton system with significant trophic implications. Recent
observations support an emerging paradigm that climate dominates nutrient
enrichment in these ecosystems, explaining seasonal and interannual variability
of phytoplankton floral composition, biomass (chl-a), and primary production
(PP). This project will evaluate this paradigm in the two largest estuaries in
the United States, Chesapeake Bay (CB) and Albemarle-Pamlico Sound-Neuse River
Estuary (APS-NRE) by quantifying responses to climatic perturbations. This
project will: (1) resolve long-term trends of plankton biomass/production from
high variability driven by climatic forcing, such as drought-flood cycles that
generate significant departures from the norm; (2) quantify the role of episodic
wind and precipitation events, such as those associated with frontal passages,
tropical storms, and hurricanes, that evoke consequential spikes of
biomass/production outside the resolution of traditional methods. The field
program will focus on event-scale forcing of phytoplankton dynamics by
collecting shipboard, aircraft remote sensing, and satellite (SeaWiFS, MODIS-A)
data, analyzing extensive monitoring data for CB and APS-NRE to develop context,
and quantifying effects of climatic perturbations on phytoplankton dynamics as
departures from long-term averages. The rapid-response sampling will be paired
with numerical simulations using coupled hydrodynamic biogeochemical models
based on the Regional Ocean Modeling System (ROMS). This combination of
observations and modeling will be used to explore mechanistic links and test
empirical relationships obtained from field
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. Drought-flood cycles, tropical
storms, and hurricanes are occurring at increasing severity and frequency,
exerting significant pressures on land margin ecosystems. Research and
monitoring in these ecosystems has focused singularly on eutrophication for
nearly five decades. Recognition of climatic perturbations as the underlying
cause of phytoplankton variability represents a significant departure from this
singular focus. This project will combine observations and modeling to
significantly extend our knowledge of how climate regulates phytoplankton
dynamics in estuaries. Progress in calibrating and validating hydrodynamic
biogeochemical models with data collected in CB and APS-NRE by this project will
lead to predictive capabilities thus far unattained, allowing us to evaluate the
paradigm that climatic perturbations regulate phytoplankton dynamics in
estuaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Addressing the effects of
climatic perturbations on phytoplankton dynamics in estuaries with a combination
of data collection, analysis, and mechanistic modeling has societal benefits for
scientists and resource managers. Applications in addition to ?basic? science
include the consideration of climatic forcing in designing effective nutrient
management strategies. Specific impacts include: (1) quantifying the effects of
climatic perturbations on planktonic processes for important estuarine-coastal
ecosystems; (2) extending empirically-based water quality criteria forward by
enabling predictions of floral composition, chl-a, and PP in changing climate
conditions; (3) combining observations and mechanistic models to support
scenario analysis, allowing us to distinguish long-term trends from variability
imposed by climate. This project will offer a graduate course in physical
transport processes and plankton productivity that will benefit from this
research, support two Ph.D. students, and train undergraduates in NSF REU and
minority outreach programs at HPL-UMCES and IMS-UNC. The main products will be
peer-reviewed publications and presentations at scientific meetings. The three
PIs maintain active web sites that will be used to distribute results and data.