* 0825842
* Integrated Experiment and Atomistic Computation on Moisture-Induced Interfacial Embrittlement
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2013
* Scott Mao, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Siegmund
* 09/30/2013
* USD 343,052.00

Integrated experiment and atomistic computation on moisture-induced interfacial
embrittlement&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Scott X. Mao, Dept of Mechanical
Engineering and Materials Science, Univ. of
Pittsburgh&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metal-ceramic composites, electronic packaging,
and environmental barrier coatings used for thermal protection, abrasion, and
hot corrosion resistance are all made with metal/ceramic interfaces. Reliability
of these interfacial materials relies heavily on the nature of their interface
performance. Currently, moisture-induced interfacial embrittlement is one of
major mechanical failures and becomes a serious technological concern in the
application of these interfacial materials in moisture-containing environment.
Lack of the understanding on (i) how moisture react with the metal/ceramic
interfacial bonds and reduce the interfacial strength and (ii) what type of
interface sensitive to moisture-induced embrittlement is the barrier for new
interfacial materials (such as coatings and multilayers) design and application.
This project will focus on the mechanism of moisture-induced ductile to brittle
transition at interface through combined experiment and atomistic model
prediction with in-situ X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) test and first-
principles calculations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed experiment with AFM
tip/moisture/substrate interaction will open a new approach to quantify inter-
atomic interaction with moisture effect. Furthermore, the project will integrate
research and education by (i) providing training for graduate and undergraduate
students, (ii) course development in ?interfacial materials and
characteristics?, (iii) increased participation of underrepresented groups into
the research through current Minority Engineering Mentoring Program, and (iv)
outreach to elementary school and exposure of young students to interfacial
materials and surface engineering through Internet explorers and Pittsburgh
Carnegie Science Museum. &lt;br/&gt;