* 0825439
* Testing methods for direct measurement of particle settling velocities and fluxes in the sea
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2008,01/31/2010
* Cindy Lee, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 01/31/2010
* USD 157,619.00

Sediment traps are widely used to quantify vertical fluxes of material and to
collect sinking particulate organic matter (POM) for chemical analyses. They
have provided proof of spatial, episodic, seasonal, and interannual fluxes of
POM through the water column, have linked variability in surface water processes
to fluxes in the interior of the ocean and to the sea floor, and have shown that
intense remineralization and alteration affects POM in the water column.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, researchers at the State University of
New York at Stony Brook will modify a settling velocity trap developed recently
as part of the MedFlux Program by installing cameras above and below the
rotating ball valve to monitor particle settling rates as they fall into the
trap and after the ball rotation. These measurements should allow them to
unequivocally determine whether particles are combining on the ball to produce
artificially-high settling velocities, or if the previous settling velocity
estimates are truly robust.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Testing and
development of the settling velocity traps will ideally allow for in situ
measurements of particle settling rates that in turn provide critical
constraints on elemental cycling within the water column. Collected samples will
also allow assessment of the relative importance of various ballast materials
(e.g., carbonate, opal, etc.). While the trap development is important to our
understanding of the biological pump, the ability to better understand carbon
fluxes also has a direct impact on larger societal issues such as CO2
concentrations in both the oceans and the atmosphere. &lt;br/&gt;