* 0825379
* Collaborative Research: FeCycle I I- Natural variability in plankton iron quotas during an unamended Lagrangian experiment
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2010
* Benjamin Twining, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 07/31/2010
* USD 181,090.00

In this project, researchers at the University of Southern California,
University of Tennessee Knoxville and the Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
will study oceanic micronutrient dynamics as part of the September 2008 FeCycle
II project sponsored by NIWA New Zealand. The international team will
investigate the natural cycling of the micronutrient iron (Fe) and other trace
elements in relation to carbon and nutrient biogeochemistry. FeCycle II is a
unique concept, since it is a Langrangian study that will follow an SF6-labeled
patch without added Fe. The U.S. team will join this effort in order to compare
and contrast the quotas of Fe and other trace elements in plankton using
parallel techniques that include high-speed sorting flow cytometry and
ultrafiltration coupled to ICP-MS, Fe and C radiotracers, and synchrotron x-ray
fluorescence. Together, these will provide multiple independent assessments of
the geochemical plasticity of Fe quotas. Building on the highly successful
FeCycle I study, this work should improve our understanding of the linkages
between the biogeochemistry and large-scale distribution of Fe and the global
carbon cycle, within the context of this interdisciplinary international
effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this study include a strong
commitment to the training of a new generation of ocean biogeochemists, support
of a new female PI at the University of Southern California, and the
facilitation of outreach and diversification at all three institutions,
including EPSCoR organizations in Tennessee and Maine. At least one post-doc, 2
graduate and 5 undergraduate students will be supported by this study, and
information will be directly incorporated into courses, public outreach events
and web dissemination at the peer institutions. A unique partnership with the UT
School of Journalism will provide a novel public and K-12 educational component.
The PIs will continue their well-established history of recruitment of
underrepresented groups and participation in methods-oriented special courses.
The proposed work will provide essential information on the variability in
group-specific quotas for Fe and other trace elements to the FeCycle II study,
and help to build and strengthen U.S. collaborative links to the international
marine science community. The unique Fe quota information and methods comparison
that our study will provide is critically needed for all models of global carbon
cycling and climate change that depend on ocean biological productivity
estimates. &lt;br/&gt;