* 0825613
* Collaborative Research: Control of Atomic-Scale Friction by Normal Surface Oscillation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Yi Guo, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* George Chiu
* 08/31/2011
* USD 162,284.00

The research objective of this award is to develop control methodologies to
reduce friction by surface vibration. Controlling frictional properties in a
desired way is traditionally achieved by chemical means, while a recent idea in
controlling the system mechanically by applying small perturbations to
accessible elements of the sliding system was shown effective through
microscopic level experiments. In particular, ultralow friction was observed by
actuating surface contact and introducing normal vibrations between the sliding
surfaces. The research will result in rigorous mathematical understanding of the
effect of normal surface oscillation on friction, and control methods to
quantitatively adjust vibration parameters. The project will validate the
analytic results through atomic force microscopy experiments, in collaboration
with scientists at Oak Ridge National Laboratory. &lt;br/&gt;If successful, the
project will advance the understanding of nanoscale friction, and move beyond
the understanding of the behaviors to an ability to precisely control them.
Methods in reducing friction between contacting surfaces find their wide
applications in machines, MEMS, and in the development of low-friction surfaces.
The project will provide theoretical support to experimental observations and
suggest new control mechanisms guiding experiments towards the reduction of
friction. The results will be disseminated through a unique online platform for
atomic-scale friction that will be built under the project?s effort, in order to
provide a live environment for community building and facilitate the evolvement
of all knowledge related to friction control from different disciplines. The
graduate student funded through the project will benefit from the multi-
disciplinary nature of the research, and have the opportunity to visit and be
involved with Oak Ridge National Laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;