* 0825768
* BRIDGE: Behavioral Response to the I-35W Disruption: Gauging Equilibration
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2011
* David Levinson, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 09/30/2011
* USD 300,000.00

This research is built upon a recent NSF-funded Small Grant for Exploratory
Research (SGER) project (NSF Award CMMI 0753580) that aims to collect perishable
travel behavior and traffic data after the collapse of I-35W Bridge over the
Mississippi River in Minneapolis. The goal of this project is to analyze the
collected data and develop a firm foundation for travel behavior models that can
answer the following three open questions: 1) How do travelers make their trip-
making choices in a day-to-day context under network disruption? 2) How do
traffic patterns evolve from a disequilibrium state toward an equilibrium state?
3) How should transportation agencies prioritize the allocation of
transportation resources in response to the network disruption, particularly
during the process of traffic equilibration? Answering these questions will make
a major leap forward in transportation science because the learning process and
resulting altered behavior of travelers after severe network disruption has
rarely been studied due to data availability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work
will benefit many audiences, including undergraduate and graduate students,
transportation researchers and practicing engineers. Results from the research
will be used to enhance both undergraduate and graduate level courses in
transportation engineering. Additional data collected from this project and
other related projects will be shared with interested researchers. The PIs will
work closely with local and state transportation agencies and will make their
best effort to convey the findings from this research to the transportation
agencies and academic community.