* 0825490
* Collaborative Research: Physiology and Biogeochemistry of Repeatedly Bleached and Recovering Caribbean Corals
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Andrea Grottoli, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 07/31/2012
* USD 388,374.00

The overall stability and health of coral reefs is declining world-wide at an
unprecedented rate. Mass coral bleaching, wherein exposure to elevated
temperature leads to the loss of significant numbers of endosymbiotic
dinoflagellates (Symbiodinium spp., commonly called zooxanthellae) and/or
photosynthetic pigments, serves as a primary global example of how fragile this
symbiosis is. While we have begun to understand the ecological and physiological
impacts of bleaching, there remain key fundamental gaps in knowledge. In
particular, it is becoming increasingly clear that a) not all corals either
respond to, or recover from, bleaching events the same way, and that b) the
impact of annual or repeated bleaching events on corals has not been examined in
sufficient detail. Several non-mutually exclusive ecological and physiological
pathways could impact how a particular coral species succumbs to or recovers
from bleaching. Recent evidence suggests that the following features may play
key roles for coral survival in the face of future seawater warming and mass
bleaching events: 1) shifts in trophic partitioning (e.g., proportional reliance
on autotrophy and heterotrophy) and energy reserve utilization, 2) enhanced
thermal tolerance through host and algal-mediated physiological responses, and
3) harboring of different Symbiodinium phylotypes. However, these mechanisms
have yet to be investigated in a unified approach that covers the entire coral
holobiont system (algae, host tissue, and skeleton), or under scenarios of
repeated bleaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objectives of this study
are as follows: 1) to determine the effect of single and repeated bleaching on
the physiology, biogeochemistry, and recovery of some Caribbean coral species,
and 2) to determine which Symbiodinium-type and host-species combinations are
more resilient to single and repeated bleaching, what aspects of their
physiology and biogeochemistry render them resilient, and to use this
information to evaluate the long-term persistence of Caribbean coral reefs. To
address these objectives, the following physiological variables will be
measured: 1) Symbiodinium type, photochemical function and algal stress
physiology, and 2) animal host energy reserves, defense enzyme concentration,
skeletal growth, and feeding capacity in the corals Porites porites, Porites
astreoides, and Montastraea faveolata. Corals will be examined immediately
following thermal stress designed to approximate natural bleaching, and recovery
will be monitored over short and long-term time scales. Next, the impact of
repeated bleaching will be examined in the subsequent year, followed by
examination over the next recovery period. This research is designed to
simultaneously evaluate the symbiotic algae, coral host, and skeleton, and to
identify patterns of physiological responses and recovery of each Symbiodinium-
type and host-species combination that would be indicative of the resilience
capacity of Caribbean corals to future more frequent thermal
perturbations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research should
significantly increase understanding of how (or if) reef corals can survive
future climate change. This is especially critical for Caribbean corals where
sensitivity appears to have a very low threshold, and where bleaching is
predicted to occur biannually within the next 20-30 years. Such information is
key for the effective future management of coral reefs. This project will
incorporate the training of two PhD students and several undergraduates, and the
PIs will incorporate the research findings into their teaching. Several female
and Hispanic students (both minorities in marine sciences) are mentored by the
PIs. In addition, collaborative efforts between Grottoli and Warner will be
enhanced by the field research monitoring efforts of the Central Caribbean
Marine Institute at the Little Cayman Research Center, and the remote-sensing-
based products from colleagues at the NOAA Coral Reef Watch Program. Results of
the research will be broadly disseminated through peer reviewed publications,
presentations at scientific conferences, and online via the PI's respective
websites.