* 0825754
* Collaborative Research: A Global Bridge From Eddy-Rich to Eddy-Less: Quantifying, Mapping, and Improving Treatment of Mesoscale Eddy Tracer Fluxes
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* John Dennis, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2012
* USD 70,017.00

The previous models required a "hero calculation" to simulate a decade of model
time, now similar models run for centuries. However, mesoscale eddy
parameterizations are still needed: increasing system complexity, simulation
length, ensemble size, and running ocean models on desktop computers require a
continuous use of coarse models for decades to come. Ideally, eddy
parameterizations should be validated directly against observations, but the
density of observations required renders this option impracticable. Tests
against higher resolution calculations are an effective alternative, but these
comparisons are rarely or incompletely done.

This project will provide such a comparison globally in a direct and thorough
manner. Three products will emerge: 1) a global diagnosis of the complete eddy
stirring tensor in a fine-resolution simulation, 2) a comparison to the stirring
tensor predicted using extant parameterizations, and 3) a ?parameterization
challenge suite? based on eddying regions in the fine-resolution model. Most
extant eddy parameterizations may be written completely in terms of the eddy
stirring tensor. Diagnosis of this tensor represents a significant advance over
presently state-of-the-art studies diagnosing only a scalar eddy diffusivity or
otherwise limited tensor structure. Agreement with the full tensor globally is a
stringent test that will lead to immediate improvement or wholesale rejection of
parameterizations. In addition to a dataset for comparison, it is useful to have
test cases for parameterization development. Traditionally, eddy
parameterizations have been tested in artifact-prone idealized settings. The
third product of this study will be a suite of perhaps 6 challenges constructed
from prototypes in the global high-resolution simulation. A challenge will
provide enough information to be run as a stand-alone forward model. The full
suite of challenges will be designed so that a successful parameterization in
all challenges will predict likely success in a global model. Much progress has
been made in parameterizing mesoscale eddies in coarse ocean models, but the
next level of accuracy requires better defined metrics in eddy-rich datasets and
test suites against which extant and forthcoming parameterizations can be
validated. This study will provide direct products accessible with moderate
computer resources, and the global nature of the diagnosis in a realistic
circulation will prevent common artifacts.

The project will increase understanding of mesoscale eddy dynamics on a global
scale and the assumptions underlying eddy parameterizations, improve or reject
extant eddy parameterization schemes, and test a novel diagnostic methodology.
The project will support two early-career researchers and a graduate student,
publicly provide manageably-sized versions of a huge simulation, lead to
improvements in ocean and climate models, lead to performance improvement of the
POP model, and support and encourage collaboration among research institutions
and modelers with the larger community.