* 0825600
* COLLABORATIVE PROPOSAL: HOW IMPORTANT IS "OLD" CARBON IN LAKE SUPERIOR? A RADIOCARBON INVESTIGATION
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2008,01/31/2013
* Elizabeth Minor, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 01/31/2013
* USD 477,428.00

Organic carbon present in aquatic ecosystems has the potential to either be
sequestered by sedimentary organic matter or recycled and contributed to the
atmosphere through microbial respiration. Ultimately, the fate of organic matter
is dependant upon its source, as well as the physical transport mechanisms and
biogeochemical transformations it is exposed to in the water column. Because
these processes vary significantly within aquatic systems, such as the ocean, it
is difficult to assess the biogeochemical importance of organic carbon; however,
it is a problem of critical importance whose results could be utilized to
resolve key issues in global biogeochemical carbon cycles and to determine the
net heterotrophy of most aquatic environments.

Scientists from the University of Minnesota-Duluth and Virginia Commonwealth
University would address this problem by studying organic carbon dynamics in
Lake Superior because its biogeochemistry is similar to that of the world ocean.
Using Lake Superior as a natural laboratory, the researchers plan to carry out
radiocarbon measurements of particulate organic carbon (POC), dissolved organic
carbon (DOC), dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC), and bacterially-respired CO2, as
well as obtain the chemical composition of DOC and POC during stratified and
non-stratified periods. Results would be used to identify the sources of carbon
in the lake and determined transformations of carbon between POC, DOC, DIC, and
bacterially-respired CO2. Educational impacts include workshops and presentation
for K-12 audiences as well as research and training opportunities for graduate
and undergraduate students in Water Resources Science and Biochemistry classes.