* 0825623
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Knowledge, Networks, and the Spaces of Coral Reef Conservation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Philip Steinberg, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 08/31/2010
* USD 11,970.00

Coral reefs are described as among those ecosystems suffering the greatest rates
of environmental deterioration, particularly when located near population
centers or easily accessible to a variety of resource exploitation efforts. The
rates of reef decline worldwide have spurred greater management and conservation
efforts, but these have achieved little success as debates intensify over which
factors endangering coral reef ecosystems are most important to address, how to
mitigate them, and how to measure progress. Coral reef conservation science is
thus beset by uncertainty and competing policy prescriptions, while the urgency
for action continues to escalate, exemplifying a paradox in the practice of
science and its application to environmental policy in general: on the one hand,
scientific research is propelled by disagreement and uncertainty in specialized
knowledges, yet on the other hand, practical policy-making requires general
agreement about discrete causal relationships. Guiding this work is the belief
that the current level of contention on this issue is due not to a lack of
scientific knowledge about reef systems, but rather to a misuse and mis-emphasis
of scientific uncertainties that drive further investigations and distort core
conclusions that are generally accepted as fact. Using Q-Methodology, this
dissertation research will characterize common understandings from competing
knowledges of reef science and conservation, and quantitatively rank the
subjectivities and goals surrounding policy. Social Network Analysis will be
employed to explore how scientific uncertainties that fuel debates are
communicated and evolve in the spatial and conceptual networks through which
they flow. Geographic information systems (GIS) will be used to determine where
particular contentions about reef systems may have originated and how
perceptions of reef decline and mitigation are spatially contingent based on the
region where the science is conducted. This research will take place in South
Florida, which not only has a well-studied reef tract and established
conservation frameworks, but also is home to several academic, international,
governmental and non-governmental organizations interested in reef conservation
thus providing a strong international network of reef scientists and policy-
makers who will be available for interviews. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By examining
the ways in which scientists and policy-makers negotiate scientific uncertainty,
this research has a strong potential to suggest new avenues for environmental
policy-making efforts that have been paralyzed by a lack of consensus within
networks that claim a common conservation goal. This work seeks to identify ways
in which to surmount the scientific uncertainties that inhibit effective
mitigation efforts, which are particularly important in marine environments
where scientific research is exceptionally expensive and where observation and
sampling techniques are contingent on regional political, biological, and
geophysical differences. This research will result in an accessible methodology
that will facilitate a way to quickly and accurately deconstruct contested
environmental debates by revealing main points that underpin the scientific
paradigms around which the contentions are structured, and quantify the degree
to which those in the network agree on core beliefs. In a time of increasing
environmental vulnerability, this research confronts some of the main obstacles
that prevent the timely translation of scientific research into effective
remediating policies.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;