* 0825347
* Lateral Load Behavior and Modeling of Shear-Dominant RC Walls for Performance-Based Design
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* John Wallace, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 07/31/2012
* USD 260,000.00

The goals of the research are to develop and validate new modeling approaches
appropriate for combined gravity and earthquake loads for buildings that utilize
solid reinforced concrete walls. In particular, the project will study the
structural performance of reinforced concrete walls, which are commonly used in
the low-, medium-, and high-rise building construction, to develop new
computer/numerical models and building code design guidelines. To accomplish
these goals, approximately ten large-scale models of typical wall configurations
will be tested under simulated earthquake loading in the Structural/Earthquake
Engineering Research Laboratory at UCLA. The walls will be instrumented with
high-resolution sensors to measure loads, stresses, strains, and their
deformations. Test observations and the collected sensor data will be used to
understand how damage accumulates and ultimately leads to collapse. Project will
provide methodology to predict damage under moderate to intense ground shaking.
The changes to building codes for the performance-based design for both new and
existing buildings with these walls will be proposed. The research results will
enable engineers to design safer and more economical new buildings and to
evaluate the performance of existing buildings to identify those posing
significant hazard to the community in terms of expected casualties and economic
losses. The new data, along with existing data from prior tests, will be
compiled into a comprehensive database and archived into a community data
repository to enable future research and development. The validated computer
models will be developed in an open-source environment to facilitate further
research and design studies. The results will be disseminated via an interactive
web site and other web-based collaboration tools that encourage active
participation. The research will provide advanced training to graduate and
undergraduate students, incorporate active participation by high school interns,
and include active participation from industry. Underrepresented groups will be
recruited in the project using well established institutional partnerships