* 0825558
* GOALI: Electrode Interface Stresses, Degradation, and Failure
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2008,12/31/2012
* Mark Walter, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 12/31/2012
* USD 165,675.00

In order for solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs) to have a significant impact on the
production and distribution of electricity, key barriers to commercialization
must be overcome. The durability and reliability of electrode-electrolyte
interfaces has been identified as a weak point for SOFCs. Thus the research
objectives of this award include the following: a) identification of fundamental
stress-based, materials-based, and environment-based reasons for degradation and
failure of electrode interfaces and b) development of high fidelity finite
element models appropriate for optimizing electrode interfaces exposed to
thermal transients. The work will include a range of experiments for determining
materials properties and for elucidating failure mechanisms. The experimental
results will also be used for developing and validating the numerical models
designed to optimize electrode interfaces. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
team at The Ohio State University (OSU) will work closely with scientists and
engineers at NexTech Materials, Ltd (NTM). Through controlled experiments and
realistic models with production-ready materials and devices, the university-
industry team aims to deliver both new scientific understanding of electrode
interface failure issues and ultimately more viable commercial SOFC products.
The team members and close associates from both OSU and NTM will benefit from
having access to the facilities and knowledge of their respective counterparts.
The Team will also work together to disseminate general information about energy
production and use to middle and high school students in the Columbus area. This
effort to provide broader understanding of energy issues will take the form of
visits to classrooms, age-appropriate curriculum materials and assignments, and
fuel cell demonstration kits. &lt;br/&gt;