* 0825019
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Managing Crisis: When Humanitarianism Becomes Government, the Politics of Humanitarian Relief in Balata Refugee Camp
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,06/30/2010
* Donald Mitchell, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 06/30/2010
* USD 11,980.00

According to United Nations projections, over half of the Palestinian population
in the West Bank and Gaza Strip relies on international humanitarian assistance,
and dependency on outside aid continues to rise. This project provides an
innovative examination of the conception, organization, and institutionalization
of humanitarian measures in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. It analyzes the
role of international humanitarian aid in managing Palestinian displacement and
the socio-political effects of prolonged humanitarian relief on the Palestinian
refugee population. In particular, it traces humanitarian policy through a
transnational network of coordinated sites from United Nations Headquarters in
New York City, to United Nations Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA) Headquarters in
Amman, and finally to UNRWA's largest field site in the West Bank -- Balata
Refugee Camp. This research draws from a political geographic framework and
employs a mix of archival research, ethnographic methods, and data analysis.
This mixed-method approach allows for in-depth study of UNRWA's humanitarian
activities as they are intended by international aid institutions and
experienced by aid-recipients. A joint-theoretical approach will be utilized to
understand the interplay between discursive and material processes in shaping
identity formation, as well as the daily lives and experiences of Palestinian
refugees. Specifically, this project is guided by the following research
objectives: (1) to determine how UNRWA's humanitarian policies and projects
translate across various geographical scales and cultural contexts into
institutional structures and modes of governance in Balata Refugee Camp, and (2)
to determine how categorical distinctions instituted by UNRWA ("refugee" and
"non-refugee") intersect with articulations of Palestinian political identity,
and assess how Palestinian refugees are negotiating these identities in their
everyday lives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research provides an integrated view
of the relationship between humanitarian institutions, aid recipients, and the
wider social context within which humanitarian activity is taking place. Such a
study has the potential to highlight critical disjunctures between humanitarian
policies as they are intended and conceived by donor institutions and their
manifestation on the ground in conflict-zones. More broadly, this research has
the potential to transform the ways in which humanitarian measures are
conceptualized and practiced in war-torn societies, especially when this
assistance becomes woven into the institutional structures and social fabric of
the field site. From this type of assessment, improved humanitarian models,
policies and practices can be devised to more effectively align humanitarian
activities with the needs of aid recipients, as well as decrease chances that
humanitarian measures contribute to or prolong military conflict. Such research
has the potential to advance humanitarian theory and practice and influence
international humanitarian policy, both as it relates to the Israel-Palestinian
conflict specifically, as well as to war-torn societies more broadly.