* 0825454
* Progressive Failure of Slopes and Excavations as Fracture Problems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2008,02/29/2012
* Joseph Labuz, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 02/29/2012
* USD 350,568.00

The objective of this research is to develop fracture models and provide
experimental data that can be used to assess conditions associated with
progressive failure in cohesive, frictional materials. The basis for the method
involves analyzing the propagation of a fracture, where the theoretical model is
an exact representation of the stresses and displacements, and the results will
be presented for (1) shear banding within a volume (slopes), and (2) crack
growth near free surfaces (excavations). The analyses for volume-type
instabilities will include (a) various shapes of the fracture, e.g. circular and
log spiral; and (b) nonlinear and time-dependent behavior,
e.g.&lt;br/&gt;plasticity and viscoelasticity. The analyses for surface-type
instabilities will include the (a)initiation and growth of cracks near a free
surface, including interactions; and (b) curvature of the free surface
associated with a borehole or tunnel. Novel experimental apparatus will be used
to measure the fracture characteristics of propagating shear bands and spalling
instability phenomena. The approach to evaluate the conditions for progressive
failure is based on the use of the hypersingular boundary integral equation for
a piece-wise homogeneous medium (layered systems are allowed), with features
such as interfaces (joints, faults) and multiple openings (drifts, shafts). The
main virtue of hypersingular integral equations is that they present a
convenient means to deal with discontinuities and other discrete surfaces.
Hypersingular boundary integral equations contain the displacement
discontinuities and tractions, the values that characterize the interactions at
the surfaces. This powerful technique will be useful to evaluate conditions of
fracture within a volume and near a free surface for excavations at the Deep
Underground Science and Engineering Laboratory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Knowledge
transfer is tightly integrated into the research program, where exchange and
engagement with the broader geotechnical engineering community will be
accomplished through software for interactive analysis. A general K-12 education
program will use the familiarity and esthetic appeal of slopes and excavations
to engage a broad spectrum of learners. Small exhibits will be designed and
fabricated to demonstrate progressive failure through experiments on fracture of
a weakly cemented sandstone.