* 0825655
* GOALI: Model-Based System Fault Diagnosis and Prognosis - Passive Robustness and Aging Prediction - Application to automotive electrical systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2012
* Giorgio Rizzoni, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* George Chiu
* 06/30/2012
* USD 261,861.00

The research objective of this award is to develop methods for improving the
diagnosis and prognosis of complex engineered systems. Real world systems are
inherently subject to faults, and information on abnormal behavior of components
and processes can be obtained through measured signals. The aim of this research
is to exploit the information provided by sensor signals together with deep
knowledge of the physical behavior of a complex system to create a unified
framework for the systematic design of diagnostic and prognostic algorithms and
for the prediction of system aging. Today, there are few, if any, general
results concerning system prognosis and aging; the research, if successful, will
result in methods that are general enough to be applied to engineered systems in
different domains, for example automotive, aerospace, chemical processes and
manufacturing. Deliverables for this project include software for the design and
analysis of diagnostic algorithms, experimental data, mathematical models, and
educational materials for engineering students.

This GOALI project is conducted in close collaboration with a major automotive
manufacturer, General Motors, and aims to apply the new methodology to the
diagnosis of automotive electrical systems and to the prognosis and life
prediction of automotive batteries. If successful, the research will result in
significantly greater reliability of future automotive electrical and energy
storage systems. This may eventually result in reduced warranty costs and
increased customer satisfaction, with the potential of touching millions of
automobile owners around the world. The research may also have a positive impact
on accelerating the introduction of advanced electrical and energy storage
systems in future electric and hybrid automobiles by increasing their
reliability and serviceability. Further, the educational outcomes of the project
will affect undergraduate and graduate engineering students at two major
universities as well as practicing engineers in the automotive industry through
distance education programs.

