* 0825713
* Collaborative Research: Extreme Experience Design for Breaking Barriers to Innovation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Arthur Markman, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Paul Collopy
* 08/31/2012
* USD 227,163.00

COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Extreme Experience Design for Breaking Barriers to
Innovation (0825461/0825713)&lt;br/&gt;Katja Hölttä-Otto (PI, UMass-Dartmouth),
Carolyn Conner Seepersad (PI, UT Austin), Art Markman (Co-PI, UT
Austin)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this award is to
establish a structured conceptual design methodology, called Extreme Experience
Design (EED), that stimulates innovation of breakthrough products by engaging
designers in extreme experiences as part of concept generation. Extreme
experiences expose the designer(s) to modified physical usage environments
(e.g., moisture or noise) or altered means of interacting with the product
physically, cognitively, or sensorially (e.g., limited dexterity via gloves or
limited hearing via earplugs). These experiences are designed to help designers
empathize with customers under a variety of conditions, and thereby design for
the types of context-related latent needs that lead to breakthrough products. A
series of experiments is planned to design and refine the EED methodology, to
investigate its effectiveness, and to better understand how a designer's pre-
ideation experiences affect the results of conceptual design. A two-phased
Design of Experiments approach will be used to test the effectiveness of the EED
methodology. The first phase will be designed to investigate the impact of
extreme experiences and designer-prototype interaction, together and separately,
on the outcomes of the conceptual design process. The second phase will be
designed to investigate more closely whether different types of extreme
experiences lead to different types of innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, the results of this research will provide fundamental knowledge of
the effects of extreme experiences and designer-prototype interaction on design
fixation and a designer's ability to innovate. The knowledge will be
incorporated in a new conceptual design approach, EED, that has the potential to
enhance designers' abilities to generative innovative concepts by engaging them
in pre-ideation, extreme experiences. Also, the proposed research is expected to
have significant broader impacts. Research will be transferred from the
laboratories to K-12 students, university students, industry, and the general
public by means of online resources, outreach programs, industry interaction,
and improved capabilities for universal design that improves quality of life.