* 0825612
* Collaborative Research: Probing mantle plumbing beneath Pacific ridges thriugh study of the Lamont and Vance Seamount chains
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Craig Lundstrom, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 08/31/2012
* USD 190,934.00

Intellectual Merit: This research addresses a first-order problem in ocean
crustal construction: i.e., how magmas rising through the shallow mantle affect
mantle melting processes. This work identifies and characterizes hypothesized
diffusion-reaction processes that occur around melt conduits that feed seamount
volcanoes near mid-ocean ridge spreading centers. Samples come from the Lamont
and Vance Seamount chains located just off the northern East Pacific Rise and
adjacent to the southern Juan de Fuca ridge, respectively. These two different
settings allow comparison between two well-studied areas of high present
interest in the ocean science community. This work tests whether seamount
chains, aligned along absolute plate motion directions, reflect the effects of
olivine-rich (i.e. dunite) magma conduits in the upwelling mantle that focus
melts to near-ridge locations. If true, then seamount chains aligned along
absolute plate motion directions will have different petrogenetic origins and
eruption histories from those aligned along relative plate motion directions.
The research will also examine whether diffusive flux-melting of the mantle
surrounding a conduit occurs once a dunite melt channel is established. Tests of
the models will be carried out by measuring U-Th-Ra-Pa disequilibria, Sr-Nd-Pb
isotopes, Si and Ca isotopes and selected trace elements in seamount lava
samples. 231Pa excesses and light isotopic compositions of Si and Ca will be
examined to determine if temperature gradients play a significant role in magma
composition. These data will also help ascertain the role of different mantle
sources in magma genesis and test whether temperature gradients play a role in
mineralogical and compositional traits that currently are not well explained.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Broader impacts of the work include
training of two graduate students and collaboration between institutions.
Undergraduates will be integrated into the research and engaged in the whole
laboratory experience. Outreach to high school earth science classes at
University Laboratory High School in Urbana Illinois will provide opportunities
for students to learn about ocean floor geology and work with bathymetric maps
and geochemical data. The study will greatly expand the current global database
for a number of geochemical traits for seamount chain samples.