* 0825761
* Wave Approach in Vibration Analysis and Control of Complex Built-up Distributed Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2013
* Carole Mei, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* George Chiu
* 06/30/2013
* USD 216,000.00

The research objective of this award is to develop methods for vibration
analysis and control of complex built-up frame structures. There has been an
increasing interest in active vibration control due to the increasing demands
for mechanical structures to be lighter and faster - lighter and faster
structures are more prone to vibrations. The conventional modal vibration
approach is greatly challenged when solving complex practical vibration problems
due to the increased model uncertainty caused by the increased complexity of
structures and the unavoidable spillover problems caused by modal truncation. In
this study, a wave centered view of structures is proposed for vibration
analysis and control of complex practical built-up structures. This research
consists of theoretical analysis, computer simulation, and experimental
verification. Deliverables include exact closed form solutions to vibration
problems in planar and three-dimensional frame structures; ?active support? and
?active joint? design strategies for absorbing incoming vibration waves or
shunting unwanted vibrations to less important structural members; and
guidelines for designing complex periodical frame structures from vibration
attenuation viewpoint. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this
research will provide practical solutions to vibrations in built-up frame
structures and bridge a gap between academic research and real solutions to real
world problems. The related experience will be brought back to the classroom for
teaching and training the next generation of civil and mechanical engineers. A
course on ?Wave Approach in Vibration Analysis and Control? will also be
developed to reach engineers from local industry. Furthermore, this research
allows the direct participation of undergraduate and graduate students. Hence,
this research not only develops a cost-effective, convenient, and practical
approach in vibration analysis and control of complex built-up structures, but
also provides a vehicle for educating a broad spectrum of students and
engineers, in the difficulties associated with suppressing vibrations in complex
practical structures.&lt;br/&gt;