* 0825427
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Geomorphology of the Connecticut River's Alluvial Lowland as a Spatial-temporal Context for Prehistoric Settlement Patterns
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2011
* Kevin McBride, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2011
* USD 14,952.00

Under the direction of Dr. Kevin McBride, Ms Jaime Grant will collect data for
her doctoral dissertation. Her research focuses on the Archaic Period, which
dates from ca. 10,000 to 2,700 years ago in New England and she wishes to
understand how, over this long time interval, prehistoric inhabitants of the
Connecticut River Valley adapted to changing environmental conditions. During
this period the region underwent considerable environmental change as the ice
from the last glaciation retreated, lakes and wetlands slowly dried and the
Connecticut River Valley in its modern form emerged. While considerable data,
both geological and archaeological are available, they are difficult to
interpret. For archaeological materials the problem is that while the
distribution of known sites can be plotted the resultant pattern can be
explained in multiple ways. It is not possible to know whether distributions
reflect human behavior or factors related to differential site preservation.
Because the Connecticut River has changed course over its history it is possible
that some sites were destroyed as a byproduct of this process. It is also
possible that site discovery is systematically biased because of differential
burial under riverine deposits. To address this issue Ms Grant will work to
reconstruct the geological history of one portion of the Valley between
Wethersfield and Hartford Connecticut. The collection of core samples will be
used to reconstruct the floodplain evolution of this riverine lowland and
alluvial dynamics will be reconstructed. The geomorphological and archaeological
data will be integrated into a geographic information system to relate these two
variables. With this information it will then be possible to trace, over a long
time interval, the interaction between environmental change and human
response.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is also important because it will
further the academic and intellectual development of a promising graduate
student.&lt;br/&gt;