* 0825920
* ETBC: Collaborative Research: Evaluating the Role of Submarine Groundwater Discharge in the Oceanic Nd Budget
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Karen Johannesson, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 09/30/2012
* USD 356,552.00

A number of unresolved questions remain concerning the oceanic neodymium (Nd)
budget which limits our understanding of the geochemistry of this rare earth
metal and the interpretation of the paleoceanographic Nd isotope record. Amongst
the issues is the apparent uncoupling of Nd isotope ratios and Nd concentrations
in the oceans, or the so-called 'Nd paradox,' as well as poor constraint on the
magnitude and isotopic composition of Nd fluxes to the oceans. Scientists from
Tulane University and Old Dominion University, on the basis of preliminary data,
hypothesize that submarine groundwater discharge to the ocean is the source of
the 'missing Nd flux' required to balance the Nd budget, and that these fluxes
also play a role in controlling the Nd isotopic composition of the marine
environment. To test their hypothesis, the scientists plan to obtain groundwater
Nd concentrations and isotope ratios from a range of locations that discharge to
the coastal oceans. Resultant data would be used to develop a global mass
balance model to determine whether measured Nd concentrations and isotope ratios
of submarine groundwater discharge are sufficient to balance the oceanic Nd
budget. The model would also be used to evaluate the impact of varying
groundwater Nd fluxes, and their associated isotopic composition, on the
paleoceanographic Nd isotope record preserved in hydrogenous sediments.

As regards broader impacts, results from this research would be incorporated
into classes taught by both scientists at their respective universities. One
graduate student and one undergraduate student from Tulane University and one
graduate student from Old Dominion University would be supported and trained as
part of this project.