* 0825338
* Collaborative Research: Structural Mechanics of Steel Columns and Beam-Columns Under Fire Loading
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Andrea Surovek, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 12/31/2011
* USD 112,000.00

Current research findings indicate that the stability (collapse potential) of
steel building structures subjected to realistic fire loading is governed by the
behavior of steel columns and beam-columns. The overall goal of this project is
to develop knowledge (in the form of experimental data and numerical models) of
the fundamental behavior and stability of steel columns and beam-columns under
structural loads and realistic fire loading effects with consideration of
structural restraints. The experimental investigations will focus on measuring
the fundamental behavior of steel beam-columns and columns under combined
gravity and lateral loads, elevated temperature distributions and thermal
gradients, and rotational end restraints. Analytical models will be developed
and calibrated to model the measured fundamental behavior of the specimens. They
will be used further to: (1) conduct parametric studies, (2) develop
performance-based design provisions, and (3) to model and predict the realistic
fire behavior of large-scale building structures. The experimental and
analytical investigations will be led by the PIs from Purdue University and
SDSM&T, respectively.

The study meets a critical need identified by the National Institute of
Standards and Technology (NIST) Building Fire Research Laboratory (BFRL) in the
aftermath of the World Trade Center collapse, which is to develop and validate
test methods, analytical tools, and guidelines necessary to evaluate the
fundamental behavior and fire performance of structural components and the
system as a whole. This will facilitate: (1) the development of performance-
based design provisions to protect public property and life, and (2) better
prediction of the performance and stability of buildings subjected to realistic
fire events. Development of case studies and course modules will impact
undergraduate, graduate and practitioner education through implementation at the
partner schools and dissemination at national meetings.

