* 0825588
* Iowa Survey of Public Attitudes:  An Optimal Approach
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2014
* Naresh Kumar, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Patricia White
* 02/28/2014
* USD 934,709.00

SES-0825588&lt;br/&gt;Kevin T. Leicht, &lt;br/&gt;Naresh Kumar&lt;br/&gt;The
University of Iowa&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Social Science Research Center
(SSRC) at the University of Iowa will complete a pilot study in 2010 to test the
efficacy of using a spatially dispersed sampling design to collect survey data.
The design will capture the maximum variance in socio-economic conditions and
contextualize the neighborhood and physical environment surrounding each survey
respondent (using their precise location). The PIs will draw a full household
sample for the 2010 and systematically compare the sampled regions and
respondents with those selected in the conventional General Social Survey (GSS).
The PIs will field individual-level surveys in one EPA region in 2010 for the
purposes of comparing their entire data collection method and results with those
from the conventional GSS for these same regions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While
the GSS has provided unprecedented access to the attitudes and circumstances of
surveyed individuals, the links between these and the larger cultural, economic,
political, and environmental contexts where people live and work have been
indirect at best. This approach takes advantage of the rapid quantification of
multi-level geographic data and its extensive integration with information on
built environments, toxic exposures, and other features of human and natural
geography that are increasingly used in theories in social and behavioral
science and public health. The PIs will construct a spatial sampling frame of
inhabited areas and then draw a sample that can capture the maximum variation in
population distribution and SES. They will utilize geographic information
systems, remote sensing and locational analysis for constructing a sampling
frame and contextualizing individual GSS respondents. This approach offers
several advantages over the conventional sampling designs by (a) capturing the
maximum spatial dispersion in population size and SES; (b) avoiding spatial
autocorrelation; (c) linking sampled respondents (via geocodes) to many
additional pieces of contextual information including SES characteristics of a
place, land use and land-cover type, and potential sources of toxic emission;
(d) ensuring spatial coverage and adequate representation across SES and ethnic
groups; and (e) providing interviewers with information that allows for a better
assessment of respondents' answers in relation to their lived
context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study presents a mechanism for conducting and
integrating the General Social Survey's traditional strengths in collecting
nationally-representative survey data through face-to-face interviews with
spatial samples of adults in the United States with a geographic information
data management system that will locate GSS respondents in multiple layers of
geographic space. The approach builds on the rapid quantification of geographic
data and its extensive integration with information on built environments, toxic
exposures, and other features of human and natural geography that are
increasingly being used to theorize social science research. The pilot survey in
2010 allows for a systematic comparison of the results from an optimal spatial
sampling approach with more conventional sampling methods for a geographic
region and allow for a comparison of both full-sampling frames at the national
level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The world is becoming more
interconnected, and the ability to link personal circumstances to broader social
structure is central to the social scientific enterprise. The ability to develop
these linkages through the GSS will provide an unprecedented opportunity to
build social science infrastructure in the United States and (eventually) around
the world by allowing researchers and policy makers to have access to spatially
linked, demographically and statistically sound data sets. The ability to train
future generations of social science students and practitioners in GIS and
hierarchical analysis methods will be greatly enhanced, and high quality data
will at a previously unheard-of level of detail will be available to the social
science and social policy communities. The pilot test of this optimal spatial
sampling approach is an important first step toward revolutionizing survey data
collection for national surveys combining the latest technologies with
conventionally sound survey research techniques.