* 0825993
* Novel Optimization-Based Biclustering Algorithms for Biomedical Data Analysis
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Oleg Prokopyev, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Edwin Romeijn
* 08/31/2012
* USD 212,789.00

This award provides funding for the development of novel optimization-based
methods for handling the problem of biclustering in biomedical data analysis.
Biclustering consists of simultaneously partitioning the set of data samples and
the set of their attributes (features) into subsets (clusters). Biclustering has
great significance for data analysis in a variety of biomedical applications.
Performing it with high reliability, we are able to not only diagnose conditions
represented by sample clusters, but also to identify the key features (e.g.,
genes) responsible for them, or serving as their markers. The criteria used to
relate clusters of samples and clusters of features may differ, relying on
various patterns of interest among elements of a bicluster. The search for these
patterns can be represented as optimization tasks, the solutions of which form
the biclusters of data. We propose a family of new mathematical programming
models to tackle the biclustering problem in biomedical data analysis. Advanced
solution approaches will be developed for solving the proposed optimization
models. Computational experiments involving real data analysis problems will be
performed to validate the implemented algorithms against existing
methodologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research
project are expected to have a high impact in the area at the intersection of
optimization, data mining and biomedicine. It will facilitate the expansion of
advanced biclustering analysis in related health care and biomedical
applications, potentially improving prediction and diagnosis procedures, as well
as the understanding of the mechanisms responsible for many diseases. The
proposed work is also expected to enhance the existing computational tools and
methodologies for solving hard optimization problems. &lt;br/&gt;