* 0825661
* Nonlinear Dynamics of Nanopore Current Oscillations
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Zuzanna Siwy, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2011
* USD 347,000.00

Oscillatory behavior has been observed for almost all electrochemical systems in
a certain range of external parameters. Electrochemical oscillators based on
membranes are studied as model systems of oscillatory biological processes, and
propagation of action potential in neurons. The intellectual merit of the
research supported by the Dynamical Systems Program is to prepare and model a
new type of membrane electrochemical oscillators based on single tapered-cone
shaped nanopores. In strongly soluble salt solutions e.g. potassium chloride,
conical nanopores act as molecular current rectifiers. When traces of sparingly
soluble species, such as CaHPO4 are present, the system undergoes an intriguing
transformation from DC current flow to quasiperiodic current oscillations when a
critical membrane voltage is reached. External parameters will be identified
that allow for tuning the frequency of current oscillations in the range between
fractions of Hz up to several tens of Hz. The ion current oscillations will also
be stable for several hours. The experimental data will be subjected to
nonlinear dynamics analysis in order to distinguish random noise from
deterministic chaos in these nanosystems, and for the latter case
characteristics such as attractor dimension and Lyapunov exponents will be
extracted from the recordings. The nonlinear dynamics analysis will be performed
in parallel to the phenomenological modeling of ion current oscillations using
coupled chemical kinetics differential equations. Universal character of this
dissipative system far from equilibrium will be investigated as
well.&lt;br/&gt;Success of the project will lead to preparation and modeling of
a new type of electrochemical oscillators, which could be applied as a working
element of an ionic circuit, artificial cells, and sensory systems. The research
will also result in nonlinear dynamics characterization of nanopore based
electrochemical oscillators, and in better understanding of systems that
function far from equilibrium in physiological, water based conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;Education program of this project is focused on organizing hands-on
activities for middle and high school students in nanotechnology at UC Irvine.
The outreach activities will be done in collaboration with the UCI School
Partnership in Research and Information Technology (SPIRIT) program.
Interdisciplinary training in nonlinear dynamics tools, electrochemistry,
surface studies, and biophysics will be offered to undergraduate and gradate
students.&lt;br/&gt;