* 0825106
* CAREER: The Development of Hinged Molecular Containers as Fluorescent Sensors of Small Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2007,12/31/2009
* Christian Schafmeister, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 12/31/2009
* USD 88,628.00

Professor Schafmeister is exploring the development of hinged molecular
containers as fluorescent sensors of small molecules. Cyclic, chiral building
blocks will be joined into spiro-ladder fused-ring oligomers that create complex
three-dimensional structures. An amino acid-linked "lid" will provide for
ligand-dependent reversible opening and closing of the resulting molecular
container. By appending a donor and an acceptor at appropriate positions, this
opening and closing will be readily observed via fluorescence measurements.
Professor Schafmeister will develop effective tools for the stereographic
presentation and visualization of three-dimensional molecular structures,
facilitating the communication and learning of these often complex structures.
These tools will be disseminated for world-wide use through the
Internet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this CAREER award, the Organic and
Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the teaching and research
activities of Professor Christian E. Schafmeister, of the Department of
Chemistry at the University of Pittsburgh. Professor Schafmeister is designing
molecules which will specifically recognize and bind selected smaller molecules
and in so doing undergo a dramatic and easily measurable change in properties.
This basic premise can serve as the basis for the design of molecule-specific
sensors and for the construction of selective catalysts for chemical
transformations. Professor Schafmeister will facilitate student learning about
the three-dimensional complexities of organic chemistry through the development
of effective tools for stereographic presentation and visualization, and will
make these tools available to others, enhancing the educational experience of
students around the world.