* 0825922
* The role of iron (Fe) in controlling in situ distributions and activities of marine synechococcus
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Eric Webb, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2011
* USD 416,063.00

The unicellular cyanobacterium Synechococcus is one of the most abundant primary
producers in the marine environment. It is also extremely widespread;
Synechococcus has been found in open ocean, coastal and even polar environments.
Unlike its close relative, Prochlorococcus, Synechococcus has the ability to use
NO3 and has been shown to respond in the field to NO3 inputs, suggesting that
this organism may play a key role in global carbon cycling and especially new
production. To date, 16 potential clades have been identified, and it is thought
that this high diversity allows for the radiation of Synechococcus into many
different environmental conditions. However, despite the ubiquity and abundance
of Synechococcus, there are few studies characterizing the physiology and niche
adaptations of each clade. Iron (Fe) shows great potential as a defining factor
for niche adaptations, as its concentration varies over the geographic range of
Synechococcus, as well as annually at specific locations, and has been shown to
limit primary production in both open ocean and coastal settings. In addition,
culture work indicates that Synechococcus strains have different abilities to
grow on low concentrations of Fe. A comparison of the available genomes of
marine Synechococcus shows great diversity in the presence or absence of known
genes related to Fe stress, suggesting that Fe could have played a key role in
the diversification and niche adaptation of Synechococcus. This project will
study the effects of Fe on growth and carbon fixation in 11 different clades of
Synechococcus (using at least 2 strains from each clade whenever possible) and
the role of Fe limitation in determining the distribution of Synechococcus
clades on temporal and spatial scales. This project will produce a comprehensive
and systematic data set on the impact of Fe-specific niche differentiation in
Synechococcus, offer new insight into the factors that control clade
distribution, and provide understanding of the biogeochemical consequences of
Synechococcus diversity. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;In addition to
defining the role and impact of Fe limitation on marine Synechococcus, both in
the lab and in the field, this project will develop quantitative PCR-based Fe
stress diagnostics that will be available to the community. These data will also
allow for improved parameterization of models in which phytoplankton groups are
differentiated, therefore improving the ability to predict the dynamics of
biogeochemical cycles. The results of this research will be widely disseminated
at national conferences. Furthermore, this project will completely fund and
provide valuable research experience and career development for post-doctoral
fellow Dr. Jill A Sohm, as well as two undergraduates participating in summer
research.