* 0825763
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Corporate Social Responsibility and Rural Development in Ecuador's Northern Amazon Region
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2010
* Thomas Perreault, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 07/31/2010
* USD 11,990.00

Corporate social responsibility (CSR) programs have emerged in recent years as
the business response to social and environmental criticism of corporate
operations. Such programs, touted as development initiatives, are becoming
increasingly popular. However, there is still little known about CSR operations
at a local level, and even less known about their effects on indigenous
populations. In Ecuador, CSR programs are implemented to mitigate many of the
social and environmental impacts of oil extraction in Amazonian indigenous
communities, yet they often create additional problems. Today CSR programs are
mandated by the Ecuadorian state, which raises important questions about state
accountability and corporate roles in development efforts. This project
investigates the CSR programs of a private multinational oil corporation,
Repsol-YPF, in the indigenous Kichwa community of Pompeya in Ecuador's northern
Amazon region. The study poses three questions: 1) How do indigenous populations
perceive and respond to CSR programs, and how has this response changed over
time? 2) What CSR programs does Repsol-YPF implement in indigenous communities,
and how are these selected? 3) In what ways does the state facilitate CSR
programs? To answer these questions, a multi-scalar ethnographic approach will
be employed to examine the social relationships produced by and within CSR
programs in the context of environmental governance and rural development.
Environmental governance is defined in this project as the way in which social
institutions (e.g., rules, norms and customs of CSR programs), produced by
relationships between organizations (e.g., the state, corporations, indigenous
peoples), facilitate the continued extraction of natural resources. In-depth
interviews will be conducted with community members, corporate officers and
government representatives at the local, regional and national levels. Findings
will demonstrate the role and influence of transnational oil corporations in
environmental governance and rural development efforts in Pompeya. The
investigators hypothesize that indigenous peoples have a limited role in
decision making processes about their own local
livelihoods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will have important
implications for both policy making and scholarship. Examining the local, place
based impacts of a global oil industry can contribute to public policy and
development processes in which local communities can more fully participate in
those programs that affect their livelihoods. While CSR programs are becoming
more prevalent on a global scale, mainstream and academic literature still lacks
a clear definition of CSR and its impacts and goals. Employing a case study
approach, the investigators will examine the micro-scale processes of
environmental governance in an indigenous community to fill these gaps in the
literature. By focusing on CSR programs as institutions that reconfigure
relations between organizations engaged in environmental governance in the
northern Amazon region of Ecuador, this project deepens recent scholarship that
challenges the seeming uniformity of institutional practices and discourses.
While mindful of the problems with extrapolating conclusions across geographic
regions, CSR and oil activities are widespread, affecting many peoples
worldwide. As such, this research can be used to inform similar processes
occurring in other regions of the world. &lt;br/&gt;