* 0825818
* A Robust Method for Resolving Incorrect Visual Occlusion in Dynamic Augmented Reality Environments of Animated Engineering Operations
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Vineet Kamat, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Konstantinos Triantis
* 08/31/2013
* USD 298,747.00

The objective of this project is to investigate and design a functional and
accurate occlusion handling method that can be easily integrated into any
Augmented Reality (AR) application. AR is an emerging visualization technology
which blends computer generated scenes in the form of CAD objects with the views
of the real environment. From the point of view of an observer of an AR scene,
incorrect visual occlusion occurs when part or whole of a real object must block
the observer?s view of a virtual (i.e. CAD) object. If not resolved accurately,
incorrect occlusion leads to unconvincing visual artifacts that reduce the
observer?s confidence and reliability in the AR visual simulations, and
consequently prevents them and other decision makers from comfortably using the
simulation results for making crucial decisions. This research proposes a novel
integration of geometry capture, remote sensing, and data communication
technologies to enable realistic, reliable, and visually convincing results in
AR animations of engineering operations. The research objective will be achieved
by developing an automated method to obtain, record, and retrieve the depth
information for both virtual and real entities in an AR animated scene of an
engineering operation using remote sensing devices, and a z-buffering technique
to detect and resolve any identified incorrect visual occlusion instances in
real-time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Success in the research will lead to
significant increases in productivity, accuracy, and safety in performance of
operations due to better understanding of the engineering environment in which
projects take place, through the use of advanced AR visualization technology.
The results will be applicable to solve a wide range of engineering problems in
construction, civil engineering, manufacturing, mechanical design, medicine,
shipbuilding, transportation, and other domains. Solving the occlusion problem
is also necessary to enable future work on subjects such as collision detection,
motion preemption, and physical interference between real and virtual objects in
AR, all of which have been long standing problems that prevent the widespread
application of dynamic AR in several engineering and scientific domains. This
project will significantly help the career development of graduate and
undergraduate students, including women and minority engineers who will actively
participate in the research activities and prepare to become tomorrow?s
engineers. The project will lead to new software tools and training materials
that will be widely distributed to the engineering, education, research, and
professional communities to enhance scientific and technological
understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;