* 0825157
* Collaborative Research: A GEOTRACES Intercalibration of Collection, Handling and Analysis Methods for Mercury Species in Seawater
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2010
* Carl Lamborg, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 07/31/2010
* USD 54,737.00

Hg is present at very low concentrations in the open ocean (fM - pM) and is
subject to a complex biogeochemical cycling. To understand this cycling,
determination of the major species of Hg found in the ocean (mercuric ion,
elemental Hg, monomethylHg and dimethylHg; Hg(II), Hgº, MMHg and DMHg,
respectively), is necessary but poses daunting analytical challenges. These
forms can be volatile and photoactive, and their low concentrations make even
small amounts of contamination ruinous. But there are important benefits to
studying Hg in the ocean, including increased understanding of the source and
bioaccumulation dynamics of a toxic metal, the formation of organometallic
compounds (including those of Ge, Se, Po, As) in the ocean, assessing the impact
of an anthropogenically mobilized element, and the possible development of a
paleoproductivity proxy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from this award,
researchers at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, University of
Connecticut, Battelle Memorial Institute, and Wright State University will
participate in the upcoming GEOTRACES Intercalibration cruises in order to
initiate a comprehensive, multi-investigator/laboratory comparison of the
determination of mercury (Hg) species in seawater. Such an Intercalibration is a
critical first step prior to full fledged GEOTRACES cruise activities, so that
the various investigators studying the chemical oceanography of Hg in the
context of that project, which is intended to be decentralized and of such scope
that no one lab would likely be capable of completing the whole effort, may
compare their results. The project will consist of both a shore based and field
(participation in the two cruises) components. In the laboratory, the team will
test the cleanliness of bottles made from plastics other than Teflon, and the
prospects of long-term storage of samples collected during the cruises for total
and speciation measurements. This award will support only the field component of
the project, with the remaining effort facilitated by on-going support from
other sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this work, and that
of the subsequent GEOTRACES studies, include a greater understanding of a
serious human and ecosystem health threat in the form of MMHg accumulation in
fish. In addition, and as with GEOTRACES in general, this Intercalibration
exercise will forge and maintain bonds of international collaboration. Finally,
the four PIs in this effort are engaged in, and in many cases seeking additional
leveraging funds to help support, educational efforts at the undergraduate,
graduate and post-graduate level. &lt;br/&gt;