* 0825662
*  Social Relations and Community Solidarity: An International Comparative Analysis
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2008,10/31/2009
* James Hawdon, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 10/31/2009
* USD 44,918.00

SES 0825662&lt;br/&gt;PI: James Hawdon and John Ryan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SGER:
Social Relations and Community Solidarity: An International Comparative
Analysis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Community
solidarity, or community cohesion, is vital for a community's recovery. However,
cohesion tends to decline after an initial surge immediately following a
disaster or tragedy. This research project will examine how communities both
grieve and restore a sense of normalcy after tragic events using data from mass
shootings in Blacksburg Virginia and Omaha Nebraska in the U.S. and at Jokela
High School in Finland. The main goal is to discover what types of social
relations sustain community cohesion and provide the most efficient means by
which community members can recover from a disaster. By extending research
conducted at Virginia Tech to different types of communities and a different
culture, the investigators will determine if the relationship between tragic
events and community cohesion depends on the type of community that suffers the
tragedy, and if the social relationships people use to deal with a disaster vary
by type of community. The research strategy is to compare the survey data from a
Virginia Tech study with survey data collected in Jokela and Omaha. Like the
Virginia Tech study, the community surveys will include measures of the social
relations in which individuals engage and measures of "recovery." The surveys
include items that measure respondents' mental health, physical health, and fear
of crime. By testing a general theory of community relations, the investigators
will contribute to sociology by enhancing scholarly understanding of how
communities operate and how they recover from disasters. The research will have
theoretical implications for disaster research and community development
research. The research also has broader impacts including addressing fundamental
issues of community and community building. The results will have implications
for any attempt to strengthen communities. Given the importance of community in
several areas of life (e.g., crime control, economic prosperity, and general
quality of life), this research will benefit researchers as well as community
development practitioners. The project will also enhance graduate and
undergraduate education by informing classes in the areas of criminology and
community. The research will also foster cross-cultural relations among faculty
members and graduate students in Finland and the United States. Finally, the
research may provide strategies for communities to follow to help them recover
from mass tragedies more quickly. &lt;br/&gt;