* 0825042
* IRES:  International Research Experience for Undergraduates in Hungary on Physical Properties of Liquid Crystals
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* David Statman, Allegheny College
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 08/31/2012
* USD 102,284.00

OISE 0825042&lt;br/&gt;Statman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This U.S.-Hungarian program
provides International Research Experiences for Students (IRES) by linking
partners at Alleghney College in Meadville, Pennsylvania, with counterparts at
the Research Institute for Solid State Physics and Optics of the Hungarian
Academy of Sciences. Led by David Statman at Alleghney and Istvan Janossy in
Budapest, the collaborative program is designed to provide early career
experience for undergraduates through guided research on liquid crystals. The
broader goal is to add to our understanding of optical effects in dye-doped
liquid crystals and the surface interactions in these
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At Alleghney College, efforts will focus on
gliding with an optical field. The Budapest component of the IRES collaboration
will emphasize studies of gliding with an applied magnetic field. Prior to going
abroad, student participants will prepare with a spring semester of
undergraduate research in physics or chemistry at their home institutions,
followed by a four week full time summer session in Prof. Statman?s group to
prepare samples and plan projects. Ending with six weeks of lab work in
Budapest, each student will gain further experience with azo dye-doped liquid
crystals, learn new techniques, and obtain experimental results while
interacting with top-notch scientists at the Hungarian
Institute.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This U.S.-Hungarian IRES on the properties of
liquid crystals fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific knowledge
by enabling experts in the United States and Europe to combine complementary
talents and share research resources in areas of strong mutual interest and
competence. For broader impact, the joint activity builds upon the successful
collaboration of Statman and Janossy while preparing U.S. undergraduates for
research in an interdisciplinary field where there is growing demand for new
technologies in optical communications and for new materials that respond to low
light levels. The early career exposure to international team work with European
experts is expected to better prepare these U.S. students for future graduate
study in a promising and globally competitive field. The IRES is supported with
funds from the NSF Chemistry Division and the Office of International Science
and Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;