* 0825997
* Collaborative Research: Internal waves impinging on  near-critical slopes: multiscale numerical quantification of localized mixing and exchange with the interior
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Alberto Scotti, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2013
* USD 207,710.00

The project will pursue a numerical investigation of boundary processes driven
by internal waves and tides incident on a sloping bottom. In particular, the
project will give a quantitative assessment of the hypothesis that nonlinear
breakdown of internal waves at critical and near-critical slopes results in
mixed fluid that then disperses along isopycnals to the interior, a problem of
fundamental importance to diagnose the global ocean circulation. There is
indirect support of this hypothesis through observations of intermediate
nepheloid layers in the vicinity of near-critical slopes as well as direct
evidence through laboratory experiments, albeit at low Reynolds number. Accurate
estimates of local dissipation rates and turbulent transport coefficients at
these ?hot spots? will also be provided by the simulations. There is mounting
evidence through field observations that bottom boundary processes are important
to the exchange of fluid between slopes and the interior, to energy pathways in
the ocean, the suspension and settling of sediment, and to local biological
productivity. It is thus necessary to improve our understanding and our ability
to numerically predict the internal wave/boundary interaction problem and a
multi-scale approach, with potentially transformative outcomes, will bridge the
large internal wave scales to the bottom boundary layer (BBL).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Realistic simulations of bottom mixing processes have not
been possible so far because of the scale disparity between the incident wave
field and the turbulence, the high Reynolds number of pre-existing boundary
layers as well as those that form in the case of critical slope, and the high
numerical dissipation used for stability in current ocean models. The scale-
separation problem is handled here through a novel hierarchical use of
analytical or numerical solutions for the large-scale problem coupled to a large
eddy simulation (LES) of bottom mixing. To provide the large-scale field when
analytical theories are not available, we will employ a new baroclinic model
based on Adaptive Mesh Refinement (AMR). A realistic description of small-scale
processes will be obtained here by employing LES with a sophisticated sub-grid
model. This sub-grid model has a scale-similarity component to account for
deviations from isotropic, inertial-range behavior, it is not unduly
dissipative, it does not need tunable coefficients, and it has a near-wall
component to account for the turbulence at the boundary layer roughness scale.
The AMR and LES will be two-way coupled. The AMR (when needed) will drive the
LES, while the latter will provide approximated boundary conditions for the
former allowing communication of boundary mixing into the interior. The
simulations will be analyzed for BBL properties, phasing of local mixing rates,
lateral dispersal of BL mixed fluid, and characteristics of the nonlinearly
scattered wave. Functional relationships to the properties of the incoming wave
and to the slope angle will be extracted. Comparisons with laboratory and field
data will be performed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Numerical large-scale models at
the regional or global level are asked to provide increasingly precise
evaluations of oceanic impact on climate change, depend on parameterizations for
boundary fluxes. The AMR and LES simulations proposed here will allow a careful
assessment of bottom turbulence dynamics which could then be used to develop an
accurate representation of the bottom mixing component of large-scale models.
Mixing along slopes affects several characteristics of the shelf-edge/slope
area, which in turn control the exchange of nutrients and pollutants between the
boundary and the open ocean. On a broader horizon, mixing at hot spots on shelf
slopes is a critical ingredient in the energy balance of the internal wave
field. Two PhD students will be trained across the fields of oceanography,
engineering and computational science. Undergraduate students will be given the
opportunity to participate in the research.