* 0825407
* Quorum-sensing and the Carbon Cycle: Identifying Cell-density Dependent Organic Carbon Degradation among Marine Bacteria in Sinking Particles
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Tracy Mincer, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2011
* USD 655,743.00

The vast majority of sinking organic carbon formed within the surface layer of
the ocean is degraded in transit through the water column, and heterotrophic
bacteria on sinking particles are important agents of this process. Recent work
suggests that these bacteria have the ability to regulate organic carbon
degrading metabolisms by communicating with one another via quorum sensing (QS).
QS is a process where bacteria use cell-cell signaling to gauge the density of
related cells in their environment for the purpose of coordinating metabolic
responses among these related cells. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this study,
researchers at the Woods Hole Oceanography Institution and the Marine Biological
Laboratory will test the hypothesis that AHL-based QS systems are active in
sinking marine particles by trapping sinking particles, and analyzing them for
cell-cell signaling molecules that are diagnostic for active QS. Sinking marine
particles contain abundant Proteobacteria. This group of bacteria utilizes a
class of QS molecules called acylated homoserine lactones (AHL) for which the
team has previously developed new pre-concentration and mass spectrometry
methods for analyzing AHLs in sinking particles.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additionally, the team will also test the hypothesis that
that genes regulated by AHL-based QS in sinking particles encode enzymes for
organic matter degradation by constructing libraries of genomic DNA from sinking
particles and screening these libraries for AHL production. This should enable
sections of genomic DNA that contain AHL-regulated genes to be singled out and
analyzed further for genes encoding hydrolytic enzymes without relying on
sequence database searches. Finally, they will apply a "functional gene
expression" strategy to definitively constrain whether hydrolytic enzymes are
indeed the products of these AHL-regulated genes. In previous work, the research
team found that some marine bacteria also secrete enzymes to degrade AHLs;
consequently, they will will examine whether this is occurring on sinking
particles using both functional gene expression assays and incubation-based
experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study of quorum sensing in sinking
particles has the potential to reveal previously uncharacterized linkages
between bacterial community composition and particle flux attenuation. The
primary justification for the proposed study is that quorum sensing is one such
connection. QS has been well-characterized in the biomedical literature, and, as
such, is ripe for exploration in marine environments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The project will support two graduate
students, one of whom is specifically interested in pursuing a postdoctoral
career path that will depend heavily on research conducted by undergraduates.