* 0825827
* Regression-based Quality Improvement in Complex Systems with Consideration of Data Uncertaintly
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Jing Li, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Edwin Romeijn
* 08/31/2013
* USD 190,476.00

The objective of this research project is to develop new regression-based
methods for quality improvement in data-rich complex systems by considering
various types of data uncertainties. This is motivated by the fact that many
existing statistical and data mining methods for process monitoring, abnormality
detection, and fault diagnosis have limited capabilities in handling data
uncertainties, making them less effective when applied to real-world
applications. On the other hand, research on data uncertainties has mainly been
conducted from a pure statistics point of view, without linking the modeling and
analysis of data uncertainties to quality improvement objectives. To overcome
these limitations, four inter-related research tasks will be performed in this
project, including (1) process modeling, monitoring, and fault detection based
on data with uncertainties; (2) separation of process fault and sensor fault;
(3) optimal sensor allocation for fulfilling prescribed requirements on
monitoring and diagnosis capabilities; (4) identification of the maximum
allowable level of data uncertainty under prescribed requirements on monitoring
and diagnosis capabilities. This research will be demonstrated in a multistage
complex manufacturing process as well as in Alzheimer?s disease
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research will (1) bridge the gap
between data uncertainty studies&lt;br/&gt;in theoretical statistics and
traditional quality engineering research that generally overlooked data
uncertainties in developing quality improvement methodologies; (2) advance the
state-of-art of the research in quality improvement by providing new enabling
methodologies that facilitate process monitoring, detection, diagnosis, and
control based on data with various types of uncertainties; (3) guide the design,
selection, and allocation of sensors, as well as the data collection process, to
guarantee that data uncertainties will not interfere with achieving quality
improvement objectives. The research agenda will be integrated with an education
plan, including new curriculum development, student internship opportunities,
women and minority student recruitment, and K-12 programs. &lt;br/&gt;