* 0825592
* Collaborative Research: Structure and Morphology of Graphene Sheets  for Carbon-Based Nanoelectronics
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Cristian Ciobanu, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 08/31/2011
* USD 150,000.00

Graphene, a single-layer of carbon atoms, exhibits dissipation-free electric
conduction over the scale of microns even at room temperature. As such, graphene
could enable the continuation of the miniaturization trend in nanoelectronics at
a time when silicon-based devices reach their natural limitations. However, the
control over the area and quality of graphene sheets remains a major challenge
because their morphology is determined both by atomic-scale phenomena and by
long-ranged elastic interactions of surface features. Experiments on graphene
growth on silicon carbide show that the key to grow large and smooth graphene
sheets lies in controlling the structure of the precursor layer, i.e. of the
interface between graphene and the substrate. To achieve our primary objective
of controlling the quality of graphene sheets, we propose a multi-scale approach
that combines experimental techniques for surface characterization with atomic-
scale calculations, genetic algorithms for finding the surface structure, and
continuum models of nucleation and growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful,
this work will guide novel approaches to grow large and smooth graphene sheets,
which through lithographic patterning can be used to fabricate low-power
nanoelectronic devices. Our investigations of the structure and the defects of
the precursor layer will provide insights into the carrier scattering mechanisms
and hence into the performance of graphene-based devices. Furthermore, we will
identify reconstructions of the precursor layer that are particularly suitable
as templates for the assembly of regular arrays of nanostructures such as
fullerenes, metallic clusters, and functional molecules. Aspects of this work
will be presented in recently developed courses at Colorado School of Mines and
Brown University. The investigators will be actively involved in career advising
and student mentorship, and will use the results of this research to enhance the
experiences of K-12 mathematics teachers and high-school students under the
outreach program of the Materials Research Science and Engineering Center at
Brown.&lt;br/&gt;