* 0825130
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Developmental Trajectories:  A Comparative-Historical Analysis
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2009
* Patrick Heller, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2009
* USD 7,500.00

SES-0824130 Patrick Heller Christopher Gibson Brown University

Brazil in the 20th century was among the most unequal - and persistently unequal
- societies in world history. Over the long run, how, when, and why did Brazil
became so persistently unequal in its social and economic development? This
project first documents a new dimension of Brazilian inequality by showing that
Brazil's states generally maintained their levels of economic and social
development relative to one another throughout most of the 20th century. Through
a comparative historical analysis of Brazilian states, the co-PI will use
archives and regional and local histories to test five hypotheses about
potential long-run causes of this inequality, including the extent of Portuguese
colonial penetration by 1650, the intensity of slavery by 1650 and by 1888, the
presence of labor-intensive estates after 1700, the intensity of tropical export
agriculture after 1700, and liberal or conservative control of provincial
governments after the mid 19th century. Initial research suggests that an
overlooked variable drove Brazilian social and economic inequality: control of
the sub-national state and its precursors by different class configurations. The
study will contribute a detailed and comprehensive study of the Brazilian case
to the evolving theoretical framework in sociology on legacies of colonialism.

Broader impacts of the study include: 1) enhanced multidisciplinary
collaborations for future research; and 2) broad dissemination of findings to
lay, policy, and academic audiences. First, the project will build and deepen
multidisciplinary collaborations with social scientists and historians of Brazil
by participating in multi- and interdisciplinary conferences, workshops, and
research partnerships. Second, findings will be disseminated broadly to
academic, policy, and lay audiences, contributing a more robust empirical
understanding of the differential historical trajectories of inequality in
different regions of Brazil.