* 0825322
* Collaborative Research:  Co-Evolution of Submillennial and Orbital Scale Climate and Ocean Behavior during the Last 700 kyrs:  The Unique Santa Barbara Basin Record
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2013
* James Kennett, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 08/31/2013
* USD 495,175.00

The project will investigate abrupt and high-frequency climate change at an
ultra-high resolution previously unobtainable before 150 ka, but here spanning
most of the 100-kyr climate regime back to ~700 ka. Resolving short-term climate
behavior before ~150 ka is critical for understanding processes, thresholds, and
feedbacks that contribute to abrupt climate change. Millennial-scale climate
oscillations (Dansgaard/Oeshger cycles) reflect major abrupt shifts in the
ocean-atmosphere system, yet knowledge of this important behavior is largely
confined to the last glacial cycle, owing to the unavailability of suitable
older sequences. This study will extend the understanding of these events and
processes for the first time by analysis of a superb suite of 32 high-
sedimentation rate (~80-120 cm/kyr) cores taken in 2005 on the Santa Barbara
Mid-Channel anticlinal trend, where older, uplifted stratigraphic sequences crop
out on the ocean floor. The PIs preliminary work confirms that Santa Barbara
Basin can reveal climate history in unprecedented resolution for this time span,
clearly recording earlier D/O-like cycles and abrupt climate change on decadal
time scales. The cores provide ultra-high resolution windows into climatic-
oceanographic behavior of the north Pacific through much of the interval
dominated by the 100 kyr glacial-interglacial cycles, an interval not previously
studied at this resolution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this
study include incorporating Graduate and undergraduate students at three
universities will be involved in all aspects of the study. This project will
fund (2-3) graduate students to work at CSULB and UC Davis on the paleoclimatic
and paleoceanographic investigations based on the geochemical, faunal, and
sedimentologic analyses of the cores. This project provides funds for training
and support of undergraduates (5-10 total) in laboratory work and research
projects at the three institutions. The program will incorporate students from
NSF-targeted underrepresented groups as part of the undergraduate research
component of the NSF-funded Geoscience Diversity Enhancement Program at CSULB.
All three researchers in this project have a track record of incorporating
climate change topics into frequent presentations for large undergraduate
courses and the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;