* 0825701
* OPERATION OF A COMMUNITY MARINE-ATMOSPHERIC SAMPLING FACILITY AT TUDOR HILL, BERMUDA
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Anthony Knap, Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2011
* USD 237,687.00

The marine troposphere plays important roles in the global geochemical cycles of
many elements, in the global radiation budget, and in the global distribution of
organic compounds, nutrients, microbes and pollutants. At present, many aspects
of atmospheric composition, atmospheric transport, and atmosphere-ocean exchange
remain poorly understood, thus limiting our ability to predict and mitigate the
effects of anticipated future climate change. Central to improving our
understanding of these topics is the ability to observe and sample the marine
boundary layer. In this regard, oceanic island observatories have played a
crucial role. By virtue of its location in the western North Atlantic Ocean,
Bermuda has been a key location for numerous field studies of the marine
troposphere. Bermuda is also well equipped for such field research, with the
23-m high atmospheric sampling tower and site laboratories that were established
at Tudor Hill during the NSF-funded AEROCE program (1988-1998). With support
from the NSF Chemical Oceanography and Atmospheric Chemistry Programs, the Tudor
Hill tower and site laboratories were repaired and refitted in 2002-2003, and
have since been operated and maintained as a community field research facility.
Facility operations have included the collection of continuous meteorological
data and weekly bulk-aerosol samples and rainwater samples, which are archived
at the Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS) and made freely available to
the scientific community, as well as the collection of samples and data for a
variety of external research projects funded by NSF, NOAA, NASA and other
agencies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funds from this renewal award, researchers
at BIOS will continue to maintain, operate and upgrade this valuable community
research facility over the period September 2008-August 2011. Specifically, they
will: (1). operate and maintain a state-of-the-art marine atmospheric sampling
and observing facility at Tudor Hill, Bermuda; (2). continue collection of
continuous meteorological data and weekly bulk-aerosol and rain samples, which
will be archived at BIOS and made freely available to other researchers; (3).
collect additional atmospheric samples and data for external investigators, and
provide for the use of the facility by external investigators; and (4). expand
the capacity of the facility in terms of electrical power and tower sampling
space. Modest facility-user fees will be requested for the collection of samples
or data in addition to those specified in (2), above, or for other research use
of the facility. Anticipated net revenue from these user fees (on the order of
$10,000 per year) will be used to defray costs of site maintenance, equipment
replacement, and additional technician support in the project period.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: In general terms, the continued operation
and maintenance of the Tudor Hill site will facilitate research concerning the
chemistry and physics of the marine troposphere and oceanatmosphere exchange
processes -- topics that are central to international research initiatives such
as IGAC, SOLAS and GEOTRACES. Such research is expected to improve our ability
to predict and mitigate the effects of anticipated future climatic and
environmental change. In a regional context, the Tudor Hill facility will
complement ongoing time-series research in the Sargasso Sea, including
Hydrostation S, BATS and the Oceanic Flux Program. Together, these programs
promise significant advances in our understanding of oceanic and atmospheric
processes. This project is expected to make significant educational
contributions at a number of levels. Data and samples will be made available for
use in graduate research projects, as they have been in the past. The Tudor Hill
facility will also provide undergraduate education opportunities through the
NSF-funded Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program, and through
undergraduate courses taught at BIOS. The Tudor Hill facility will continue to
feature in BIOS public outreach activities, including public lectures, weekly
tours, and the annual open-house day. In addition, there will be a new web page
that will include general information on the Tudor Hill facility, as well as
information and data for external research and education users.