* 0825001
* Developing a General Description of the Unfolded State of a Protein
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Lisa Lapidus, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2012
* USD 539,736.00

The unfolded state of a protein under physiological conditions has long been
modeled as a random coil polymer with negligible self-interactions. Recent
measurements by nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) have revealed substantial
residual structure and transient interactions in several proteins, contradicting
the classic view of the unfolded state. However, the NMR data do not describe
the global conformational dynamics of these highly disordered states with much
specificity. This project seeks to marry these earlier results with
complementary measurements of the rate of intramolecular diffusion on the same
sequences. The PI uses the novel technique of quenching of the triplet state of
tryptophan by cysteine, which is measured with an optical instrument with
nanosecond resolution. Intramolecular diffusion coefficients can be extracted
from these measured rates using a theory by Szabo, Schulten and Schulten which
requires a probability distribution of equilibrium distances between the
tryptophan and cysteine in the sequence. The PI and co-PI construct such
distributions using a polymer model that exploits the structural information
obtained in the prior NMR studies. These distributions are compared to existing
distributions constructed by the Forman-Kay and Vendruscolo labs and also to
molecular dynamics simulations that will be completed as part of this project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal is to develop sequence-specific
distributions based on established polymer models, statistical structure
predictors, hydrophobicity scales and measured diffusion coefficients that
should lead to a general understanding of the dynamics of the unfolded state.
This project encompasses aspects of structural biology, computation biology,
optical spectroscopy and polymer physics. Therefore the students involved in
this work will require cross-disciplinary training to accomplish the scientific
goals. As part of a new graduate program in Quantitative Biology at MSU, the PI
and co-PI are designing new lecture and laboratory courses to introduce physical
science students to biology and biology students to quantitative methods. This
project is jointly supported by the Molecular Biophysics Program in the Division
of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate for Biological Sciences
and the Division of Physics in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;