* 0825964
* Development of a Spatial Analysis Framework to Predict Critical Segments of Water Distribution Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2008,12/31/2012
* James Garrett, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Konstantinos Triantis
* 12/31/2012
* USD 280,000.00

The main objective of this research is to investigate and develop spatial
analysis and deterioration modeling methods in order to improve understanding of
pipe breakage and the prediction of water pipe breaks and deterioration as
phenomena in space. American water distribution systems are aging and more
frequently presenting problems that are mostly visible as water pipe breaks.
Water pipes breaks cause water supply interruption, damage to properties, and
water quality issues and should be avoided. Also, as water distribution
investment needs grow while available resources shrink, attention has been
brought to the way water utilities use their resources to maintain and renew
their systems. If the time until breakage of a pipe was known with certainty,
maintenance could be planned in advance avoiding the problem that results from
pipe breakage. Several studies have been done in order to understand how water
systems and their components structural condition behave over time. However,
understanding how pipe condition varies in space is also important because the
factors that cause deterioration of pipes, such as soil characteristics and
surface load, vary over space. Yet, few studies have explicitly targeted the
spatial aspect of pipe deterioration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major long term
social benefit of this research is the improvement of water distribution system
condition assessment and the eventual optimization of investment allocation.
Expected impacts also include the development of competences to teach our civil
and environmental engineering students means of spatial analysis both to the
infrastructure management and environmental domains. It is believed that this is
an area that is emerging as an important part of the analytical competence of
engineers. The experience and the insights provided by this research will be
shared with graduate students. In addition, a series of workshops and seminars
to share the usefulness of this research work and concepts with practitioners
and municipalities will be held. Also, it is expected that this work will also
assist in broadening the participation of underrepresented groups in research.
Special attention will be given to attract students and to hire research
assistants from groups that have been traditionally underrepresented in science
and engineering to work on this research.&lt;br/&gt;