* 0825753
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Spatial and Temporal Dynamics of Salt Marsh Vegetation across Scales
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2008,12/31/2009
* Daehyun Kim, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Ezekiel Kalipeni
* 12/31/2009
* USD 11,730.00

Salt marshes are characterized by multi-scale spatial and temporal dynamics of
vegetation and environmental factors, which means that both scale and change
must be understood relative to each other. Recognizing that few studies have
explicitly addressed such dynamics at various scales, this doctoral dissertation
research aims to fill knowledge gaps on the Skallingen salt marsh in Denmark.
First, compared to the major emphasis on the effect of long-term, gradual sea-
level rise, there is little information about how short-term wind tides driven
by storminess on the ocean surface influence changes in plant species
composition. Second, while much research was conducted on broad-scale biotic and
abiotic patterns encompassing outer and inner marshes, fine-scale zonation of
vegetation in response to edaphic and topographic gradients across tidal creeks
has received less attention. Third, it has not been recognized that there should
be different rates of sedimentation depending on species composition, or
successional phase. The first gap will be filled based on data on plant species
ocurrence and over-marsh flooding frequency acquired since the early 1930's.
Preliminary analysis proved that the inundation frequency is closely related to
the ocean storminess. Such a correlation will facilitate the understanding of
vegetation succession in response to short-term wind tides. The second problem
will be solved by comparing micro-scale species zonation and the drainage of
inundated sea water across tidal creeks. For example, the dominance of late-
successional species on cutbank edges observed during preliminary field work
will be explained by high bulk density and coarse-textured substrate. Such soil
physical conditions are indicative of adequate drainage of saline water. The
third question will be answered by dating sediment cores from four different
sites, each characterized by different successional stages (i.e. early, early to
mid, mid to late, and late). Each core will be sliced into 1 cm-thick sections
and dated by means of gamma spectrometry using the constant initial
concentration method. These procedures will show how much sedimentation has
occurred annually at each site with different species composition.

The significance of this research lies in both scientific and societal
perspectives. In terms of the scientific consideration, the study will achieve
the integration of salt marsh ecology across temporal and spatial scales.
Temporally, both long-term and short-term sea-level variations will likely
explain vegetation dynamics, challenging the conventional belief that the long-
term variation is the primary driver. Spatially, recognizing the significance of
micro-scale processes across tidal creeks, this research will emphasize the need
for adopting hierarchical strategies that take both broad- and fine-scale
ecology into consideration. In addition, accomplishment of the third objective
will result in a methodological advancement by introducing dating methods to
quantifying vegetation-sedimentation relationships. In a societal sense, this
research delivers new insights on the importance of short-term wind tides to
coastal zone managers and policy makers who have primarily been concerned with
long-term, gradual sea-level changes. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising
student to establish a strong independent research career.