* 0825024
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Race in Place: Evaluating the Process of Residential Integration
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2010
* Evelyn Perry, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2010
* USD 7,404.00

PI and Co-PI: Robert Robinson and Evelyn Perry&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Indiana University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Doctoral Dissertation Research.
Race in Place: Evaluating the Process of Residential Integration&lt;br/&gt;&lt;b
r/&gt;0825024&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project will examine how living in a diverse community shapes the racial makeup
of residents? local social networks qualitatively and quantitatively. Data
collection will involve in-depth interviews with thirty key informants,
ethnographic fieldwork, including extensive participant observation, and 120
social networks interviews with residents in Riverwest, a stably-integrated
neighborhood in Milwaukee, Wisconsin. Currently, there is little empirical
investigation of the neighborhood-level relationship between residential
integration?the co-existence of racial and ethnic groups in a community?and
social integration?meaningful and/or useful cross-race ties. Thus, scholars do
not know whether increasing demographic integration leads to the many assumed
benefits of integration on interracial interaction and exchange (e.g. resource
sharing, improved racial relations, increased access to social and cultural
capital that support social mobility). This research will address the following
research questions: How do local organizations (commercial, civic, religious,
social service) in a residentially-integrated neighborhood facilitate cross-race
social integration and/or reinforce social segregation? How do residents of a
residentially-integrated neighborhood ?frame? (assign meaning to) their
neighborhood? How do these understandings of the neighborhood affect how
residents act in and toward their neighborhood? The goal of the research is to
explain how residents of a residentially-integrated neighborhood make social
distinctions within their local context and provide insight into how symbolic
boundaries affect resident interactions of the neighborhood (e.g., where to go,
how to interact, whom to interact with or avoid, how to deal with problems).
Overall, the research aims to advance sociological understanding of social and
cultural processes central to the perpetuation of inequality and to the
promotion of equality by grounding these processes in a diverse residential
context. By identifying local practices and organizational features that limit
or enhance the development of interethnic ties, the research will suggest
policies that could support the successful integration of neighborhoods and
maximize the benefits of integration.