* 0825406
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Interpreting Prehistoric Agriculture from Isotope and Pollen Indicators in Neotropical Lake Sediments: Do Multiple Cores Enhance Spatial Resolution?
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Sally Horn, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 07/31/2011
* USD 11,388.00

Lake sediments are important archives of paleoenvironmental information and have
played a key role in advancing scientific understanding of past climates and
human-environment interactions. This dissertation project seeks to evaluate some
common assumptions in lake sediment research by using a network of six cores
from Laguna Zoncho, Costa Rica to characterize spatial variations in lake
sediments. Previous paleoenvironmental work has established a record of
prehistoric agriculture at Zoncho. This study will use the agricultural impacts
as stratigraphic markers to analyze spatial variation in organic carbon and
stable isotope composition. Each core will be subjected to a suite of
geochemical analyses including bulk sediment and compound-specific stable carbon
isotope analysis to delineate the extent of prehistoric agriculture, organic
matter characterization and source determination using compound-specific
techniques, and analysis of stable hydrogen isotope ratios to provide a record
of moisture balance. The record created by the geochemical analyses will be
augmented with maize pollen counts from the agricultural intervals. The data
will be combined to create a high-resolution, spatially explicit record of
organic carbon composition. From this dataset it will be possible to quantify
the extent of spatial variation. If spatial variation proves significant, it may
transform the currently accepted approach to lake-sediment sampling and improve
the interpretation of proxies that rely on organic matter analysis. Spatial and
temporal coincidence between the records will provide strong evidence that
multiple cores can create a spatially explicit reconstruction of prehistoric
agriculture. This information will have obvious utility to archaeologists and
will contribute to understanding of the linkages between a lake and its
surrounding watershed, an important step toward the goal of separating
anthropogenic and climate signals in lake sediments.

Understanding relationships between humans and their environment are critical to
preparing for current global change scenarios. The interdisciplinary aspect of
this research (geographic, geochemical, archaeological) will provide an
opportunity to communicate results to a wide audience and promote collaboration
between scientists in different fields. The record constructed in this project
may be particularly helpful to local land managers, ecologists, and conservation
biologists as they seek to understand forest regeneration and apply this
knowledge to reforesting degraded lands. The detailed information on disturbance
and disturbance recovery in tropical premontane rainforest is especially
important because the area near Laguna Zoncho is not only one of the most
biologically diverse sectors of Costa Rica, but also one of the most deforested.