* 0825762
* Collaborative Research: A Nanostructure Sensor for Measuring Dissolved Iron and Copper Concentrations in Coastal and Offshore Seawater
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2013
* D. Whitney King, Colby College
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 09/30/2013
* USD 279,543.00

Iron and Copper serve as key co-constituents for numerous enzymes in a wide
range of biological systems, and their elevated or impoverished levels in
aqueous systems have dramatic consequences at organismal, ecosystem, and human
health scales. Over the last decade these effects have increasingly been
recognized to be important in ocean systems. Identifying sites and times where
these metals cause negative environmental outcomes is greatly hampered by their
comparatively sparse datasets. This problem is a direct consequence of the
analytical challenge of obtaining accurate Fe and Cu determinations in saline
waters at very low (trace) concentrations, and the limitations of ship-dependent
sampling regimes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI?s request funding to build on
research and technology advances in the Tripp, Wells and King laboratories to
develop active nanostructures that can serve as platforms amenable for detection
of a wide range of environmentally important dissolved metals in seawater.
Preliminary work has validated a biologically-inspired sensor platform in the
subarctic N. Pacific, providing the first demonstration of dissolved Fe
measurements at very low (&lt;50 pM) concentrations in oceanic waters by a solid
state sensor. The proposed work will 1) optimize this prototype sensor by tuning
the active nanostructures to measure dissolved Fe and Cu, and 2) develop a
detection device that migrates the current ship-board method to operate on
rosette profiling platforms as well as on moorings and autonomous vehicles.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has the
potential to further develop a sensor that will provide unique information about
the chemical speciation of the biologically important metals Fe and Cu. The work
proposed here fills an important need for high spatial and temporal resolution
data of these metals identified as priority by researchers in marine chemistry
and marine biogeochemistry. This interdisciplinary approach has the potential to
fill an analytical void for data that continues to stymie efforts to understand
how and Cu and more specifically Fe availability in the oceans modulates the
cycling of carbon and nitrogen in the marine environment. The proposal is well
balanced in its goal of marrying nanotechnology with IR spectroscopy to address
a analytical void while providing specific support for the training of students
at the undergraduate and graduate levels. The PIs plan to develop minority
student involvement in their research. This will have the most important impact,
since bringing smart students into our field and stimulating young students to
consider careers in science is essential for the continued growth of our
national science capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;