* 0825121
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Land Use and Water Law in the United States: Seeking Integrated Legal Solutions to the Water Resource Challenges of Suburban Sprawl
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2008,01/31/2011
* Jacque (Jody) Emel, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 01/31/2011
* USD 0.00

As the global population shifts from rural to urban areas, meeting the growing
demand for clean, adequate supplies of water is becoming an increasingly
difficult problem. In the U.S., the sprawling form of urban growth has created a
particularly complicated challenge in that it increases demand for water while
simultaneously endangering sources of supply. An important and efficient
solution to the problem is to avert the impacts of sprawl before they occur by
building in a way that has fewer negative impacts on water resources.
Unfortunately, the local land use decisions that govern development are usually
made in isolation from water resource considerations. Recognizing the need to
better integrate land and water management, a number of jurisdictions throughout
the U.S. have experimented with creating a legal nexus between land use and
water resources. For example, California requires developers of large
subdivisions to demonstrate to the local development permitting agency that
there will be adequate water supply to meet the demands of the proposed
development for at least 20 years, while Massachusetts imposes an additional
layer of development review for proposed projects within 200 feet of most rivers
in the state. This doctoral dissertation research provides the first systematic
review of these efforts and evaluates how well each integrates land use and
water resource decision-making from the perspective of environmental and legal
"best practices." To do so, this project investigates the following questions:
(1) what would a legal framework that successfully integrates land use and water
resources look like?; (2) are existing examples of integrated legal frameworks
capable of addressing the intertwined land use and water management challenges
of suburbanization?; and (3) what are the pre-conditions to achieving regulatory
integration of land use and water resources decision-making? To address these
questions, the investigators undertake a state-by-state survey to identify and
evaluate integrated regulatory regimes. To obtain deeper understanding of both
the potential and the limitations of these programs, two states with examples of
integrated legal regimes are chosen from the national survey for further
investigation. The project employs a combination of legal research and
interviews with key informants in the land use and water management communities.
This evaluation forms the foundation for prescribing further avenues for
integrating the legal frameworks of land use and water management to encourage
water sustainability.

Addressing the suite of emerging water concerns in the United States will
require solutions that forge new connections among water, land use, and law. To
date, there is little literature in either geography or law that addresses these
interconnections and their significant implications for environmental health and
urban sustainability. While addressing that gap, this project will also provide
a roadmap for the many places in the U.S. that currently lack the legal
prerequisites to integrate land use and water resource management effectively.