* 0825872
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The World Social Forum and Transnational Processes: Coalition Engagement, Framing Strategies, and Multi-Organizational Fields
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Scott Byrd, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2010
* USD 7,450.00

PI and Co-PI: David Smith and Scott Byrd&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Title: The
World Social Forum and Transnational Processes: Coalition Engagement, Framing
Strategies, and Multi-Organizational Fields&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation will examine the capacity of
transnational gatherings to integrate and organize civil society and movement
organizations at the global, regional, and local level to help incubate
transnational cooperation and mobilization. Focusing on transnational gatherings
and meetings where social movements create opportunities to collectively
articulate tensions, grievances, and conflicts increases our knowledge of
constituent mechanisms related to transnational organizational processes. One
such ongoing gathering of primary interest to this project is the World Social
Forum (WSF) first held in 2001 in Porto Alegre, Brazil. Specifically, this
research will analyze three components related to organizations and groups
affiliated with the WSF: coalition formation and participation; transnational
framing strategies; and the dynamics of multi-organizational fields. Analysis of
these three components will provide insight into the following questions. First,
what organizational factors explain the dynamics of transnational coalition
engagement? And, second, in what ways does the structure of multi-organizational
fields established by these coalitions affect transnational framing strategies?
Primary organizational and coalition data will be gathered from websites, WSF
session documents and summaries, and pre-existing databases. Semi-structured
interviews will be conducted with coalition representatives and campaign
activists at the 2009 WSF to be held in Belem, Brazil to not only procure more
detailed organizational data on coalition members, but to also examine coalition
and campaign success, framing strategies, and networking tactics. Both
quantitative and qualitative data will be analyzed through a combination of
network analysis, frame analysis, and extended case method. By examining
gatherings such as the World Social Forum, researchers are better able to
understand the multi-level effects of organizational dynamics on collective
grievance articulation from the local to the global level. Understanding the
influence of civil society exchanges on transnational organizational processes
provides valuable information for policy makers, movement activists,
organizational representatives, and political leaders to utilize while
implementing development projects, responding to crisis, and promoting
initiatives. Data gathered for the project will also be freely available to
other researchers as well as organized for instructors and their students to
utilize in the classroom.