* 0825394
* Characterizing the Formation, Nature, and Export of Weddell Sea Bottom Water using Noble Gases and Transient Tracers
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* William Jenkins, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2013
* USD 620,771.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;It is commonly accepted that since at least the
last glacial maximum, the substantial millennial-timescale changes in global
climate have been caused by, or at least associated with abrupt changes in the
oceanic Meridional Overturning Circulation (MOC). There is the lingering
suspicion that perhaps the ultimate trigger of the climate transients may lie in
the southern hemisphere. Dense waters formed by buoyancy modification on
Antarctic shelf regions leave the shelves and sink to comprise the major water
mass complex known as Antarctic Bottom Water (AABW). AABW, the coldest and
densest water to play a role in the MOC, in turn enters all of the major ocean
basins and thereby closes the southern end of the MOC loop. The Weddell Sea
features prominently in the production of AABW, where interaction between
seawater and the floating ice-shelves produces a unique pre-cursor to AABW by a
combination of processes, including) strong heat extraction at ice-edge
polynyas, sea-ice formation and export, melting of glacial ice at the grounding
line, and formation and deposition of sub-marine sea-ice. These processes not
only produce oceanographically and climatically significant injections of fresh
water into the AABW pre-cursor, but are hypothesized to have significant impact
on its dissolved noble gas composition. We propose to use high precision
measurements of the latter as a diagnostic tool of the magnitude of these
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will participate in a British
research cruise ANDREX which is a section connecting the CLIVAR (CLImate
VARiability and predictability Program) repeat line I6S with the Antarctic
Peninsula in early 2009. The cruise follows the northern rim of the Weddell Sea
gyre, and is ideally situated to study the exchange of water masses across the
Antarctic Circumpolar Current. A combination of noble gases, transient tracers
(tritium and radiocarbon) along with CFCs, stable isotopes, 3He, and traditional
hydrographic measurements will be used to place constraints on an
oceanographically and climatically important
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;This project involves
the development and use of novel oceanographic tracers and the application of
more traditional tracers in new ways to characterize water mass transformation
processes that are of fundamental importance in the operation of the global
climate system. The new insights into these processes will provide valuable
guidance in the design and construction of the next generation of coupled ocean-
atmosphere climate models, which will be of strategic importance in facing the
broad range of economic, policy, and societal issues created by climate change.
The data set produced in this work will be submitted to the appropriate data
centers/repositories to be made available to modelers and climate scientists to
guide future research efforts and to evaluate or test existing and future
climate models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;