* 0825066
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Status and Engineering Identity Development Among Undergraduate Majors
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2010
* Angie Andriot, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2010
* USD 4,150.00

PI and Co-PI: Timothy Owens And Angie Andriot

Status and Engineering Identity Development among Undergraduate Majors

SES - 0825066

Abstract

This research will examine the causes and consequences of engineering identity
development among undergraduate engineering majors. We hypothesize that those
who are better able to be socialized into the engineering student role will also
develop a deeper identity as an engineering student. Further, this process will
likely be influenced by development and use of a network of others who support
that identity. Also, gender and race will influence the extent to which an
individual is able to successfully develop an engineering identity. Finally,
those who develop an engineering identity will be more likely to remain in their
program. Our data collection is informed by research that has found that women
are underrepresented within engineering majors, and some evidence indicates that
females drop out of engineering at a greater rate than males. Data will be
collected in three phases. First, students will meet in focus groups to talk
about what it means to be an engineering student, what is expected of
engineering students, what they think might be common assumptions regarding and
stereotypes of engineers, and whether they think the stereotypes have any merit.
Second, incoming fall 2008 freshmen engineering students will be asked to
complete an online survey on engineering, identity, and progress in their major
once per semester for their first two years in the program. Finally, 20-30
students will be randomly selected for individual interviews, in which they are
asked to expand upon their survey responses. There are two expected impacts of
this research; one is theoretical and the other regards policy. Theoretically,
this research allows for the application of identity theory to occupational
decision-making. In terms of policy, it will help clarify why some women leave
engineering and others stay. Specifically, this research will advance discovery
and understanding of the social forces which influence student attrition within
engineering programs. There have been very few sociological examinations of this
phenomenon, and such a perspective can contribute to the current literature. By
identifying the ways a student?s role socialization, network affiliations, and
identity salience may influence attrition decisions, this research will can also
be used to inform policy decisions by universities, engineering departments, and
individual student mentors. Though the gap is shrinking, women are still
underrepresented in engineering. Research which elucidates some of the reasons
why women who were initially interested in becoming engineers, but later dropped
out of the program, can be used proactively. Once it is known why students?and
especially female students?are leaving engineering programs, steps can be taken
to actively work to increase retention rates, and thus, rates of women in the
field.