* 0825789
* Short-Term Joint Maintenance and Production Decision Support Tool of Manufacturing Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Jun Ni, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 12/31/2012
* USD 278,743.00

The research objective of this award is to develop scientific methods for
modeling and analysis of short-term joint maintenance and production decision
support tools for complex manufacturing systems. For manufacturing systems with
unreliable machines and finite internal buffers, there is a need for effective
short-term real time control policies in order to satisfy various system
performance requirements, such as throughput, reliability, quality and cost
effectiveness. This research will develop a real-time short-term production and
maintenance control system based on novel data-driven instantaneous bottleneck
detection methods, maintenance opportunity planning and maintenance task
prioritization without using simulation models. The proposed system will
investigate the mitigation of production uncertainties to reduce unscheduled
downtime and the effective utilization of finite factory resources on the
throughput-critical sections of a production system by detecting bottlenecks.
This goal for such proposed joint maintenance and production decision
optimization is to achieve a nearly balanced line status for any given
production operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this
research will establish a scientific knowledge base and provide an opportunity
for creating optimal maintenance policies that can be used to effectively
improve the performance of complex manufacturing systems as well as many other
mission critical engineering systems. The developed ?smart? joint production and
maintenance decision-making can have a significant impact for industrial
applications such as automotive production systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
results will be disseminated to allow industrial practitioners to apply these
methods to achieve increased production efficiency, reduced cost, and improved
competitiveness. Graduate and undergraduate engineering students will benefit
through classroom instruction and involvement in the research. Students involved
in this research will greatly benefit from the interdisciplinary research
environment anticipated in this project, where mechanical, industrial, and
electrical engineering science will be intertwined. &lt;br/&gt;