* 0825843
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Immigrant Family Detention: The Family, Law, Security, and Space in U.S. Immigration Policy and Practice
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2008,01/31/2010
* Lauren Martin, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 01/31/2010
* USD 9,504.00

In 2006, U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) announced the expansion
of family detention as part of its Secure Border Initiative. Since then,
immigrant and asylum-seeking families have been detained at two facilities: the
Berks County Family Care Shelter in Leesport, Pennsylvania and the T. Don Hutto
Family Residential Facility in Taylor, Texas. While immigration research has
examined labor markets, policy, individual and collective identities, and
citizenship practices, these studies have not analyzed the role of immigration
enforcement practices in the immigration process. Seeking to fill this gap, this
research examines how the spatial strategies of family detention are central to
justifications for the policy and its legal contestation. Family detention
combines spatial strategies by (1) segregating migrant families from the
population; (2) differentiating between detainable and non-detainable migrants;
(3) regulating the temporal and spatial location of migrants' inside Berks and
Hutto. To understand how these spatial strategies overlap with discourses of the
family, security, and space, the research asks: (1) What do the different ways
of using space in family detention practice and its legal contestation reveal
about the relationship between space, the family, the child, and the migrant as
political categories? (2) How do family detention policy and its public
contestation reproduce and circulate spatialized conceptions of the family and
the child? (3) What does the administration and regulation of family detention
reveal about new connections between security and immigration enforcement
practices? Using a multi-method approach, the research combines archival data on
immigration enforcement policy towards families and semi-structured interviews
with key policy makers, legal experts, advocates, and former detainees. The
study examines the operation of the only two existing family detention
facilities, Hutto and Berks, providing comprehensive and comparative data on
family detention practices. Combining quantitative content analysis with
qualitative interpretive analysis, the research analyzes how the spatial
strategies and discourses of family detention rely upon localized applications
of immigration law and policy at detention center sites.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research contributes an empirical analysis of an
understudied geographical phenomenon: the detention of migrant families. Recent
legislation specifically names the T. Don Hutto facility as its model for a new
family detention center, yet a single study of family detention exists from
which to evaluate family detention policy (Women's Commission 2007). In
geography, immigration research has analyzed how transnational labor markets,
policy, and individual and collective identities have changed as a result of
mobility. These studies do not, however, examine the impact of immigration
enforcement policy and practice on these processes, nor what happens to migrants
between arrest and deportation. Linking the spatial strategies of family
detention practice to the circulation of legal and political discourses of the
family, the child, the migrant, and security, this analysis will reveal how
homeland security concerns have encouraged the expansion of detention and
deportation practices to new populations. Thus, the research will contribute an
analysis of how spatialized configurations of the family can change policy,
contributing a political geographic conceptualization of family detention to
multidisciplinary research on security, migration, and kinship. Distributed to
governmental and non-governmental immigration policy-makers and published in
academic journals, the results of this research will provide new information and
analysis about the legal, political, and material implications of family
detention.&lt;br/&gt;