* 0825647
* Collaborative Research: Surface Flux for Cracked and Intact Clays for Ponded and Sloped Conditions
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Kenneth Walsh, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Richard J. Fragaszy
* 07/31/2012
* USD 149,429.00

Assumptions of extremes of wetted state of unsaturated soils during
infrastructure lifetime (saturated or dry properties) have significant
implications for design, construction, functionality, safety, and structural
longevity. Assessment of the degree of saturation that occurs in the subsurface
requires understanding and quantifying actual surface flux, a complex function
of soil surface conditions, including in particular soil suction, degree of
cracking, and slope geometry. There are two major related research issues yet to
be adequately addressed in geotechnical applications: (1) the effect of surface
cracking in volume-change-sensitive clays on unsaturated flow property
functions, and (2) the effect of drainage conditions (well-sloped surface versus
poorly drained) on surface flux of cracked and intact clays. Seasonal cracking
of soil results in poor estimates of runoff and infiltration due to the changing
soil storage conditions (Arnold et al, 2005). Prediction of soil suction
profiles requires substantial improvements in current capabilities, both from a
soil property and numerical modeling perspective. Several conditions present
numerical solution challenges: (i) strong nonlinearities in soil properties,
(ii) abrupt changes of moisture conditions at the surface boundary and wetting
front, and (iii) the presence of surface runoff conditions (Scanlon et. al.,
2002). The behavior of unsaturated cracked soil is quite different from that of
intact soil, further complicating evaluation of surface flux conditions for
clays.

This study addresses key remaining questions rarely, or only superficially,
discussed in the geotechnical literature, and is geared toward transformation of
surface flux modeling capabilities for cracked and intact clays. The
geotechnical research team will work with a co-investigator in Applied Math
towards addressing these needs through development of: (1) data and models for
unsaturated soil properties of cracked clays including volume change of both the
cracks and matrix; (2) data and models for run-off for well-inclined (sloped)
and level-grade cracked and intact (3) improved solution methods for surface
flux, including run-off, and (4) evaluation of field damage related to drainage
and cracking for consistency with modeling and data. A key element of this
research is the collaboration and sharing of physical resources among partners
(ASU?s advanced unsaturated soils testing equipment and SDSU?s unique tilt
table).

A wide range of problems arise from unsaturated soils. Damage to infrastructure
from expansive clays alone is estimated to be as much as 15 billion/yr (Nuhfer
et al., 1993; Wray and Meyer 2004). Krohn and Slossom (1980) estimated that 20%
of surface soils of the U.S. are subject to shrink-swell (and cracking).
Concerns over movement of contaminants to great depth have heightened interest
in understanding unsaturated flow and the complex interactions between climate,
human surface activities and unsaturated soil subsurface conditions and
processes. Researchers have demonstrated the role of unsaturated soil behavior
in rainfall-induced slope failure (Toll, 1999; Yin, 1998). Surface flux and
surface runoff are critical to the performance of slopes, and little is known
about the influence of cracks on the flux or on slope stability itself. In
California in 1982, over 18,000 slides swept down slopes with little warning,
damaging homes and killing 14 residents (Ellen and Wieczorek, 1988). U.S. costs
for landslide repairs exceed $2 billion/yr and landslides, nearly all rainfall-
induced, result in 25-50 deaths/yr (Spike and Gori, 2003). This research will
have impact on solutions to all of these problems through enhancing our
understanding and modeling of surface flux and unsaturated flow.

Students will be trained and will be engaged in dissemination, including
conferences and publications. Findings will be presented in CE classrooms at ASU
and SDSU, and integrated into ASU?s Math program where students will perform
numerical simulations and compare with existing codes and data. On-going ASU
recruiting programs focused on teachers and underrepresented students will be
used to bring aspects of this study into junior and high school classrooms. A
set of lectures will be developed on the research process and presented at a San
Diego high school having an 82% female and non-white male student body. Students
will also tour labs. Working with pre-engineering teachers, Co-Is will develop a
means of attracting students to engineering and research.