* 0825220
* NSF-GEM4 Summer School on Cellular and Molecular Mechanics
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2014
* Guruswaminaidu Ravichandran, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 07/31/2014
* USD 577,271.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interdisciplinary research in the areas of cell/molecular
biology and engineering is clearly an emergent field that will become the
frontiers of scientific, engineering, and biological research. It is also clear
that there is an urgent need to educate engineers about biology and biologists
about engineering, and a need to train researchers in this critical, emergent
field. In this project, an NSF-GEM4 Summer School on Cellular and Molecular
Mechanics will be established through a collaborative effort among five US
institutions (UIUC, MIT, Caltech, Georgia Tech, and UT-Austin). In the next five
years, the Summer School on Cellular and Molecular Mechanics will be held at
Caltech, UT-Austin, UIUC, MIT, and Georgia Tech, respectively. Experts from
engineering and biology are invited to give lectures on basic knowledge in
mechanics and in biology as well as on state-of-the-art research. Participants,
including graduate students, postdocs, and faculty members from both engineering
and biology, will learn the research tools and methods in each other's to
explore potential collaborations on topics of mutual interest.&lt;br/&gt;The
Summer School series is expected to produce the next generation of researchers
who are equally familiar with the tools and methodologies in engineering and
biology research, with a goal to foster a new, interdisciplinary research area
at the intersection of engineering and biology. The impact of the Summer Schools
will be significant and far-reaching, including developing new research tools,
transforming the existing research methodologies, and potentially leading to
solutions to some of the most challenging problems facing society including
healthcare, energy and the environment. The five US institutions are
strategically located geographically. The collaborations among these
institutions will form the foundation for potential coordination in this
emergent field and enhance the impact of future educational and research
efforts.