* 0825826
* Collaborative Proposal: Impact of secondary circulation and mixing of estuarine exchange flows.
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Ming Li, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2012
* USD 241,945.00

Intellectual Merit: This study is the first proposed field effort to quantify
the role of secondary circulation in driving the estuarine exchange flow.
Although recent numerical studies in a limited estuarine parameter space suggest
that the lateral advection is a leading-order term in the subtidal along-channel
momentum balance, it has not been confirmed by observations. Observational test
of this model result is critical to the field of estuarine oceanography because
it raises a fundamental question regarding the validity of the classic theory of
estuarine circulation. Numerical and scaling results have suggested that the
effects of lateral advection are nearly always balanced by internal stresses so
that a simple theory based on the momentum balance between longitudinal pressure
gradient and bottom stress provides an accurate prediction for the estuarine
residual velocity. The central hypothesis is that the near cancellation between
secondary flows and interfacial stress is a manifestation for a possible
interaction or feedback between the advective accelerations due to secondary
circulation and diffusive momentum transfer due to small-scale turbulent flows.
This project will investigate the co-variability between the lateral advection
and interfacial stress over the spring-neap tidal cycle and assess their roles
in the estuarine exchange flow. We plan to conduct a series of field experiments
in the James River estuary, complemented by ROMS (Regional Ocean Modeling
System) and LES (Large Eddy Simulations) modeling simulations. Field efforts
include moored and shipboard observations as well as dye-release experiments and
microstructure profiling. ROMS modeling will focus on the effects of secondary
circulation on the estuarine exchange flows in this wide estuary, while LES
modeling will examine the interactions and possible coupling between secondary
flows and small scale turbulent flows. Results obtained from this project will
provide a definitive answer on the role of secondary circulation in estuarine
circulation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Estuarine dispersion is
largely driven by the exchange flow and the ability to predict dispersion is
critical in many applied problems such as determining the Maximum Total Daily
Load (TMDL) permissible to an estuarine system. More generally, this project
will yield much-needed information regarding the circulation and mixing
processes in estuaries and help develop state-of-the-art numerical models for
simulating estuarine flows, which are required for predicting water quality,
contaminant and fish larvae transport. For the field work in the James River, we
will involve participation of high school teachers and students from the areas
near the estuary. Through the participation of one of the investigator at the
University of Florida, this project enhances the involvement of minority groups
in science. This project will also provide training to three graduate students
and undergraduate interns.