* 0825938
* Composite Structural Insulated Panels (CSIPs) for Hazard Resistant Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Fouad Fouad, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 08/31/2013
* USD 546,475.00

Building construction systems, such as Structural Insulated Panels (SIPs) have
demonstrated the capabilities for energy efficient and affordable housing but
with inadequate resistance against wind storm loading and floods. The objective
of the project is to, for the first time ever, adapt a new preforming process
and low cost thermoplastic technology to develop innovative multifunctional
envelop systems for sustainable housing and storm shelter through the evolution
of Composite SIPs (CSIPs) concepts that will provide better energy efficiency,
inherent flood resistance and substantially higher strength with much thinner
structural panels. Adaptation of inexpensive natural fiber reinforced composite
to replace conventional building materials will receive emphasis. Numerous
issues regarding basic materials science and engineering, joining (including
mechanical attachments and bonding), structural testing and analysis, and
environmental performance modeling will be addressed to determine if the
potential of CSIPs can be fully realized. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential
payoff for success of this program could be rapid technology insertion into
building systems needed for the rebuilding of homes in the gulf coast states and
in flood prone areas since the approach builds upon existing construction
systems concepts. The potential for these technologies to lead to low cost,
energy efficient housing with superior resistance to natural hazards such as
floods, hurricanes, and tornados is tremendous with excellent potential for
transition into commercial applications. The spirit of interdisciplinary
engineering education will be encouraged through cross-disciplinary educational
program including web casting of large-scale tests and engaging the composites
industry in the construction market. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;