* 0825937
* Collaborative Research: Safe Coordination of Multiple Autonomous Vehicles
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Prabhakar Pagilla, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/2012
* USD 140,004.00

The focus of the project is on developing methods for safe coordination of
groups of multiple vehicles accomplishing multiple tasks in the presence of a
variety of physical, collision avoidance, and informational constraints. Safe
coordination assumes the accomplishment of the vehicles? individual and group
goals while never violating the overall multi-vehicle system?s safety.
Coordination of multiple vehicles is considered safe if there is a guarantee of
no collisions between the vehicles and between the vehicles and static objects.
The individual and group goals are defined based on numerous applications
including surveillance and reconnaissance, control of mobile sensor networks,
manipulation of static objects using mobile robots, and air and highway traffic
control, to name a few. The main deliverable of this project is to provide
methodologies that would lead to implementable control laws for coordination of
a variety of vehicles in the presence of safety, motion, and communication
constraints. The theoretical results will be tested on a number of experimental
vehicle platforms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The benefits of successfully
accomplishing this project are numerous. Implications of providing safe
coordination laws for ground and air traffic regulations as well as for numerous
applications of groups of unmanned vehicles are of crucial importance, the first
and the foremost being the safety of humans involved. The benefits also include
a decrease in cost due to collision avoidance and the reliability of
accomplishing desired goals using groups of autonomous vehicles by assuming
realistic models. Graduate and undergraduate students would benefit from
investigating problems that are theoretically challenging with many useful
application opportunities. Demonstrations using multiple autonomous robots will
be presented to K-12 students in order to introduce them to exciting
opportunities that engineering as a profession can offer.