* 0825710
* GOALI: Robust and Efficient Knowledge Discovery With Application in Gene Expression Based Diagnosis
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Samuel Huang, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Edwin Romeijn
* 08/31/2012
* USD 374,998.00

The research objective of this award is to develop a robust and efficient method
to discover knowledge from large data sets that are high dimensional, with
disproportional class distribution, and with data coming from different sources
at different times. The key technique is a model-free knowledge discovery method
that does not require the time-consuming pattern extraction step traditionally
carried out in data mining. This is accomplished by converting a large data set
into a compact contingency table through discretization, feature selection, and
data summarization. A confusion matrix based data set characteristic measure is
used to ensure that feature selection is robust to class distribution so proper
class separability is maintained in the reduced data set. When new data is
available, the contingency table can be efficiently updated to enable
incremental knowledge discovery. The developed method will be validated and
applied to gene expression based diagnosis, which involves datasets with
extremely high dimensionality (up to several hundred thousands). If successful,
the results of this research will provide a knowledge discovery tool that
enables domain experts to make better decisions in various applications
including evidence-based medicine in healthcare, fault diagnosis in maintenance,
and customer relationship management in finance and retail. The target
application of gene expression based diagnosis, when successful, would allow
physicians to identify complex genetic traits that underlie different
phenotypes, disease subtypes, as well as clinical outcome. This will enable
personalized intervention to maximize treatment effectiveness for individual
patients. The collaboration with College of Medicine and Cincinnati Children?s
Hospital makes it possible to access critical domain expertise and specialized
computing resources; thus enhancing research and education infrastructure.
Research results will be incorporated into both Engineering and Medicine
graduate courses so students can benefit from most recent interdisciplinary
research advances.