* 0825507
* Collaborative Research: Geoengineering Extreme Events Reconnaissance (GEER) Association : Turning Disaster Into Knowledge
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2008,11/30/2013
* J. David Frost, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 11/30/2013
* USD 57,172.00

Documenting and learning from observations following extreme events are
invaluable to advancing the state-of-the-art and the state-of-the-practice in
multi-hazards engineering. Recorded observations serve as benchmarks to our
understanding of the effects of these events, their underlying causative
mechanisms, and for validation of design procedures. Capturing these
observations is critical to advancing the profession. Currently, the Geo-
Engineering Earthquake Reconnaissance Association performs post-earthquake
reconnaissance. Having succeeded in developing innovative techniques for post-
earthquake reconnaissance, the association is broadening its scope to include
other natural and human-made disasters. This broadening of its mission is
reflected in its new name: Geo-engineering Extreme Events Reconnaissance (GEER).

While post-earthquake reconnaissance continues to be a central mission, we
recognize that GEER members have already participated effectively in
reconnaissance efforts that document geotechnical effects of other extreme
events (e.g., World Trade Center Towers collapse and Hurricanes Katrina and
Rita). GEER is well positioned to provide leadership in developing innovative
technologies and protocols for performing reconnaissance of the damaging effects
from other natural and human-made disasters. Much of the data and information
generated by extreme events is perishable and therefore must be collected within
a few days or weeks of the event. There continues to be a real need for
assembling strategic geo-engineering survey teams with NSF support. Many of the
innovative techniques employed in recent reconnaissance efforts, such as use of
digital cameras, GPS devices, PDAs, remote sensing, and digital mapping, were
developed by GEER members. GEER's ability to rapidly assemble experienced and
new geo-engineers is unmatchable. However, these efforts are being improved
through better coordination prior to the next event, through continued
development of technologies, and training of young professionals. By joining
with other professions who have also developed effective procedures, and sharing
the results of this research with other communities, the future detrimental
effects of extreme events will be minimized.

This award provides funds for continuation of GEER management and reconnaissance
activities under the new expanded scope of providing quick response
investigations of major geo-engineering-related disasters. It is expected that
an average of one or two investigations of moderate sized events would be
conducted per year. In the event of a major disaster, a small quick response
team would be dispatched to determine the magnitude of the needed response so
that a request for additional funds could be quickly submitted.