* 0825724
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Rural Communities, Mining, and Globalization
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Michael Dougherty, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2009
* USD 7,499.00

Gary Paul Green Michael L. Dougherty University of Wisconsin-Madison

Guatemala, El Salvador and Honduras sought to integrate into the global economy
in the mid 1990s, in part, through foreign direct investment (FDI) in the
mineral sector. Spatially incorporating rural communities into the global
economy through gold mining has galvanized civic opposition to mining projects
in the region. As these anti-mining movements have blossomed across Central
America, governments have responded harshly to reassure foreign investors.
Ironically, however, as state and civil society determinedly confront each other
over the mining issue, this political instability has discouraged foreign
investment in other economic sectors. Mining-led market integration has made
Central America a less attractive investment environment for the kinds of FDI
that best contribute to the economy through job creation, technology and
learning spillovers, and linkages with other economic sectors. The prominent
literatures on globalization and development?the dependency school, the
neoclassical frame, and the developmentalist state literature, do not account
for the emergence of this paradox. Instead, these cases may constitute the
emergence of a new model of mineral-led market integration in the neoliberal
era, where relationships between states, firms and communities are reconfigured.
Incorporating political process theory to frame civic opposition, public choice
theory to frame state intervention, and a commodity chain analysis of the global
gold mining industry may help illuminate this reconfiguration. To explore the
stand-off between state and civil society at the core of this development
paradox, this dissertation poses two research questions: 1) how do rural
communities make sense of their integration into the global economy through gold
mining? And 2) how do these governments negotiate their social contractual
obligations to civil society with their contractual obligations to foreign
capital? Data collection will involve twelve months of ethnographic fieldwork in
rural communities in these three nations, as well as interviews with key
informants in government, the mining sector, and civic society. This research
advances discovery and sociological knowledge by probing the limits of the
?grand theories? of development and globalization in the context of current
restructuring in the global gold industry, the growth of transnational and
national social movements, and the political parameters of neoliberal foreign
direct investment policies. The results of this research will be disseminated
through university courses, public lectures, and Spanish-language publications
facilitated by IARNA.