* 0825414
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Impact of HIV/AIDS on the Wild Harvesting Movements of Women and Girls in Former Transkei
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2011
* John Stepp, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2011
* USD 12,000.00

South Africa has the highest rate of HIV/AIDS in the world while still suffering
from the legacy of apartheid. The pandemic puts a further stress on existing
rural labor constraints caused by male urban migration. Concurrently,
environmentalists have raised concerns about the deepening reliance on the
harvest of wild natural resources as a result of HIV/AIDS. A political ecology
of disease is therefore fitting to explore how rural women and girls cope with
labor constraints within the context of wild resource harvesting. The problem is
that of a silenced group of users dependent upon open access natural resources
of little national interest while suffering from an epidemic that the community
prefers not to speak of. The research will therefore investigate rural women's
and children's environmental spatial behaviors while coping with the household
impact of HIV/AIDS in the former homeland Transkei. The objectives are to: 1)
model the varying spatial distribution of wild harvesting among women and girls
to compare individuals from HIV/AIDS afflicted households with non-afflicted
households 2) and understand the contextual political ecology of disease that
condition individual and household spatiotemporal allocation of wild harvesting
in a context of rural poverty and poor health. The project hypothesizes that the
labor constraints caused by the pandemic will influence individuals' spatial
mobility as determined by the overall activity space of wild resource
activities. Consequently, the proposed work will look at the issue of mobility
on an individual and household level as an important asset and adaptation in
rural natural resource-dependent livelihood strategies. Using a mixed methods
approach to integrate geospatial tools with political ecology, there will be
analyses of GPS-derived self-mapped daily trajectories, participatory
ethnomapping with GPS, as well as contextual semi-structured interviews and
socio-economic survey data. Such an integrated grounded analysis can help
develop a framework of local micro-agency and to theorize about women's and
girls' behavioral coping strategies and responses to the pandemic as they relate
to wild harvesting.

Wild harvesting by women and children is an integral part of the diversified
rural livelihood system in South Africa's HIV/AIDS affected communal lands. Yet
the varying harvesters' conditioning factors and subsequent finer-scaled
distributions of such harvesting are not well represented in the literature.
Past research has focused on the demographic impact of the epidemic as it
relates to natural resource use while there is scant attention paid to
subsequent possible varying spatial distribution of dynamic wild resource use.
The proposed research will present the first spatial micro-geography
investigation of such daily environmental behaviors of women and girls living
with HIV/AIDS within a macro-political ecology straddling the urban-rural
divide. Because this epidemic is a multi-dimensional shock it is only through
such an integrated approach that one can come to better understand its magnitude
and complexity. This study will contribute to the literature on wild harvesting
extraction in Africa generally while specifically addressing the need to
understand women's and girls' spatial environmental behavior in the shadow of
the HIV/AIDS pandemic. An understanding of how the pandemic influences
individuals in their extraction of fragile natural resources is also needed to
guide future integrated policy interventions for poverty alleviation and
sustainable natural resource management. Any lessons learned here can be applied
not only to other HIV/AIDS afflicted regions in Africa but also to more general
public health studies in other parts of the world. The proposed research will
also train local previously disadvantaged African students in GIS as well as a
number of research methods. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement
award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to
establish a strong independent research career. This project is jointly
supported by the Geography and Regional Science Program and the Office of
International Science and Engineering.