* 0825942
* Rapid Post-Earthquake Assessment on Building Condition and Chemical Hazard with a Temperature-Tolerant Monitoring System
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Genda Chen, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 08/31/2013
* USD 220,000.00

The research objectives of this award are to 1) develop and calibrate new fiber
optic sensors that are fireproof and sensitive to temperature and strain, 2)
develop an integrated sensing system and a decision-making tool based on
measured strains and temperatures, and 3) validate and demonstrate the developed
system in a high-temperature environment for the assessment of the progressive
collapse mechanism of steel structures. Building frame models, representing a
reduced-scale substructure of the 3-story steel building frame used in SAC Steel
Project after the 1994 Northridge earthquake, will be tested under gravity loads
at elevated temperatures. To simulate various earthquake effects, the frames
will be first subjected to different inelastic stresses with a lateral load. It
will then be tested at elevated temperature. As the temperature increases, the
steel column degrades (softens) and its ability to carry the dead weights
decreases gradually. The progressive collapse of the frame will be monitored
with fire-resistant sensors and predicted in real time using the finite element
model updating technique.

This award results from a collaborative effort of faculty from electrical and
civil engineering, thus providing an interdisciplinary training opportunity to
participating students in structural health monitoring and condition assessment.
If successful, the new sensor technology will enable researchers to measure data
at fire-structure interfaces that are critical to fundamental understanding of
the fire-induced structural degradation process in post-earthquake fire
environments. The developed decision-making tool with FEM will allow a real-time
monitoring and assessment of the structural condition of steel buildings in
post-earthquake fire environments. Research findings will be integrated into the
teaching of an undergraduate senior course that will attract students from a
broad range of backgrounds including electrical, civil, and mechanical
engineering. The enabling technology will be demonstrated to federal agencies
such as FEMA for potential deployment in future disaster responses.