* 0825576
* Collaborative Research:  The role of Ice in the response of Large Lakes to a Changing Climate
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Katsumi Matsumoto, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2012
* USD 214,965.00

The long-term response of large lakes to climate change is not well understood.
Recent observational results have shown that winter ice cover plays a vital and
previously underappreciated role in determining thermal conditions the following
summer; the concentration of high albedo ice determines the timing of the spring
overturn, which in turn affects summer temperatures. A long-term trend towards
lesser ice cover in Lake Superior is causing a sustained and more effective
warming season that is contributing to a rise in summer lake temperatures in
significant excess of the rise in air temperature. However, the role that ice
plays in this phenomenon and the ability to predict the thermal response of the
lake to climate change is poorly understood. In addition, the thermal response
of the lake to winter ice cover is critical to its carbon cycle, because
temperature is perhaps the single most important determinant of biogeochemical
reaction rates. Rates such as nutrient uptake rates by phytoplankton and
bacterial respiration rates work in synchrony to regulate the lake carbon cycle.
Nevertheless, little is known about what effect steadily rising lake
temperatures may have on the long-term stability of biochemical cycles within
large lakes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will fill in these gaps in
knowledge and to gain a fundamental understanding of the role of ice in
determining the full annual and interannual cycles of temperature and carbon in
large lakes. The following questions that pertain to Lake Superior?s physics and
biogeochemistry will be addressed: 1) What is primarily responsible for setting
the amount of ice formation? 2) What role does the spatial and temporal
variability of ice formation play in determining lake-wide summer conditions? 3)
What are the trends in mixed layer depth? 4) Are increased temperatures and
reduced ice cover playing a role in the long-term mass balance of the lake, and
contributing to the general trend of lower water over the last few decades? 5)
How much ?information? regarding heat and carbon, if any, is passed from one
year to the next? 6) What is the impact of a progressively earlier ice melt,
higher summer temperatures, and stronger thermal stratification on biological
production and carbon cycle? The project will improve our understanding of lake
levels, a significant factor to the shipping industry. The unprecedented dataset
will be available to a variety of lake modelers. Expertise in ice and
biogeochemical modeling will also be broadened.