* 0825840
* Stochastic Control In Semiconductor Supply Chain
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Melda Ormeci, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Edwin Romeijn
* 07/31/2012
* USD 479,955.00

This grant provides funding for the development of a linear programming (LP)
based approach to solving diffusion control problems, which have proven
practical and effective for modeling the stochastic nature of many processes
including large call centers, assemble-to-order systems, semiconductor wafer
fabrication lines, etc. One of the main advantages of diffusion models is that
they provide a tractable way to find approximately optimal solutions when
analyzing the problem in its exact form is difficult and intractable. Further,
the use of a diffusion model as an approximation of the original system is often
justified through heavy traffic limit theorems. The LP approach exploits 40
years of investments in theoretical developments and computational tools for
linear optimization. It produces both a near-optimal policy describing
appropriate actions to take in every circumstance and a lower bound on the best
possible average cost. Formulating the problem as a linear program involves a
novel discetization scheme and increasing the fidelity of the discretization
produces asympotically optimal policies. The proposed approach promises to bring
the practical computational power of LP to bear on the pressing and challenging
problems of managing variability in the supply chain. The approach will
initially be developed in an idealized setting in which a single-product,
single-stage process is managed via drift controls and instantaneous controls at
specified boundaries. After enhancing the fidelity of the drift control model by
incorporating additional constraints and control regimens like singular control
and impulse control, extensions to multiple products and stages will be
addressed.

If successful, the approach will allow LP formulations of individual diffusion
control problems to be knitted together and integrated into the larger multi-
product, multi-stage supply chain models that address the complex strategic and
operational challenges facing the semiconductor and other industries today. More
effective tools for planning in stochastic environments will help improve
product availability, capacity utilization and return on capital in a variety of
industries. The proposed work will forge a stronger bridge between the largely
separate research areas of stochastic control and deterministic optimization.