* 0825436
* Collaborative Research: Structure, Function and Evolution of Authigenic, Methane-Derived Carbonate Ecosystems
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2013
* Anthony Rathburn, Indiana State University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 09/30/2013
* USD 295,514.00

Authigenic carbonate precipitation associated with methane seepage is typically
mediated by anaerobic oxidation of methane (AOM). This microbial process
produces massive amounts of carbonate rock, introducing habitat heterogeneity to
continental margins and providing a major repository for methane-derived carbon
released from the sea floor. This study will investigate the extent to which
these carbonate substrates form a distinct ecosystem within the seep environment
by characterizing associated microbial, foraminiferal, macrofaunal and
megafaunal communities in a successional context. Surveys and sampling of
carbonate will take place at 4 bathyal locations on the Costa Rica margin
(730-1300 m) and at Hydrate Ridge North on the Oregon margin (590 m).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Location differences and associated water depth,
oxygenation, seep megafauna and carbonate formation variation are expected to
influence community composition. This study will characterize assemblages
inhabiting carbonates subject to active, weak and no methane seepage, and
conduct rock colonization and transplant experiments to address the following
main hypotheses:(1) Under conditions of active seepage at the seafloor-water
interface, authigenic carbonate functions as a distinct ecosystem fueled by AOM,
with its own sources of (chemosynthetic) primary and secondary production; (2)
Seep carbonate faunal communities undergo succession driven by methane supply
and microbial activity; (3) Sessile seep carbonate assemblages include mainly
microbial, protozoan and metazoan species that are taxonomically and
evolutionarily distinct from the biota of surrounding seep sediments, but
ecologically and evolutionarily related to deep-sea, hard-substrate and reducing
faunas, including those from seeps, vents, coral mounds and whale bones.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Single rocks will be split and sectioned for carbonate
mineralogy and isotopic analysis, FISH-SIMS analyses of endogeneous
microorganisms and their respective delta 13C signatures, faunal (protozoan and
metazoan) taxonomic, lifestyle and position studies. Stable isotopic and lipid
analyses of foraminifera and metazoan protoplasm, delta 18O and delta 13C
signatures of foraminiferan tests and mollusk shells will be linked to microbial
and carbonate signatures to assess trophic pathways and paleo proxies for
methane release. Archaea and AOM are hypothesized as key to both. Defaunated
carbonate substrates will be deployed at active and inactive sites for 1 year to
examine early faunal succession and the role of external seepage. Rocks
transplanted between inactive and active sites, with appropriate manipulation
controls, will provide additional information about faunal reliance on seepage
and persistence of AOM in the absence of seepage. Community comparisons will be
drawn with seep sediments, other biotic substrates (mussels, clams, tubeworms)
and with other deep-sea reducing and hardground systems (vents, whales, deep-
water corals). Macrofaunal assemblages will be DNA and selected annelid and
foraminiferan taxa will be targeted for phylogenetic analyses to assess
evolutionary affinities with fauna from other hardground-reducing ecosystems
(vents).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Benefits of this research to
society include: (1) an understanding of seep carbonate ecosystems for improved
marine resource management and more comprehensive assessments of seafloor
biodiversity, carbon cycling, and adaptations to extreme environments; and (2) a
model for successional changes in carbonate ecosystems and the use of their
faunas as proxies to more accurately assess past methane release and
paleoclimate change. Education and outreach will include local school
presentations; web site development and interdisciplinary, hands-on, at-sea
training of future scientists at undergraduate, graduate, and post-doc levels,
including under-represented groups (women; first-generation university students
from rural communities) recruited through SURF, STARS and REU programs. Research
results will be incorporated into lectures, exercises and field trips for deep-
sea biology, microbiology, geology, paleontology, oceanography and benthic
ecology courses, and onto websites and databases managed by the Census of Marine
Life and the SIO Benthic Invertebrate Collection.