* 0825189
* Direct Nanoimprinting-based Nanopatterning of Functional Nanomaterials for Electronics &amp; Sensing Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Albert Pisano, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 06/30/2011
* USD 420,000.00

The research objective of this award is to pattern, at the nanoscale, functional
nanomaterials for electronics and sensing applications. The patterning will be
accomplished using a novel, elastic nanoimprinter, as opposed to the traditional
rigid nanoimprinters, which greatly alleviates the need for precision alignment
between stamper and substrate, and allows multi-layer nanoimprinting. This new
manufacturing method makes possible the nanopatterning of functional
nanomaterials such as metal conductive traces synthesized from nanoparticles.
These metal conductive traces are first deposited as a nanoparticle ink,
patterned by a nanostamper, and subsequently sintered at low temperatures to
form fully continuous, low-resistance metal traces that are fully compatible
with a wide variety of polymer substrates and active materials. The approach
taken in this research is to 1) characterize the fluidic and thermal properties
of nanoparticle solutions (nanoparticle inks), 2) characterize the mechanical
properties of nanoimprinting stamps for improved fidelity nanopatterning, 3)
conduct both experiments and theoretical analysis of thermal sintering of
nanoparticles, 4) make a quantitative analysis of the adhesion between the
nanoimprinted features and substrates, 5) perform an analysis of the influence
of mechanical deformation on the performance of nanoimprinted materials and 6)
develop multi-layer, multi-material nanoimprinting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the benefits and broad impact of this
research will be a new, low-cost, high-performance manufacturing technology that
will eliminate the need for both vacuum and lift-off processes. Nanoimprinting
via elastic stampers also allows multi-layer materials to be imprinted. This new
manufacturing technology will make possible major cost reductions and major
quality improvements in flat panel displays, large area electronics, electronics
on flexible substrates. Other benefits include new technologies for the creation
of biodetection circuits.&lt;br/&gt;