* 0825376
* Collaborative Research: Critical Layers and Isopycnal Mixing in the Southern Ocean
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* John Marshall, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2013
* USD 653,638.00

Climate-scale ocean models unanimously stress the key regulatory function played
by the oceanic overturning circulation in the Earth's climate and biogeochemical
cycles over decadal and longer time scales. Yet in their quest to resolve many
topical climate problems, the models credibility is challenged by their extreme
sensitivity to the representation of mixing processes in the Southern Ocean.
This peculiarity of model behavior reflects the unique role of mixing in
mediating the vertical and horizontal transports of water masses in the
Antarctic Circumpolar Current (ACC), which shape the overturning circulation
through their respective impacts on the overturning rate and inter-ocean
exchange. The Diapycnal and Isopycnal Mixing Experiment in the Southern Ocean
(DIMES) was recently funded by NSF to measure directly eddy mixing along density
surfaces in the ACC. Eddy mixing will be measured by releasing a chemical tracer
and 150 floats at one vertical level. New theoretical results, not available at
the time, suggest that eddy mixing rates are strongly enhanced at critical
levels in the vertical. The goal of this project is to extend the DIMES project
and release 50 additional floats at a shallower level to test the hypothesis
that critical levels control the rate of upwelling and downwelling of water
masses in the Southern Ocean.

Intellectual Merit. Conceptual models of global meridional overturning and
numerical predictions for future climate are strongly sensitive to the methods
used to represent mixing along and across the ACC. Theory suggest that mixing
rates vary greatly in the horizontal and in the vertical. Climate ocean models
unanimously stress that model skill is strongly sensitive to these variations.
The DIMES project will provide the first direct observations of mixing in the
Southern Ocean and will likely deliver a wealth of new information about eddy
transport in this part of the ocean. However tracer and float deployments are
planned only at one level and will not provide information about the vertical
variability of eddy mixing. The additional 50 floats to be deployed at a
shallower level will capitalize on the opportunity to learn about a key aspect
of eddy mixing in the Southern Ocean.

Broader Impacts. This proposal has potentially wide impact because it is
designed to further our understanding of a central component of the climate
system. The proposed work will also contribute to the improvement ofmixing and
stirring in large-scale ocean models such as the MITgcm. Finally, there is
strong educational component through the training of a graduate student and a
post-doc, and the development of new curricula to introduce students in the
MIT/WHOI Joint Program to the role of the Southern Ocean in the climate system.