* 0825979
* Predicting the effects of ocean warming on larval dispersal by measuring adaptive potential of corals
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Iliana Baums, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2013
* USD 474,000.00

Dispersal of larvae via ocean currents is a common strategy among sessile marine
organisms and so spatially discontinuous populations maintain a shared gene
pool. Long-lived reef building corals employ such strategies to connect their
shallow-water populations across stretches of inhospitable open-ocean.
Increasing seawater temperatures are predicted to quicken larval development so
that average dispersal distances are expected to decrease. At the same time,
species currently limited by minimum annual seawater temperatures may extend
their ranges pole ward in the coming years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives
of this project are to measure the effect of high and low seawater temperatures
on early life stages and ultimately predict changes in connectivity patterns as
a result of global warming. It is expected that individuals and populations
within species differ in their abilities to respond to changing environmental
conditions. Adaptive trait variation among individuals and populations in the
reef-building coral Acropora palmata will be measured by a combination of gene
expression experiments and population genomics. Symbiont-free larvae obtained
from controlled crosses from each of the two previously identified Caribbean A.
palmata populations (Florida and Puerto Rico) will be exposed to a range of
seawater temperatures and their development patterns documented. The larval
pools will be interrogated by a 40,000 probe microarray developed with next
generation sequencing. It is hypothesized that larvae from both populations show
a similar response to increased sea-surface temperatures but that Florida larvae
are better able to survive cold shocks. The microarray data will thus yield
candidate genes for temperature adaptation in corals. These data will for the
first time provide estimates of genome-wide adaptive trait variance in corals
that can be incorporated into real-time dispersal models to predict changes in
connectivity patterns as a result of global warming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
study will provide the first range wide estimates of adaptation in a coral by
developing novel genomic tools for a non-model species. This research will focus
on the effects of temperature on dispersal of a reef-building coral, a topic
particularly relevant in light of global warming and the sensitivity of corals
to warming temperatures. Acropora palmata is particularly worthy of attention
because it is one of two coral species currently listed as threatened under the
US Endangered Species Act. By identifying signatures of selection over the range
of the species, conservation efforts can prioritize source populations for
restoration material based on adaptive similarity. The transcriptome data
generated here will be invaluable to the wider biological community and benefit
society at large. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study includes outreach missions to
educate and train the public and public institutions. Through continuing a
series of workshops held since 2005 by SECORE (SExual COral REproduction), the
proposed project will help build a cooperative international network of public
aquariums and research institutions to establish coral breeding programs for ex
situ and field populations of A. palmata. Graduate and undergraduate students
are in integral part of this project and will receive training in field and
laboratory work and lecture courses.