* 0825244
* Laser-Assisted Rapid Surface Microstructuring of Alumina Ceramic
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2008,02/28/2010
* Narendra Dahotre, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 02/28/2010
* USD 371,123.00

The research objective of this award is the development of a novel technique of
laser-assisted rapid surface microstructuring of ceramics with potential in a
range of structural, electronic, and biomedical applications. In the present
effort, the technique will be explored for alumina for the specific purpose of
precision grinding/machining. The approach is based on engineering of highly
ordered and polygonal faceted surface grains characterized by multiple edges and
vertices. The proposal will develop an understanding of evolution of
crystallographic and morphological surface textures due to rapid solidification.
This information will be employed in prediction of the machining/grinding
performance in terms of material removal rates. An integrative approach based on
experimental and modeling methodologies will be adapted to understand the
physical phenomena during laser surface microstructuring and its influence on
precision grinding performance will be evaluated. Modeling efforts will be
focused on temperature evolution, microstructure evolution, and grinding
performance, and finally processing-microstructure-property correlation will be
established.

The successful execution of proposed research will lead to development of a
laser-based technique for rapid transformation of commercial alumina grinding
wheel for efficient and precision (micro-scale) machining/grinding. The non-
contact nature of fiber delivered laser beam will facilitate the remote and
online or simultaneous engineering of surface microstructure with multi-faceted
grains with micro-cutting edges and vertices for micro-scale precision
machining/grinding of materials. Due to the rapid nature of laser processing,
integration of experimental and computational modeling will be based on
extension of thermodynamic/kinetic principals to near- and/or non-equilibrium
conditions. The development of technique and understanding of underlying
physical phenomena will facilitate its extension to other grinding/machining
material systems such as cBN and diamond. This research will establish a basis
for engineering surfaces at microscopic level through creation of experimental
and computational foundations as next-generation engineering design tool.

This project is jointly funded by the Materials Processing & Manufacturing (MPM)
Program, of the Civil, Mechanical, and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI) Division;
by the Thermal Transport Processes (TTP) Program, of the Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems (CBET) Division; by EPSCoR,
and by funding provided from the Directorate for Engineering (ENG) to support
Inter Divisional Research.