* 0825654
* Planning for Drought Preparedness in the Watershed Context: A Risk-Based Decision Analysis
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2013
* Ximing Cai, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 07/31/2013
* USD 320,000.00

This project aims at a lasting intellectual impact by developing a widely
accepted model of drought risk that accounts for climate change, particularly
the uncertainties involved in climate change prediction. The research activities
will translate climate change predictions and uncertainties into useful
information for drought preparedness planning in order to address a critical
question of great societal importance: What does possible climate change imply
for drought hazards, and how should society respond to it today? Today, concern
over drought is widespread. On average, severe droughts hit 35-40 percent of the
area of the United States in recent years and caused huge damages (many over $1
billion). Conventional drought management has focused on emergency response and
post-impact analysis to drought events. It is time to place greater emphasis on
preparedness planning, i.e., how should we prepare for future droughts that will
probably be more frequent and severe? Preparedness planning is based upon risk
mitigation and involves strategic measures, which are long-term and usually
require capital investment. Moreover, from a scientific perspective, it is
important for researchers to examine how drought events, in both the past and
the future, are related to climate change. With such concerns in mind, this
project seeks to improve drought risk assessment and decision making in
infrastructure planning under an uncertain future that might be aggravated by
climate change. Specific objectives of this project are to: 1) estimate the
likely future drought risks under climate change, 2) understand the
complementary relationships between long-term strategic and short-term tactical
measures in drought risk mitigation, 3) test the effectiveness of practical
technologies for drought preparedness, and 4) develop a ?fire drill?, also
called a virtual drought exercise (VDE), using a hypothetical, computer-
generated drought event to foster education for drought risk management. To
achieve these objectives, the project will combine meteorological, hydrological,
engineering and sociological research in order to provide information useful to
craft strategic plans. The research will be applied to conjunctive surface and
ground water management in the Kankakee Watershed in Illinois. It will address
crop production loss and fish function damage, and the tradeoff between these
two sectors during drought events.

By providing scientifically-based, practically-relevant information on drought
risk and mitigation measures, the project will help set the agenda for drought
management policy examination and change by addressing problems and alternative
solutions, with the ultimate goal of reducing drought damages. Furthermore, this
project will provide technical and educational support for addressing issues of
social equity, particularly the damage that drought causes for underrepresented
groups. This will provide policy makers with information about the resulting
gains and losses among stakeholders so that attention may be directed to groups
that could possibly be under-represented in water allocation during drought.