* 0825511
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Socioeconomic and Environmental Determinants of Birth Defects in North Carolina
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2008,09/30/2009
* Michael Emch, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 09/30/2009
* USD 5,262.00

While some causes of birth defects are known (i.e., chromosomal damage),
researchers believe that unidentified environmental factors may also contribute
to their development. In North Carolina, birth defect rates exhibit a
significant amount of spatial variation. Traditional environmental health
studies assume that these patterns are due to factors in a mother's environment,
such as proximity to a hazardous waste site, that cause birth defects to occur.
However, there is also evidence that birth defects are related to behavioral and
economic risk factors, such as smoking and poor prenatal care. Spatial patterns
of birth defects may therefore be due to the fact that individuals with similar
backgrounds and risk factors live in the same geographic area, producing larger
area-level patterns of disease. Traditional environmental health studies ignore
geographic clustering of people with similar risk factors and use very simple
methods to determine exposure to an environmental contaminant. Thus, they may
incorrectly attribute spatial patterns of birth defects to environmental hazards
rather than socioeconomic factors. This study will develop new theories and
methods for examining which of these factors are most important in explaining
the geographic variation of two birth defects in North Carolina: orofacial
clefts and gastroschisis. Specific study questions include: 1) Is the clustering
of birth defects a consequence of compositional factors (i.e. people with
similar socioeconomic backgrounds living near each other)? 2) If compositional
factors are controlled for, what additional environmental factors explain
spatial variability in birth defects (i.e. proximity to hazardous waste)? 3) Do
models using hydrogeography to define areas of high contamination risk estimate
the risk of birth defects better than models using Euclidean distance? Seven
years of data from the NC Birth Defects Monitoring Program and Office of Vital
Statistics will be used to examine these questions. Individual-level birth data
will be integrated with area-level socioeconomic data and the location of
environmental hazards using a Geographic Information System (GIS). Analytical
methods include a statistical cluster analysis and a case-control study with
spatial multi-level regression models to determine which socioeconomic and
environmental factors explain variation in birth defect outcomes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The presence or absence of environmental contaminants and
socioeconomic characteristics and the geographic extent of such factors can
offer important insights into the causes of birth defects. However, the complex
interactions between people and their environment make it difficult to determine
the relative importance of different social, economic and environmental factors.
This study offers an interdisciplinary opportunity to merge geographic and
epidemiological theories and methods for birth defects research. It applies
geographical theories and methods (i.e. disease ecology, hydrological modeling
and spatial statistics) to traditional epidemiological research in order to
further our understanding of how human-environment interactions affect chronic
conditions such as birth defects. The methodologies employed are innovative;
they have not been used in this subject area before and will provide a model for
conducting future environmental research. Ultimately, this study will provide
new findings about the environmental and socioeconomic determinants of orofacial
clefts and gastroschisis. Such findings have important policy implications and
can be integrated into health promotion programs seeking to prevent birth
defects. &lt;br/&gt;