* 0825621
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Quantitative Hydraulic Models for Jokulhlaup-Type Outflow Channels on Mars: Application of Earth Analogues, Geomorphology, and Remote Sensing
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2010
* Douglas Howard, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Ezekiel Kalipeni
* 06/30/2010
* USD 11,343.00

Studies of Earth analogues of planetary bodies are used primarily to test
hypotheses about phenomena that may be similar to those on Earth. This doctoral
dissertation research uses Earth analogues to test the hypothesis that the
massive fluvial channels on Mars and their observed geomorphic features were
formed by a combination of surface water flow and eruptions from ground water
confined by a cryolithospheric layer. These types of eruptions are termed
"Jökulhlaup", from an Icelandic term that describes an abrupt release of massive
amounts of water from behind or beneath a glacier. There are also similar
locations on the Earth's surface, including the Cheney-Palouse Scablands in
eastern Washington (associated with Glacial Lake Missoula) and the Jökulsá á
Fjöllum channel at Vatnajökull glacier in Iceland. These Earth analogues were
formed by jökulhlaup-type outburst floods in the geologic past, and so should
provide insights into processes on Mars, where the size of the source basins is
not sufficient to create the fluvial and geomorphic features observed,
especially given the lower planetary gravitational constant. This research
encompasses the use of space-borne remote sensing, ground-based field
measurements, and one, two and three-dimensional hydrologic and hydraulic
modeling of natural phenomena on Earth and Mars. Collecting and processing
remote sensing data will provide the fluvial channel physical properties needed
for the hydrologic and hydraulic models, which then will be verified by
extensive field mapping of the fluvial channels at two Earth analogue study
areas, in the Glacial Lake Missoula paleoflood zone and in Iceland. A unique
technique for deriving the hydraulic property of surface roughness, based on
bedrock thermal inertia and conductivity, will be tested. The objective of this
work is to estimate the mean flow velocity, peak discharge and power needed to
create the jökulhlaup-type fluvial channels and geomorphic features on Earth in
order to apply these models to similar channels on Mars. Secondly, the goal is
to establish quantitatively the amount of water needed on Mars to create these
features given a gravitational constant less than half that of the Earth's. This
research will provide new quantitative insight into the hydrologic and geologic
history of Mars.

The results of this work will convey quantitative information about the amount
of water needed to sculpt the fluvial landforms on Mars and provide a
significant datapoint to its geologic and hydrologic past. This research will
provide key insight into the mechanisms that created the massive outflow
channels on Mars and how climate change may have influenced these processes.
Similarly, hydrologic and hydraulic modeling of catastrophic flow regimes and
the interactions between surface and subsurface water sources at Earth analogues
sites, particularly at those areas most influenced by glacial processes, will
provide a viewpoint to the processes that may occur due to our own climate
change. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also
will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
independent research career.