* 0825747
* New Methods for Measuring, Monitoring and Evaluating Post-Disaster Recovery
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2008,04/30/2009
* Stephanie Chang, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 04/30/2009
* USD 288,111.00

NEW METHODS FOR MEASURING, MONITORING AND EVALUATING POST-DISASTER RECOVERY

A Research Collaboration between the University at Buffalo, ImageCat, University
of British Columbia, University of Delaware and University of Memphis

Post-disaster recovery - one of the phases of the disaster management cycle - is
a complex physical, social, economic, environmental, and political process. It
lasts years, requires enormous financial and other resources, and can define the
character of the affected communities for years to come. The literature includes
a number of theoretical frameworks of recovery, and many empirical case studies
of historic events. The empirical studies have often focused on a single
dimension of recovery, such as households and housing, and they have typically
relied on interviews, focus groups, and one-time surveys for data gathering.
This literature offers rich cross-sectional insights into recovery at a given
point in time, but limited views of changes over time or systematic,
quantitative empirical descriptions of recovery over large areas. An excellent
opportunity exists now to address some of these limitations using newly
available high-resolution satellite imagery; previously underutilized
statistical data, and advanced field survey techniques that capture a detailed
geographically-referenced record of recovery through photographs, video, and
observations. Given the importance of recovery, limitations of previous research
on it, and new technological opportunities, this study will develop innovative
methods for systematically and quantitatively measuring and monitoring post-
disaster recovery. Using Hurricane Katrina as a case study, the proposed project
will achieve the following objectives: (1) Develop methods to process and
interpret remote-sensing data to describe the physical and socio-economic
manifestations of post-disaster recovery; (2) Obtain and compile quantitative
and qualitative recovery data from: remote-sensing, field reconnaissance
surveys, secondary statistical sources, interviews, and surveys; (3) Develop
methods to analyze and synthesize the recovery data to comprehensively measure
and monitor recovery; and (4) Demonstrate application of the new methods within
the case study area. Improved tracking of recovery will serve as a critical
first step for future efforts to better explain and evaluate recovery by
addressing questions such as: - For a disaster that has just occurred, over what
timeframes and in what ways is recovery likely to unfold? - Why is recovery
proceeding in a particular way? - How are recovery speed and character
correlated with various pre- and post-disaster decisions and actions?

Enhancing our ability to address such questions will bring many practical
societal benefits. Governments, policy makers, and local organizations can apply
findings to examine the impact of their decisions and ultimately to improve
plans for and actions supporting future recovery efforts. The systematic
examination of recovery in both a qualitative and quantitative way using multi-
source data can empower communities and give them evidence to support their
experiences of the recovery process. It can open a new source of dialogue and
discourse that could have practical repercussions for the creation of resilient
communities, for the distribution of aid and resources, as well as theoretical
discussions on the potential identification of different types of recovery,
dependent on their initial conditions and key decisions post-disaster. Further,
by augmenting existing ways of empirically measuring recovery, the project will
advance the state-of-the-art in post-disaster recovery studies. It will support
the continuing development of a theory of post-disaster recovery through
verifying or modifying existing theories.