* 0826020
* Nonconsumptive predator effects in a pelagic community: an integrated laboratory, field and modeling approach
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2009,10/31/2014
* Doran Mason, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 10/31/2014
* USD 505,067.00

This study will address a fundamental issue about how species interactions
influence communities. Classical approaches, including the vast majority of
experimental and modeling studies, focus on how species affect the density of
other species through predator-prey interactions. This approach ignores a
growing body of work that documents how prey modify their phenotype (traits) in
response to predators to reduce predation risk, and how this, in turn, can
profoundly influence the consequences of species interactions. There is abundant
evidence that such nonconsumptive effects (NCEs, also trait-mediated or
nonlethal) of predators could be important in pelagic Great Lakes and marine
ecosystems. Whereas, the underlying mechanism is well known, there is little
understanding of the influence of NCEs, and almost no studies of NCEs in large
pelagic ecosystems. The existence of NCEs could strongly affect the qualitative
and quantitative nature of species interactions and the properties of
communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will examine the role and
operation of NCEs in marine and Great Lake systems. The investigators will
examine NCEs caused by an invertebrate predator, the invasive spiny water flea
Bythotrephes. The project will attempt to answer the broad questions:
&lt;br/&gt; How do Bythotrephes induced effects on prey influence their net
effect on Great Lakes communities? &lt;br/&gt; Are NCEs influential in complex
field settings? &lt;br/&gt; What is the influence of NCEs of an invertebrate
predator on the zooplankton prey assemblages or on the young-of-year fish
competitors?&lt;br/&gt; How do factors such as resource level, temperature, and
light affect the influence of a predator?s NCE on a prey assemblage (via effects
on competition)? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A comprehensive approach based on three
objectives will be used that integrates laboratory studies, field surveys and
modeling. The investigators will: (1) Determine the phenotypic responses of key
zooplankton species to Bythothrephes. This will involve laboratory studies that
examine behavioral, morphological and life history responses. Laboratory studies
will also quantify Bythotrephes predation rates. Optimization modeling will
guide and allow interpretation of these laboratory studies. (2) Develop
predictive models of the NCEs of Bythothrephes on zooplankton prey growth rate
and competitive outcomes and test predictions with microcosm and mesocosm
experiments. This is a key methodological component: If models accurately
predict induced trait changes, and their consequences to species interactions in
mesocosm experiments, this increases the ability to form predictive models in
natural systems. (3) Determine NCEs of Bythotrephese in the field using
ecological models based on parameters derived from the aforementioned exercises
and field surveys. Field surveys will examine the effect of Bythotrephes on
zooplankton prey in the field, and classify abundances and parameters such as
young of the year fish density and position and abiotic factors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significant intellectual contributions will result from
this study by addressing a key, but poorly understood, component of species
interactions in Great Lakes and marine systems. Societal concern and interest
over the influence of invasive species including Bythotrephes in Great Lakes
food webs will facilitate educational outreach. In addition, close associations
with institutions (e.g., the NOAA Great Lakes Environmental Research Laboratory,
GLERL) will develop from the project and there will be strong outreach
components that foster educational opportunities. For example, many individuals
and groups from high schools and management agencies come to GLERL for education
and training. Further, a Great Lakes Sea Grant Network extension educator has
agreed to work to bridge the research with educators by helping the PIs engage
with the Center for Ocean Sciences and Education Excellence Great Lakes (COSEE)
Great Lakes and Sea Grant. The investigators on this project will work with
professional educational outreach partners to enhance the broader impacts from
the research. COSEE Great Lakes already has a framework in place to reach
teachers throughout the region and includes an emphasis on underrepresented
groups including tribal educators and COSEE and Sea Grant also are working on a
variety of curriculum pieces. This project will contribute to these efforts.
Finally, graduate and undergraduate training in research and outreach is part of
this activity.