* 0826197
* SedDB, The Online Information System for Sediment Geochemistry Continued Operation and Development
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Steven Goldstein, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 08/31/2012
* USD 399,123.00

Intellectual Merit: This project implements Phase II of the creation of an on
online digital data collection (SedDB) that archives, manages, and makes
accessible geochemical data of sediments in a new, user-friendly way. It allows
users to create customized data sets that integrate data from any number of
publications and unpublished sources. SedDB provides efficient access to NSF-
funded datasets that are of fundamental interest to many fields in the
Geosciences associated with Earth history, tectonics, the atmosphere, life, and
climate; thereby maximizing the utility of these data. Through its interface and
linking with data visualization products, SedDB allows researchers to easily
discover, access, and analyze data, integrate it with other data types, and
develop new cross-disciplinary approaches to important scientific questions.
Goals for Phase II are to expand the data holdings through continued data
compilation from the literature and addition of new focus sites, to implement
user-friendly data submission procedures for investigators, and to develop
authentication procedures that will allow users to add and integrate their
unpublished data with restricted access. Linking and collaborating with other
database and Geoinformatics world-wide are a priority in order to take advantage
of synergies, insure the broadest possible access to data holdings, and
contribute to the development of global data networks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project primarily builds crucial
infrastructure in the geosciences. Outreach and education activities such as
short courses and workshops will be conducted to advance use of the system, seek
buy-in and feedback from potential user communities with the goal to integrate
SedDB into research and education, and identify and respond to community needs
and concerns. Students at both the graduate and undergraduate level will be
trained in geoinformatics.