* 0826293
* International Symposium to Commemorate the 60th Anniversary for the Invention of Holography
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2009
* Ryszard Pryputniewicz, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Glaucio H. Paulino
* 07/31/2009
* USD 10,000.00

PROPOSAL No. 0826293&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Support for the International
Symposium on Holography&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ryszard J.
Pryputniewicz&lt;br/&gt;Mechanical Engineering Department&lt;br/&gt;Worcester
Polytechnic Institute, Worcester, MA 01609&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Objective of the proposed effort is to
develop tools by employing hybridization approach to build up new know how to
continue advance of emerging technologies (including, but not limited to
photonics, microsystems, telecommunications, and nanotechnology) of contemporary
interest and national importance. This advance demands use of sophisticated
tools to design, fabricate, characterize, and support modern components as well
as complex devices, structures, and systems they enable. The tools available
today can be categorized as analytical, computational and experimental.
Unfortunately the tools from a single category are not sufficient to continue
the pace of current progress and extensive merging, or unification, of tools
from different categories is needed to develop hybrid methodologies for the
future.&lt;br/&gt;Development and availability of correct and adequate hybrid
methodologies will be of great benefit to the society as this will provide
flexible-tools that will lead to new products, not existing at this time, it
will also lead to development of new manufacturing capabilities necessary to
make the new products that, in turn, will lead to increased employment. To
assure qualified workforce, educational programs will integrate hybrid
methodologies into curricula that will increasingly be dependent on highly
diversified student populations of the future.&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks
partial funds to support the first of its kind and a very unique event that is
being organizing on behalf of SEM ? the Society for Experimental Mechanics: the
International Symposium to Commemorate 60th Anniversary of Holography
(ISCAH?2008), to be held at the Sheraton Monarch Conference Center in
Springfield, MA, 27-29 October 2008.&lt;br/&gt; ____________ &lt;br/&gt;