* 0826106
* Real-Time Control for Engineering Electrospun Nanofiber Diameter Distributions for Advanced Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Michael Gevelber, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2012
* USD 230,100.00

This research is directed towards developing the first real-time control system
for the electrospinning process that will enable greater control over critical
nanofiber manufacturing characteristics, thereby improving yield and production
rate. Currently, the electrospinning process is run open-loop with respect to
the actual process states, and there are large, unpredictable, time varying
distributions of fiber diameter. However, emerging nanofiber applications for
medical products and manufacturing carbon nanotubes (CNTs) require nanofibers
produced to tighter specifications. The research is focused on understanding the
process dynamics in order to develop the appropriate sensing capabilities and
control design that will yield effective real-time control for electrospinning.
The control design efforts will be directed to meet the requirements of several
advanced applications.

Electrospun nanofibers are continuous polymer fibers with submicron diameters.
They offer larger surface area per mass as well as greater mechanical strength
than micron scale or larger fibers, so they are suited to a variety of important
applications. High-value applications for nanofibers include improved life-
saving surgical instruments such as hemostats and dermal templates, cell
scaffolding that enables in-vitro tissue engineering, as well as low-cost
manufacturing processes for carbon nanotubes. Each of these advanced
applications are in a state where commercial companies are trying to move them
from the laboratory to full scale production. However, development of a
production process control capability that reliably delivers the required fiber
distributions with minimum waste will significantly assist making the
electrospinning process become commercially successful.