* 0826711
* Evolutionary Perspective on Collective Decision Making
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Craig Laramee, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Mary Rigdon
* 08/31/2012
* USD 552,074.00

Collective decision making plays an increasingly important role everywhere in
today?s human society. Existing literature addresses issues in collective
decision making with linear statistical analysis or relatively simple dynamical
modeling. Either approach is still limited in capturing the complexity of real
human decision making dynamics that typically involve high-dimensional nonlinear
problem space, nontrivial societal structure, within-individual cognitive and
behavioral patterns, and/or between-individual diversity. In this project the
PIs will develop a novel conceptual/computational multi-level model of the
dynamics of complex collective decision making by shifting the viewpoint from
the dynamics of participants to the dynamics of ideas being discussed.
Collective decision making will be redefined as evolution of ecologies of ideas
over a social network habitat, where populations of potential solutions evolve
via continual applications of evolutionary operators such as reproduction,
recombination, mutation, selection, and migration of solutions, each conducted
by participating humans. The effects of various model as-sumptions on collective
decision making will be studied through computer simulations, and their results
will be evaluated through experiments of team decision making on complex
collaborative tasks with human subjects. This project will generate a novel
perspective on human and social dynamics by introducing evolutionary principles
and methodologies into the modeling of their complex behaviors, making a
theoretical advancement from a traditional, individually-focused psychological
or social science paradigm to a more dynamic, multilevel, evolutionary paradigm
for collective social processes. A number of practical implications will be
produced, e.g., the effects of coherence of shared information and
organizational structure within teams upon their exploratory and adaptive
performances, which will be widely applicable to current issues that many human
organizations are facing today. The outcomes of this project will be integrated
into undergraduate and graduate education at Binghamton University.