* 0826501
* Performance Enhancement of PZT Thin-Film Microactuators via a Multi-Scale, Multi-Domain Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* I-Yeu Shen, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 07/31/2012
* USD 270,525.00

Lead-Zirconium-Titanium Oxide (PZT) is a piezoelectric material widely used as
actuators for bulk structures. Lately, PZT micro-actuators have received wide
attention, because they could potentially outperform traditional micro-actuators
(e.g., comb drives or thermal drives) in terms of bandwidth, energy density, and
actuation strength. As a result, PZT micro-actuators enable various new
impacting applications, such as minute hearing implants and miniaturized
diagnostic tools that are less invasive. To enable this new technology, PZT
micro-actuators must employ PZT thin films to maintain a proper aspect ratio to
function and fundamental studies are needed to enhance actuator performance by
orders of magnitude.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is proposed to enhance performance
of PZT thin-film micro-actuators via multi-scale and multi-domain approaches
that encompass nanotechnology and mechanics. There are two specific goals to
achieve. The first goal is to use nanotechnology to enhance material properties
and yield of PZT thin films. In particular, (a) PZT thin films via seeded nano-
PZT particles and electrophoretic deposition and (b) Platinum bottom electrodes
with nano-textures and indentation will be developed. The second goal is to
introduce stress relief grooves in PZT thin films to maximize actuator
displacement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;