* 0826159
* Investigation of Structure-Property Relations in Active Piezoelectric Nanocomposites
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2010
* Henry Sodano, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 07/31/2010
* USD 106,000.00

The research objective of this award is to develop methodologies to fabricate
piezoelectric nanomaterials (in the form of particle, rods and wires) for their
inclusion into polymer matrices. The resulting nanocomposites will be
theoretically and experimentally characterized to elucidate the impact of the
piezoelectric constituent?s geometry on the electomechanical properties of the
nanocomposite. These compliant piezoelectric materials have been proposed for
use in a wide variety of applications including polymeric actuators, sensors and
multifunctional materials for applications including structural health
monitoring, sensing, energy harvesting, and control of adaptive structures.
However to realize the potential of these nanocomposites improvements in the
coupling efficiency is required. This research effort will build the knowledge
base required to achieve the required increase in electromechanical coupling.
Expected deliverables from these efforts include a new micromechanics model to
predict the electroelastic properties of active nanocomposites, heuristics for
designing a nanocomposite with the desired properties, and engineering student
education and the development of an after school outreach program to educate
students on the scientific diversity of the engineering field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outreach activities planned under this program will
impact students from middle school to graduate school. A sustainable program to
familiarize the students with the engineering discipline and allow them to
experience hands on how the fields are interconnected will be developed. This
program will be implemented through a series of presentations and hands-on
exercises that will be delivered to the students in ongoing programs sponsored
by the Student Outreach and Retention Program (SORP) at Arizona State
University. Undergraduate students will be directly incorporated into this
research effort through an internship program where they will work side-by-side
with the graduate student. This opportunity will expose the students to a cross-
disciplinary skill set (polymer processing, materials synthesis, morphological
and electromechanical characterization) as they learn to expand their
communication skills and knowledge base across disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;