* 0826521
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Role of Transportation in Employment Outcomes of the Disadvantaged
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2008,04/30/2010
* Ming Zhang, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 04/30/2010
* USD 6,952.00

Affordable and efficient transportation is crucial for the employment of low-
income individuals, as they have fewer resources to spend on mobility. To help
improve employment outcomes of the disadvantaged, planners and policy makers
have emphasized the significance of transportation and suggested expanding
public transit services or providing automobiles at lower cost. To justify such
policy efforts, numerous researchers have studied the impact of transportation
on labor market outcomes of the disadvantaged. The studies have focused on a key
element -- whether or not disadvantaged individuals have adequate
"accessibility" to reach job opportunities. Thus, there is a fundamental
assumption that accessibility and employment are directly connected to each
other. That is, the past research is built upon the idea that low-income
individuals with reliable access to a transport option or higher accessibility
to job opportunities by car or public transit will choose a particular transport
mode for work-related travels. Despite this seemingly logical assumption,
accessibility alone does not warrant an individual's choice of a certain travel
mode. By systematically considering travel mode choice decisions of low-income
individuals, the objective of this dissertation is to shed new light on the
current understanding of the relationship between accessibility and employment
of the economically disadvantaged. In particular, this project asks two research
questions. First, what are the factors determining travel mode choices of low-
income individuals? Second, after systematically considering travel mode
choices, does accessibility to jobs still have a direct and independent impact
on improving employment outcomes of the deprived? This research, using household
travel survey data collected in the San Francisco and Atlanta regions, addresses
the above questions by conducting a series of statistical analyses to estimate
employment outcomes of the poor as a function of accessibility and travel mode
choices. The investigators expect to demonstrate the significance of mode choice
decisions in examining the impact of accessibility on the employment outcomes of
low-income individuals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation is important in
two respects. First, few research studies have systematically integrated travel
mode choices of the poor in studying how accessibility affects employment;
little consideration has been given to the idea that a high level of job
accessibility provided by a transport means does not guarantee that individuals
will choose the particular travel mode. Thus, what is missing in the literature
is how accessibility affects travel mode choices for poor individuals, and how
travel mode decisions subsequently influence employment. The proposed study will
fill this gap in the literature. Second, the findings from this research will
offer guidance for future transportation policy. Current transportation policies
for the poor tend to focus on improving accessibility by providing cars or
expanding transit services. However, if this study finds that there are factors
specific to each individual that restrict their travel mode choices, and if mode
choices indeed have significant impact on employment, this research can inform
policy makers about the sources of such constraints that limit the value of
accessibility. The public sector can then design policy instruments that are
specifically aimed at removing such constraints, thus ensuring higher social
returns from present accessibility-enhancing strategies. &lt;br/&gt;