* 0826867
* Collaborative Research: DHB: Identifying the Biological Influences on Political Temperaments
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2012
* John Alford, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 12/31/2012
* USD 78,071.00

Humans live in large social units and often care deeply about the rules
governing life in those units (politics) even if those rules are unlikely to
affect them personally. In fact, they sometimes care so deeply that differences
of opinion over politics can be the cause of small-scale arguments and large-
scale violence. This project examines the multiple influences on people's
political preferences, using a wide range of techniques across different
samples. Traditionally, it has been assumed that environmental factors, like
parental socialization, lead some people to adopt positions associated with the
left and others to adopt positions associated with the right (while still others
refrain from adopting any political positions at all). The field of behavioral
genetics, however, modifies this assumption in an important way by providing
empirical evidence, mostly from twin studies, showing that genetics also plays a
role in shaping political orientations. This research extends this work by using
multiple levels of analyses including genotyping, brain imaging, physiological
tests, surveys, and hormonal assays, applied to large samples of people in the
United States and in Australia. Not only does identifying the specific genes,
biological systems, and cognitive processing biases relevant to various
political temperaments make the gene-political temperament link more convincing,
it elucidates the nature and sources of political orientations. This project
will also provide interdisciplinary training opportunities to undergraduate and
graduate students.