* 0826554
* Acoustical and Structural Energy Based Methods to Minimize Acoustic Radiation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2010
* Kent Gee, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2010
* USD 219,693.00

Many scenarios exist that involve vibrating structures radiating sound into an
interior field, including interior aircraft noise, noise in the cabins of
automobiles and other vehicles, and transmission between two adjoining rooms.
The proposed research focuses on developing three active noise control
approaches for minimizing the sound field created by vibrating structures
radiating into enclosed sound fields. The three approaches consist of: i)
minimizing the acoustic energy density at discrete locations in the acoustic
field, ii) minimizing the structural energy density at discrete locations on the
vibrating structure, and iii) minimizing the structural power flow at discrete
locations on the vibrating structure. The effectiveness of each approach for
minimizing the interior acoustic field will be compared and contrasted.
Relationships and correlations between the three measured quantities in the
control approaches will be developed. A greater understanding of the coupling
that exists between the acoustic energy (in the enclosed field) and the
structural energy (in the vibrating structure) will also be acquired. This
project will advance scientific knowledge through the discovery of new energy-
based relationships, control techniques, and measurement techniques. This
research has potential for significant societal benefits by enhancing noise
control techniques in applications ranging from room acoustics, to an aircraft
fuselage, to vehicle cabs. Through this research, future professionals will be
trained with strong research skills and broad backgrounds in acoustics and
structural dynamics. These two disciplines are often considered separately but
this project will couple them in approaching new and innovative ideas. Graduate
and undergraduate students will be involved on teams, and will learn to
effectively interact with one another. The teams will be supported and
encouraged to publish and present their research at technical meetings. A
relatively large number of female students have participated in the research
group. The PIs will continue to encourage additional female and minority
students to become involved. The objective is to continue to teach those
involved with the group the importance and strength of having a broad and
diverse research group. Numerous K-12 groups visit our facilities each year, and
will see and be exposed to this work as a highlight of the research at BYU.