* 0826067
* Design and Surface Engineering of Nanofiber-based Probes
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Konstantin Kornev, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Gary Fischman
* 07/31/2012
* USD 250,000.00

Much of the success of nanoscale bioengineering relies on the development of new
tools for probing minute amounts of liquids. Testing biofluids from and
operation on individual cells, probing biofluids from primitive organisms
ranging in size from fractions of microns to tens of microns, probing
physiological fluids from secretory glands and microcapillaries, and collecting
probes for forensic analyses are only a few examples of procedures in which
nanoneedles and nanochannels are necessary instruments. In general, fibers with
hierarchical pore structure are important in applications where liquid
collection, transport, and analysis are performed on the same sample. Materials
for these probes are required to have superior absorbency, controlled
retention/extraction ability, and sufficient stiffness. To address these
problems, we propose to develop one-dimensional probes with core-sheath
morphology. We employ nanofiber yarns as cores. These yarns guarantee
exceptional absorption and retention ability due to strong capillary action. As
sheaths we suggest different materials with the common characteristic that the
proposed sheaths effectively support liquid transport and provide sufficient
stiffness. We also propose to graft the interior of the probe core with
thermally responsive polymers. When slightly heated, the nanopores will decrease
the level of hydrophilicity and push the liquid out of the pores. Therefore, the
tested liquid will be released. In general, the results of this project are
expected to set the basis for the design of novel fiber-based probes (organic
and inorganic) employing high permeability contrast (nanometer and micrometer-
diameter pores) and wettability stimulation (switching from hydrophilic to
hydrophobic). The deliverables include a catalog of fundamental parameters and
basic absorption and transport mechanisms analyzed through modeling and
experiments, technological tricks and prototypes of materials and probing
devices, documentation of research results, and engineering student educations.
Involvement of the brightest high-school, undergraduate, and graduate students
in modern surface and nanotechnology research is considered an important mission
of this project. As the project progresses, we plan to develop new courses for
graduate students and disseminate the results through many industrial partners.

