* 0826812
* Dynamics of Intimate Partner Violence
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* DAVID KATERNDAHL, University of Texas Health Science Center San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 08/31/2011
* USD 749,205.00



In the United States, husband-to-wife violence is widely prevalent and causes
great physical and psychological harm. One in five women has been hurt by
intimate partners in their lifetimes. Among them, 42 percent receive injuries
and 12 percent require medical care. Despite the devastating impact that
husband-to-wife abuse has on the wives and society, little is known about the
day-to-day dynamics of this abuse. The scientific understanding of patterns of
husband-to-wife abuse centers around three long-established theories: The Cycle
Theory of Violence, Family Systems Theory, and the Power and Control Wheel.
These three theories of violent behavior each predict different dynamic patterns
with distinct implications for predictability and intervention. The Cycle Theory
of Violence asserts that violence occurs in three phases (tension-building,
explosion, and then respite) which would yield cyclic or periodic patterns.
Although the frequency of the periodicity may vary due to variable phase length,
within each couple the periodicity would remain fairly constant. Under the
Systems Theory, the violence is dependent upon the feedback loops between victim
and batterer. The feedback, variable in strength and direction, may lead to
chaotic patterns in violence. Finally, in the Power And Control Wheel, the
constant force of abuse produces constant stress in the relationship,
occasionally erupting in violence. Use of multiple associated strategies for
control resembles the interdependent components with varying response
predilection seen in critical systems under constant stress, leading to
occasional random violent catastrophes of varying intensity--the dynamics of
criticality. To improve understanding of the dynamics of intimate partner
violence, this study will document daily patterns of domestic violence as it
happens, in the context of the changing environment surrounding that violence,
and use dynamical modeling to tease apart the three theories and their predicted
patterns. The objectives for this basic theoretical study are to determine 1)
the dynamics of intimate partner violence, 2) the personal, household, and
relational context of violence, 3) determine the dynamical patterns of violence
and degree of nonlinearity observed, 4) whether dynamic patterns of violence
reflect underlying theoretical models that explain violence, and 5) the impact
of study participation. To achieve the objectives, this study will recruit 200
Hispanic and Non-Hispanic white adult women from six primary care clinics during
routine office visits. Women who report being abused within the past month but
do not intend to leave the relationship will complete an interview at intake and
a telephone survey every day for 90 days. Questions will address the previous
day's level of violence, arguments, hassles, distress, marital harmony, life
events, and husband's and wife's alcohol intake. Weekly telephone discussions
with the women and end-of-study interviews will assess additional relationship
factors and women's sense of safety during the study. Analysis will determine
the specific dynamic pattern of violence seen as well as same-day and previous
day(s) triggers of violent events. This work will advance the scientific
understanding of husband-to-wife abuse by identifying dynamic patterns and the
processes that underlie these patterns, which in turn may enhance the
predictability of these violent events and inform possible interventions.