* 0826059
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Mexico's "New" Rural Women: Gendered Labor and Formulations of Rural Citizenship
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2010
* Altha Cravey, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 07/31/2010
* USD 12,000.00

As men increasingly migrate away from the Mexican countryside to seek work in
the United States, women are left behind to take on new roles in agricultural
fields, households, and communities. While studies of U.S.-Mexican migration
often focus on the economic impact of remittances from migrant laborers, the
political and economic role of undocumented workers in the United States, and
migrant experiences of border crossing and settlement, less attention is given
to the shifting dynamics of labor in Mexican sending communities. The role of
state-led development projects that promote grassroots development initiatives
is a key aspect of transforming labor relations in rural Mexico. As part of the
Mexican state's attempt to formulate a new rural citizen who no longer relies
upon state support, but rather sees the state as a partner in self-initiated
economic prosperity, state-led development projects are specifically targeting
rural women. The objective of this study is to investigate how male emigration
and state-run development projects are reshaping women's rural labor in the
state of Oaxaca. Through quantitative methods of household and community
surveying and qualitative methods of participant observation, life histories,
and semi-structured interviews, this study will examine how dramatic political
and economic changes in Mexico are restructuring gendered labor in three key
areas: household labor, productive economic labor, and political labor. The
study will center around three main research questions: 1. How is male
emigration from rural Oaxaca restructuring household labor relations? 2. How do
new gendered labor relations reshape women's political roles in Oaxacan
communities? 3. How are changing gendered labor relations incorporated into the
federal government's re-conceptualization of "new" productive citizens? Through
an examination of changing labor relations in each of these areas, this project
will explore how both Oaxacan women and the Mexican state are using changing
labor discourses and practices to formulate a new type of rural gendered
citizenship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While studies of economic globalization have
highlighted the increasing feminization of industrial labor and its exploitative
consequences for women in the global south, they have often overlooked the
dynamics of gendered labor relations in rural areas. By providing an
ethnographic account of the political effects of shifting labor practices in
rural Oaxaca, this study highlights the rural aspects of women's labor struggles
within broader political and economic contexts. Through dissemination to
academics, Mexican development officials, and Oaxacan communities, this research
will have a potential impact upon how development policy is formulated and on
how communities seek to engage or challenge development initiatives. Likewise,
the project's focus on women's political participation will contribute to both
state-led and grassroots initiatives that seek to expand women's access to
political arenas in Mexico at the scales of the community, the state, and the
nation. &lt;br/&gt;