* 0826103
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation in California's Central Valley: Implications of Risk and Risk Aversion for Integrated Assessment
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* W. Michael Hanemann, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Ezekiel Kalipeni
* 08/31/2010
* USD 11,975.00

This dissertation research will improve current understandings of regional
adaptation to climate change, a problem increasingly recognized as critically
important by scientists and policymakers. It will integrate climatology,
hydrology, and decision analysis to address a current debate about the
importance of risk and risk aversion in climate change assessments. Risk
aversion (the desire to manage events so as to avoid risk), is common in human
decision-makers, but to date modeling of water resources and climate change have
implicitly assumed risk neutrality (indifference to risk). The proposed research
will incorporate risk and risk aversion into an integrated assessment of climate
change impacts and adaptation strategies in water resources in California's
Central Valley. The analysis will proceed in four steps. First, an integrated
hydrology and water operations simulation model will describe three basins in
California's Central Valley. Second, re-sampling synthetic historical weather
time series (and perturbing them based on downscaled GCM data) over many model
runs will generate probability distributions for water supply reliability at
each demand node in the model. Third, economic techniques for utility function
elicitation will be used to determine the risk preferences of water
organizations in the study basins. Combining these utility functions with
probabilistic output from the hydrology model will allow estimation of expected
utility. Finally, scenarios of management options for adapting to projected
changes will be analyzed under different assumptions of emissions trajectories,
allowing for comparison of the expected utility to each water organization under
each modeled scenario. The result will be a clearer understanding of impacts and
adaptation than existing studies.

The project will make contributions to the study of water resources in the
fields of physical geography and risk analysis. First, it will take up
theoretical challenges to the widespread assumptions by water planners that
future climate will closely resemble that in recorded history. It will produce a
method to more clearly articulate the hydrologic risks faced by water managers.
Second, in the field of risk analysis, the research will challenge the implicit
assumption of risk neutrality in the water resources and climate change
literatures. Given that climate change will likely involve increased extreme
events and uncertainty about water supply, its projected impacts will likely be
significantly greater when risk aversion is explicitly acknowledged. By applying
both risk and risk aversion to regional scale climate impacts assessment, this
research will produce a set of products that are greater than the sum of the
individual parts. The tools produced by this research will have direct
application in this and other water resource systems. The hydrology/water
operations model will be a more transparent, accessible tool than those that
currently exist for modeling water operations in California. In the short term,
the model will be useful for sensitivity analysis by stakeholders who currently
lack access to such planning tools. In the longer term, the model will be
connected with others to form a statewide representation that integrates new
functionality, including a dynamic representation of physical hydrology
appropriate for climate change assessment. Additionally, this general tool can
be applied to topics ranging from environmental assessments to water supply
reliability analysis. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award,
this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish
a strong independent research career.