* 0826924
* Single Cell Genome Sequencing of Uncultured Prokaryotes From the South Atlantic Mesopelagic
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* David McClellan, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2012
* USD 976,747.00

The mesopelagic zone of the ocean is 200 to 1000 m below the sea surface and
contains about 25% of the global ocean volume. It harbors one of the largest and
least understood of the Earth's ecosystems. This region receives the organic
matter which rains down from the photic zone and is dominated by microorganisms
whose activities are critical for ocean productivity - because they recycle
nutrients - and for the global carbon cycle. This community also constitutes an
untapped source of pharmaceuticals. Despite considerable interest in this deep-
dwelling community, the biochemistry, physiology and evolutionary history of
mesopelagic microbes remain enigmatic, largely due to access, the vast scale of
the region and the limitations of research tools. As a new approach to the study
of these deep dwelling communities, scientists at the Bigelow Laboratory for
Ocean Sciences will employ single amplified genomics (SAG), a novel,
transformative technology which enables the reconstruction of the entire genome
of an uncultured microorganism collected from the environment. These scientists
coupled SAG with flow cytometry, which is used for sorting cells, to apply this
procedure in the ocean. This technology is transformative because, though many
marine bacteria are not culturable, this limitation is now overcome because it
allows these scientists to study a microbe (through its genome) without the need
for first bringing the organism into culture. These investigators will use
samples from the mesopelagic zone in the South Atlantic Gyre and through a
careful screening procedure, produce hundreds of SAGs from these samples, which
can then be sequenced. These researchers will be particularly interested in
characterizing the identities and genomic composition of the microorganisms
which are involved in the degradation of complex biomolecules and in the
transformations of nitrogen compounds that control the productivity of the
ocean. These SAG sequences will also be interrogated with metagenomic sequence
datasets, such as the Global Ocean Survey dataset, to postulate the metabolism,
physiology and evolutionary history of these organisms. The genomic information
these scientists will gather from uncultured cells will lay the groundwork for
microbial evolution and population genetics studies in the future. To promote
development and broader use of this new technology, the investigators will be
engaging postdoctoral associates and undergraduate students in the project,
hosting SAG workshops, and establishing a web-based SAG discussion group. The
SAG genome sequence library will also be an important community resource.