* 0826811
* Undergraduate Diversity at the Society for the Study of Evolution and the Society of Systematic Biologists
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2012
* Scott Edwards, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 04/30/2012
* USD 67,500.00

The Society for the Study of Evolution (SSE) and the Society of Systematic
Biologists (SSB) are the premier professional societies in the US for discussion
and dissemination of ideas relating to evolution. This award will provide
travel, registration, and lodging costs for approximately 15 undergraduates from
groups underrepresented in science for the annual meetings of these societies
for the years 2008 - 2011. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is a continuation of
a very successful program that began with the 2001 meetings and has raised
awareness and enthusiasm for the need to broaden the undergraduate base at the
meetings. During the meetings the undergraduates will be mentored by graduate
student and faculty mentors, who will help the undergraduate network at the
meetings, help demystify talks for the undergraduates, and generally make the
students feel more welcome at the meetings. There will also be an official
mentoring session for undergraduates, consisting of a seminar that will help
encourage the students to prepare for careers and/or graduate school in
evolutionary and environmental biology. These activities will be supplemented by
social activities not covered by this grant, as well as further efforts on the
part of both societies for encouraging undergraduate participation, such as
reduced registration fees, daily fees for attendance by students at the host
site, and an undergraduate poster session. These activities will help increase
participation by underrepresented groups at the Evolution meetings, and
ultimately should have a positive effect on participation in evolutionary
biology nationally.&lt;br/&gt;