* 0826874
* COLLABORATIVE PROPOSAL: DRU: INCORPORATING HOUSEHOLD DECISION MAKING AND DYNAMIC TRANSPORTATION MODELING IN HURRICANE EVACUATION: AN INTEGRATED SOCIAL SCIENCE-ENGINEERING APPROACH
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2008,06/30/2010
* Wai Kan Victor Chan, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 06/30/2010
* USD 485,000.00

This project will develop new methodologies for understanding hurricane
evacuations by integrating behavioral modeling of household decision making with
dynamic transportation modeling. By understanding evacuation decision making,
the research will contribute to improving the efficiency of hurricane
evacuation.

This project will develop novel modeling approaches to: (1) Estimate the social,
demographic and cultural characteristics that influence household evacuation
decision making from surveys of Miami-Dade County residents; (2) Understand how
people synthesize evacuation warnings up to the time they make the decision to
evacuate; (3) Assess the influence of household decisions based on spatial
location; (4) Estimate the temporal variation of evacuees from the time of
warning; (5) Determine the optimal time of departure, optimal route and
destination choice based on the temporal demand patterns; (6) Incorporate
behavioral rules obtained from social science analysis to simulate the
transportation system impacts; and (7) Identify ways to distribute the obtained
results from multiple hurricane scenarios to stakeholders.

The project will use multidisciplinary approaches to understand hurricane
evacuation by bringing together approaches from social science, network
optimization, agent-based modeling, transportation operations, stochastic
optimization and hurricane emergency response.