* 0826535
* Design and Development of Body-Centered Cubic Alloys with Increased Strength and Toughness for Infrastructural and Structural Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Dieter Isheim, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Demitris Kouris
* 08/31/2012
* USD 399,854.00

Design and Development of Body-Centered Cubic Alloys with Increased Strength and
Toughness for Infrastructural and Structural
Applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;A theoretical and
experimental program to ductilize alloys with body-centered cubic (bcc)
structure and specifically steel will be performed. The guiding principle is
that nanoscale precipitates that are coherent with the matrix not only
significantly increase the strength of the material but also reduce the ductile
to brittle transformation temperature by locally lowering the Peierls stress for
screw dislocations. The ferritic matrix of the steel will be strengthened and
ductilized with nano-scale precipitates containing Cu, Ni, Mn and Al. The
relationship between the precipitate composition, structure, size and mechanical
properties will be established. The composition of the steel and heat-treatment
conditions will be selected to give the optimal strength, ductility and fracture
toughness at low temperatures. Theory of ductilization of bcc metals by nano-
size slightly misfitting precipitates will be generalized using the methods of
micromechanics and will be applied to other metals where high Peierls stress
limits the ductility. The results of the experimental work will guide and test
the theoretical work.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed concept will have far-reaching
implications in materials design, such as improving the toughness of Cr and Ti-
based alloys, intermetallics, and possibly ceramics. This will open up new
opportunities for research and development of new materials for infrastructure
and structural applications. Also this project will be very effective in
training of graduate and undergraduate students since it combines the use of
advanced scientific tools with theoretical work. &lt;br/&gt;