* 0826027
* Collaborative Research: Grazing and Iron Controls of Diatom Blooms in the Arabian Sea
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2011
* James Moffett, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 12/31/2011
* USD 344,047.00

The Arabian Sea is important in global C and N budgets because of its high rates
of annual primary production, its extensive zone of oxygen depletion and
denitrification, and its expected strong response to global warming via ocean-
atmosphere feedback to monsoon winds and upwelling intensity, especially the
Oman Upwelling, driven by the SW Monsoon. The paradox of the Arabian Sea is that
it produces a very weak and delayed phytoplankton response compared to other
physically dynamic upwelling systems. Thick blooms of large diatoms are uniquely
not evident in the Arabian Sea despite apparently abundant nutrients, seed
stocks and favorable hydrographic conditions. The subdued response shifts carbon
export offshore of the coastal upwelling area and delays major flux events until
the latter stages of the SW Monsoon, with important implications for the western
boundary of the oxygen minimum zone. This work will test the hypotheses that
grazing interactions, iron limitation, or both, control diatoms and, more
generally, phytoplankton biomass, production and the delayed flux
characteristics of the Arabian Sea. Grazer control was a major, but as yet
untested, conclusion of the US JGOFS program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2007, one
of the investigators found that a large region of the central and southern
Arabian Sea was Fe-limited during the SW Monsoon, consistent with recent
modeling studies. Iron limitation may exacerbate grazing regulation, and
integration of Fe and grazing experiments is a central part of the work plan. A
cruise to the Oman upwelling region during the SW Monsoon in 2010 will include
iron and nutrient biogeochemistry, plankton community structure and dynamics,
taxon-specific estimates of phytoplankton growth and production, grazing
contributions of micro- and mesozooplankton, with a focus on large copepods
(Calanoides carinatus, Subeucalanus crassus, Paraeucalanus sewelli), whose life
histories, abundance and size are consistent with a top-down regulatory role.
The approach will involve assessment of net community rates of changes following
a Lagrangian drift array and contemporaneous in situ studies of phytoplankton
growth, production, micro- and mesozooplankton grazing. Shipboard experiments
will address the response of phytoplankton to added Fe and Si and reproductive
responses of dominant large grazers to food supply, their ability to modulate
the grazing impacts of micro-herbivores and their direct and indirect effects on
lower trophic levels. The sampling program will resolve the abundances, depth
distribution and lipid contents of major grazers during a critical time of year
(August-September) when there is little previous data and as the animals are
preparing to leave surface waters for their seasonal diapause migration to
mesopelagic depths. Grazing control in the Arabian Sea, if confirmed, will be a
unique example of top-down regulation of a significant open-ocean ecosystem with
important consequences for carbon and nitrogen cycling. Furthermore,
understanding the potential limiting effects of Fe availability will allow us to
better anticipate how the ocean ecology and biogeochemistry will respond to
changes in climate and monsoon intensity that affect dust fluxes from the
surrounding arid landmasses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most recent IPCC report
cites changes in monsoon intensity as a likely impact of the present trend in
planetary warming. This project seeks to understand ecological, biological and
geochemical constraints on production, carbon cycling and export in the
upwelling system so that the effects of climate changes can be better
anticipated and modeled. This project will also contribute to the oceanographic
infrastructure of India and Oman, both critical US partners in the Indian Ocean,
as well as continue ongoing activities in public outreach, K-12 education,
broadening undergraduate educational opportunities, for example through the MATE
program, and graduate training of diversity students in marine
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;