* 0826081
* Collaborative Research: Blind Discovery of Variation Sources for Visualization by Multidisciplinary Teams
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Daniel Apley, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Edwin Romeijn
* 07/31/2012
* USD 189,862.00

Programs for systematically reducing manufacturing variation and improving
quality (often called six-sigma programs) are now firmly established in
industry. However, the vast majority of six-sigma analysis tools were designed
decades ago for use with limited amounts of data with relatively simple
structure. This research will develop a knowledge discovery methodology for six-
sigma variation reduction that is designed for the high-dimensional data
structures found in modern manufacturing operations. In contrast to methods in
which one constructs prior models for known variation sources and then looks for
those specific premodeled patterns in the data, the goal of this research is to
blindly discover the nature of the variation patterns and their sources, based
solely on a sample of data, with no premodeling. Interactive graphical
visualizations of each identified pattern will enable users to visualize the
root causes of variation. To accomplish this, this research will develop a
paradigm for representing variation patterns that encompasses linear and
nonlinear phenomena in a variety of data structures. The research will also
develop algorithms for blindly identifying the patterns with as much accuracy,
robustness, and automation as possible. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful,
this research will modernize variation reduction methods to keep pace with
advances in measurement and information technology. Although the algorithms will
necessarily be complex, the automation, coupled with methods that will be
developed for visualizing the results, will create tools that are easy-to-use
and widely applicable. These characteristics, which are traditional six-sigma
hallmarks, will facilitate broad dissemination and adoption of the methodology
and enable its use by multidisciplinary teams of collaborators (e.g., operators,
engineers, statisticians, and managers with varying backgrounds). Dissemination
will be further enhanced by integrating the results into six-sigma and data
mining courses offered to undergraduate and Ph.D. students and to an ethnically
and technically diverse spectrum of engineers and managers in professional
masters' courses. &lt;br/&gt;