* 0826151
* Understanding the Frictional Properties of Boundary Films
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2008,01/31/2012
* Wilfred Tysoe, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 01/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

The research objective of this award is to provide a fundamental understanding
of the frictional properties of thin inorganic films on metal substrates. Such
films are relevant to coatings or reactively deposited films that are formed on
surfaces by reaction with lubricant additives. The research strategy involves
making precise measurements of frictional forces on well-defined thin films that
are grown and characterized under ultrahigh vacuum conditions. This ensures that
clean and well-characterized films are studied and that their surfaces remain
clean to ensure that precise and reproducible experimental measurements are
made. These results will be modeled at the atomic scale using quantum mechanical
calculations to understand the frictional behavior and the experimental systems
have been selected such that they are sufficiently simple that they can be fully
modeled using this strategy. The ultimate goal of the research is thus to
understand, at a fundamental molecular level, the origins of sliding friction
and the mechanisms by which energy is dissipated during sliding.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research will provide
fundamental insights into the requirements for fabricating low-friction coatings
and to enable the chemistry of lubricant additives to be designed to form
coatings with targeted frictional properties. The results will be disseminated
by publication in peer-reviewed journals and will be presented at national and
international conferences and will thus be widely available to coatings and
lubricant manufacturers. The results will also be communicated directly to local
lubricant manufacturers. Graduate and undergraduate students and in physics and
chemistry will benefit from an interdisciplinary project involving a close
interplay between theory and experiment on a project that has real-world
applications. &lt;br/&gt;