* 0826886
* AOC: The Ecology of Terrorist Organizations
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2008,12/31/2012
* Gary LaFree, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 12/31/2012
* USD 772,520.00

The goal of this project is to advance understanding of the behavior of
terrorist organizations as agents of change. While there has been enormous
interest in terrorist organizations, especially since the events of 9/11,
systematic unclassified empirical data on terrorist organizations, along with
similar political organizations that choose not to use terrorism, has never
before been collected and analyzed. This project addresses this knowledge gap by
assembling a major new dataset and then uses the tools of the social and
behavioral sciences to develop and test models that predict which political
organizations are most likely to use terrorist violence to pursue
goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project generates interdisciplinary insights
into the behavior of political organizations as a function of local, national,
and international political, social, and economic variables, as well as
organizational characteristics. It accomplishes this by analyzing terrorist
organization behavior as part of a larger social ecology. The project involves a
partnership of more than 15 researchers from 3 major research universities and
represents a range of academic disciplines, all of whom share a substantive
interest in the dynamics of human behavior. Political scientists,
criminologists, and sociologists collaborate to construct integrated models of
organizational behavior that take into account the broadly defined context in
which an organization operates, building upon existing theories and concepts
about social mobilization, political violence, and criminal gang behavioral
dynamics. Moreover, computer scientists on our research team provide insights on
how information extraction tools can most efficiently classify data to determine
if it meets key conditions. Computer scientists and social scientists work
together to develop optimal protocols for combining automated and non-automated
data-collection efforts specific to the topic of politically active
organizations. The combination of these processes allows for transformative
research into the dynamics of terrorism, pushing well beyond current theoretical
and methodological boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of the data,
methods and analyses resulting from this project extends beyond the academic
community to the policy realm. The core question?under what conditions does an
organization turn to terrorism to pursue its political and social agenda??is of
fundamental importance to governments around the world, and the research team
assembled for this effort is well positioned to ensure that the knowledge gained
from this effort is transferred to interested public officials. The research
home for this project is the National Consortium for the Study of Terrorism and
Responses to Terrorism (START), a Center of Excellence of the U.S. Department of
Homeland Security, with a mandate and the mechanisms to ensure that advances
made through this research are communicated directly to the policy
community.&lt;br/&gt;