* 0826465
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Vulnerability and Health: Economic Development in Ugandan Pastoralist Communitites
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2008,01/31/2010
* Amber Pearson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 01/31/2010
* USD 12,000.00

In sub-Saharan Africa, efforts to meet the Millenuim Development Goals (MDGs),
improve access to drinking water, reduce gastrointestinal illness, and other
development strategies have and continue to involve the privatization of
environmental resources and services. In the late 1980s, southwestern Ugandan
pastoralist communities experienced dramatic decreases in access to land and
water through privatization and conservation policies aimed at promoting
economic development. Using the frameworks that were originally proposed within
research on natural hazards and the social construction of vulnerability, the
two Ugandan policies of land privatization and conservation may be considered to
be 'political hazards.' These hazards may have altered aspects of social and
biophysical vulnerability by impacting access to resources or altering coping
strategies in the pastoralist communities. The ultimate goal of this project is
to understand the implications of land privatization and conservation practices
for health and vulnerability in the communities experiencing these development
projects. By collecting infectious disease incidence data and demographic data,
and by conducting semi-structured interviews, an understanding of the incidence
and dynamics of health and disease may be fostered. The resulting understanding
faculitates the connections of specific economic development policies and
vulnerability, which may result in an increased risk of infectious disease,
expressed as an increased disease incidence rate. The specific aims of this
project are to: 1) Test the hypothesis that higher vulnerability is associated
with increased infectious disease incidence; 2) Test the hypothesis that high
vulnerability preceding the political hazards is associated with high
vulnerability after these hazards; 3) Identify the self-perceived root causes of
social and biophysical vulnerability; and 4) Explore discordant instances of
vulnerability and health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This framework broadens the scope
of medical geography to include health, vulnerability and the environment in the
context of access to resources and power dynamics. The proposed research will
contribute to understanding the potential connections between scales, from
national economic development policies and transnational ideologies to diverse
health outcomes within communities. In addition, this research will be an
important contribution to the science of vulnerability, testing the creation of
a vulnerability index. The resulting connections between vulnerability and
health may call for new trajectories for development, which facilitate equality
and empowerment of people to use available material and social resources to
lessen vulnerability and bring sustained improvement in the quality and health
of their lives. Examination of the factors that make people and places
vulnerable can guide public policy development and improve current efforts to
increase access to safe drinking water, reduce mortality associated with
environmental infections, and meet the MDGs, while bearing implications for the
push to meet those goals through privatization and
individualism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by NSF's Office of
International Science and Engineering.