* 0826941
* HSD: Anticipatory Learning for Climate Change Adaptation and Resilience
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2008,03/31/2013
* Christopher Hoadley, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 03/31/2013
* USD 749,814.00

Adaptation to the impacts of climatic change is now at the forefront of
scientific inquiry and policy negotiations, but the current debate has
contributed little to the understanding of the decision-making processes that
shape adaptation and resilient livelihoods. This interdisciplinary research
project hypothesizes that cyclical (loop) learning enhances people's
anticipatory capacity, which is reflected in more flexible and dynamic local and
regional adaptation plans. The investigators propose a resilience-enhancing
approach that emphasizes an iterative way of analyzing and learning about
changes and uncertainties in the past, present, and future. By focusing
explicitly on learning processes and decision-support tools, this project is
expected to reverse the deterministic notion of presumably vulnerable groups as
passive victims of climate change by highlighting people's skills, knowledge,
strategic responses, anticipatory capacity, and agency for adaptation planning.
Research will be conducted in selected rural communities in Ghana and Tanzania
using methods from the learning sciences, rural sociology, cultural geography,
and participatory action research to understand how anticipatory learning
(learning that helps people anticipate and adapt to change) occurs on the ground
and how it can be enhanced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The contributions of this
project are expected to be threefold: (1) a theory regarding how anticipatory
learning works in the context of climate change; (2) initial measures of
people's individual and collective capacity for anticipation; and (3) pilot
interventions for anticipatory learning tools. The project will address new and
important questions in decision theory with respect to processes that permit
some communities to better adapt to change than others; relationships among
social configuration, learning practices, and decision making under climatic
risk; and dynamics in knowledge creation and action. The project also will
provide immediate benefits for the study populations, training opportunities in
the U.S. and in Africa, and findings that have high potential impact on the
pressing human impacts of climate change. Through co-design of adaptation tools
and interventions in Ghana and Tanzania, the research will foster people's
capacity to influence their future through iterative planning rather than
learning by shock. The study will involve students in the U.S. in three ways:
(1) graduate and undergraduate students educated and trained through their
direct participation in the conduct of this project; (2) undergraduate students
enrolled in a course on climate change adaptation and study abroad in Africa;
and (3) an interdisciplinary graduate seminar to design anticipatory learning
tools with African colleagues. The U.S. investigators will work closely with
researchers and practitioners at African partner institutions (the University of
Dar-es-Salaam in Tanzania, the University of Ghana, and the Afram Plains
Development Organization (APDO) as well as with disaster risk and development
organizations (CARE International and the Red Cross/Red Crescent). An award
resulting from the FY 2008 NSF-wide competition on Human and Social Dynamics
(HSD) supports this project. All NSF directorates and offices are involved in
the coordinated management of the HSD competition and the portfolio of HSD
awards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;