* 0826873
* COLLABORATIVE PROPOSAL: DRU: INCORPORATING HOUSEHOLD DECISION MAKING AND DYNAMIC TRANSPORTATION MODELING IN HURRICANE EVACUATION: AN INTEGRATED SOCIAL SCIENCE-ENGINEERING APPROACH
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2013
* Pamela Murray-Tuite, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 09/30/2013
* USD 88,109.00

This project will develop new methodologies for understanding hurricane
evacuations by integrating behavioral modeling of household decision making with
dynamic transportation modeling. By understanding evacuation decision making,
the research will contribute to improving the efficiency of hurricane
evacuation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop novel modeling
approaches to: (1) Estimate the social, demographic and cultural characteristics
that influence household evacuation decision making from surveys of Miami-Dade
County residents; (2) Understand how people synthesize evacuation warnings up to
the time they make the decision to evacuate;&lt;br/&gt;(3) Assess the influence
of household decisions based on spatial location; (4) Estimate the temporal
variation of evacuees from the time of warning; (5) Determine the optimal time
of departure, optimal route and destination choice based on the temporal demand
patterns; (6) Incorporate behavioral rules obtained from social science analysis
to simulate the transportation system impacts; and (7) Identify ways to
distribute the obtained results from multiple hurricane scenarios to
stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use multidisciplinary
approaches to understand hurricane evacuation by bringing together approaches
from social science, network optimization, agent-based modeling, transportation
operations, stochastic optimization and hurricane emergency response.