* 0826650
* Diversity and ecology of marine RNA viruses
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Alexander Culley, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2011
* USD 498,325.00

Viruses are an integral component of the marine food web contributing to the
disease and mortality of essentially every type of marine life, yet the
diversity of marine viral assemblages remains very poorly characterized. This is
especially true of the RNA containing viruses. There are several reports of
isolations of RNA containing viruses that infect marine protists, but
cultivation-independent surveys of RNA viral diversity are still very limited.
Previous studies in coastal British Columbia and in coastal Oahu have shown RNA
viruses are diverse and persistent in both temperate and subtropical waters.
These molecular surveys have made it clear that the few available isolates of
marine RNA viruses are just the tip of the iceberg; novel RNA viruses are still
being discovered with each new sample analyzed. Many of these novel gene
sequences appear to derive from viruses of marine protists and their high
diversity suggests that viral infections are a persistent force shaping
protistan community composition in the sea. Quantifying the abundance,
diversity, and dynamics of these viruses is an important first step toward
incorporating them into the ecology of the sea. The immediate goals with this
proposal, therefore, are focused on answering some important first order
ecological questions, namely, 1) Do RNA viruses make a significant numerical
contribution to the total virus pool?, 2) On what spatial and temporal scales
does the diversity and specific composition of the marine RNA virus community in
this ecosystem vary?, 3) What are the decay and production rates of RNA viruses
and how do they compare to those of DNA containing
viruses?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will estimate the absolute and
relative abundance of RNA viruses using epifluorescence and electron microscopy
in parallel with RNA and DNA assays of purified and fractionated viral
assemblages harvested from seawater and we will document the genomic diversity
of RNA viruses in a subtropical environment using a metagenomics approach. New
bioinformatic tools and approaches specifically designed to handle metagenomic
data will also be tested and implemented in this project. The investigators will
employ DGGE fingerprinting and sequencing of the RdRP gene to determine on what
scales (meters to kilometers, hours to years) the community composition varies
and how this variability relates to measured environmental gradients. They will
also quantify the spatial distribution and temporal dynamics of individual
phylotypes of RNA viruses by qRT PCR. The sampling program will resolve the
relevant scales of variability in community composition. This is a fundamental
issue that is frequently ignored in investigations of microbial diversity.
Finally, the investigators will attempt to make the first estimates of decay and
production rates of RNA viruses relative to DNA containing viruses in different
plankton size fractions. These estimates will provide a basis for estimating the
contribution of RNA viruses to mortality among the
plankton.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is expected that the output from this project
will be of interest and value to researchers in a range of disciplines including
microbial oceanographers, evolutionary biologists, virologists, and protistan
ecologists. This study will provide the first information on the dynamics of a
poorly studied group of pathogens, which are likely to have significant
influence on structure and function of the planktonic food web. The project is
almost certain to dramatically expand the known range of genomic diversity among
RNA viruses, will provide new insights into their evolution, ecology, and
biology, and will contribute to the development of new bioinformatics tools of
broad applicability for metagenomics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs lab
participates routinely in the bi-annual open house held by the School of Ocean
and Science and Technology at the University of Hawaii, which draws thousands of
visitors over two days including K12 school groups from over 50 Oahu schools.
This opportunity is used to educate students and teachers about the presence and
importance of microbes in the sea and to motivate student interest in scientific
research. The PI and post-doc on this project are also affiliated with a
recently established Science and Technology Center known as the Center for
Microbial Oceanography - Research and Education (CMORE). As members of CMORE, we
are working with an education and outreach team to help develop and implement a
variety of outreach and education activities. A key educational goal is to work
with CMORE's education office to increase diversity among under represented
groups, particularly Native Hawaiians and Pacific Islanders (NHPI). C MORE has
already established a strong, working partnership with (1) Ka Imi Ike ("Seekers
of Knowledge"), aimed at recruiting and retaining NHPI undergraduates into the
ocean and earth sciences, and (2) the Hawaiian Internship Program (HIP), a
10-week summer program that engages NHPI undergraduates and recent graduates in
hands-on scientific research through close mentoring. The PI and post-doc have
already hosted one NHPI student in their lab through the HIP program for the
summer of 2007 with great success. This student plans to continue her work on
viral diversity this fall and we anticipate that the results from her summer
project will lead to a publication in a peer reviewed journal. We plan to
participate in the HIP and Ka Imi Ike programs in future years and funds
budgeted for undergraduate research in this proposal will be used to help
support research by students identified through these programs.