* 0826255
* Upgrades, Reneging and Retrials: Advanced Dynamic Control of Service Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Mark Lewis, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Edwin Romeijn
* 08/31/2012
* USD 281,582.00

Some estimates put the number of people in the U.S. that work in call centers as
high as 3 million. This is consistent with the well-known shift of the U.S.
economy from a manufacturing base to a service base. The proposed research is to
study the dynamic control of service systems with three major innovations:
upgrades, reneging, and retrials. Although the motivation in each case stems
from call centers, the results obtained will be applicable more generally. The
following questions are to be considered:

? After market segmentation, are there simple modifications to classic resource
allocation policies that can reduce waiting times for lower class customers,
while guaranteeing high quality service for higher class customers? ? Do the
insights drawn from classic allocation policies continue to be useful in the
advanced systems of today? ? In models with controlled the admission rates, are
there simple, implementable policies given today's new decision-making
paradigms?

To tackle each of these questions specific models of service systems are
presented. Each model presents new challenges from both a theoretical and
managerial standpoint. If successful, insights into optimal resource allocation
in service systems will be provided as well as opening the door for new
exploration of service system control.

The intellectual merits of our proposed research include examining extensions of
some of the classic models in scheduling and admission control. These extensions
stand to update the state of the art to cover more recent innovations in service
systems and answer new paradigms introduced in the current service economy of
the United States. In some cases we expect that the insights gained can serve as
a warning against blindly using classic results as the models become more
intricate. Indeed, the proposed models are not even proposed the most general
possible, yet the insights even so far are profound. The author continues to
work vigorously to pursue top Minority graduate students to be involved in his
work. Moreover, the results will enhance classroom instruction for advanced
courses in applied probability and operations research/management that the
author teaches at Cornell University.