* 0826825
* DHB: Conditions Guiding Coordinative and Adaptive Dynamics in Human Interaction
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Roger Kreuz, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2013
* USD 673,079.00

When two humans interact, they often mirror each other's behavior. While
discussing a work of art, their eye movements and gestures may become similar or
even synchronize. When conversing face to face, they may adjust to facial
expressions and gestures of their conversational partner. In addition, they may
carefully adapt their sentences to the shared world that each can see. Therefore
when two people interact, to some extent they become one "coupled" system. Like
a couple dancing, they adjust their behavior in response to their partner. This
research will explore how and when two people can be conceived as one dynamic,
coupled system. An interdisciplinary team, consisting of two psychologists, a
computer scientist, and a philosopher, will develop experiments and computer
simulations to find new ways of understanding this "mirroring" and "adapting"
that people seem to do while communicating.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Theories of
human communication often emphasize strong coupling or, as a default, its
absence. This work will supplement such theories by seeking a systematic middle
ground based in cognitive mechanisms. How does facilitating memory and attention
foster coupling between speakers? Humans can be made to adapt effectively to
each other if the conditions are just right, and less often otherwise. The
findings from this research could suggest ways of redesigning task environments
to facilitate communication between partners. These tasks are common in everyday
life, from sharing a computer screen during interaction, navigation, and even
educational contexts in which tutors and students discuss visual or other
information. The project could help two people couple more strongly, thus
helping task partners avoid vagueness and ambiguity, and enhance the efficiency
of their communication.