* 0826158
* Geometry of state space in plane Couette flow
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Predrag Cvitanovic, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2012
* USD 250,000.00

A large conceptual gap separates the theory of low-dimensional chaotic dynamics
from the infinite-dimensional nonlinear dynamics of turbulence. Recent advances
in experimental imaging, computational methods, and dynamical systems theory
suggest a way to bridge this gap and make a fundamental breakthrough in our
understanding of turbulence. It has recently been discovered that recurrent
coherent structures observed in wall-bounded shear flows (such as pipes and
boundary layers) result from close passes to weakly unstable invariant solutions
of the Navier-Stokes equations. These 3D, fully nonlinear solutions (equilibria,
traveling waves, and periodic orbits) structure the state space of turbulent
flows and provide a skeleton for analyzing their dynamics. We propose to
calculate a hierarchy of invariant solutions for a canonical wall-bounded shear
flow and to use these solutions (1) to develop a quantitative description of the
flow's turbulent dynamics, and (2) to predict, directly from the fundamental
equations, physical quantities such as bulk flow rate and mean wall drag. We
will use a combination of novel and proven numerical and analytical techniques,
such as periodic orbit theory, group representation theory, nonlinear search
methods and variational solvers, and computational fluid dynamics. The proposed
research will be conducted with collaborators in Japan, Germany, the UK, and the
US, and all results and numerical software will be disseminated through through
our group's collaborative e-book www.ChaosBook.org and open-source CFD software
and invariant solution database www.Channelflow.org.

Turbulence is not only the great unsolved fundamental problem of classical
physics, but a problem of great practical importance. Any progress in our
fundamental understanding of turbulence impacts technology and engineering.
Applications range from the suppression of plasma instabilities in magnetic
confinement fusion reactors to the key challenge of reducing turbulent drag.
Drag is responsible for a significant part of the fuel consumed in automotive,
aviation and shipping industry as well as in transport of fluids. Even an
incremental reduction of drag by improving flow control methodology would have a
significant economic impact across a broad range of industries.