* 0826204
* Prion Transport in Porous Media: Influence of Electrostatic and Non-DLVO Interactions
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Joel Pedersen, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 08/31/2012
* USD 400,000.00

0826204/Pedersen

This study addresses prions, the infectious agents in transmissible spongiform
encephalopathies such as bovine spongiform encephalopathy ("mad cow" disease)
and chronic wasting disease of deer and elk, represent a potential threat to
human health. At present, our understanding of prion fate and transport in soils
and subsurface environments is extremely limited, even though such an
understanding is critical to assessing the risks associated with prions in the
natural environment (e.g., from diseased carcasses, animal shedding, discharges
from slaughterhouse and game processing septic systems) and in engineered
systems (e.g., landfill disposal of carcasses and waste from eradication
programs and meat recalls). The main objectives are to evaluate the interactions
important in infectious prion protein transport through porous media; and
determine the reversibility of prion protein deposition induced by chemical
perturbations. The PIs will examine prion protein attachment to quartz and
functionalized silica surfaces under varying ionic strengths with background
electrolytes differing in cation valence. The contribution of physical straining
to prion protein retention in porous media will be examined using ultrapure
quartz grains of several median particle sizes and size distributions.
Attachment will be examined in saturated column experiments and using a quartz
crystal microbalance with dispersion, and will be interpreted within the
framework of the Derjaguin-Landau-Verwey-Overbeek (DLVO) theory of colloid
stability. Equations will be derived that describe the single-collector
efficiency under low Péclet number conditions and electrostatic and van der
Waals interaction interactions between spheres and rods. Broader impacts will be
realized through enhanced K-12 education by designing, implementing, and
evaluating an instructional unit on environmental engineering and science for
middle-school students that is organized around inquiry- and discovery-based
learning exercises. Developing this middle-school unit will continue an existing
collaboration with a middle school science teacher that was initiated through
the NSF Research Experience for Teachers program. The project team will leverage
existing resources to reach their educational objectives such as UW's NSF-funded
Delta Program in Research, Teaching, and Learning to provide opportunities for
graduate students to develop skills in classroom teaching, preparation of
instructional materials, informal education, teaching to diverse student
audiences, teaching with technology and internships.