* 0826131
* Cutting, Selecting, and Transfer-Printing Technology for Graphene-on-Demand over Entire Wafers and FET Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Stephen Chou, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2012
* USD 280,000.00

The goals of this research are to (a) develop new ways of placing high-quality
few-layer graphene on entire device active areas over a large wafer, by a
graphene-on-demand approach that precisely cuts, selects and transfer-prints
(GCST) high-quality graphene from graphite onto the wafer, and (b) as a test bed
for GCST, scale and develop new graphene FET structures, materials, and
fabrication technologies for IC integration. The research is based on the
Principal Investigator groups recent successful demonstration of the most
critical steps of Principal Investigator groups GCST approach: precisely
cutting, exfoliating and transfer-printing (with a stamp) of 3-6 monolayer thick
graphene from bulk graphite to device active areas of another substrate; and
successful fabrication of high performance FETs using GCST-printed graphene that
have FET mobility and on drive current that are among the highest demonstrated.
The research also relies on Principal Investigator groups previous extensive
work in nanopatterning (including nanoimprinting and transfer-patterning) and
nanoscale Si MOSFETs. The research is to further develop these successes and
make other innovations that are necessary to achieve the goals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will generate new cutting-edge knowledge in
new nanofabrication technologies, new materials, and graphene FETs, and will
have broad applications in future nanomanufacturing and next generation
electronics. Thus, the success of the research will benefit U.S.'s
competitiveness in nanotechnology, aid U.S. industry, and will potentially have
significant economic impact. The research will train graduate and undergraduate
students in the new technology area of nanofabrication and nanoelectronics.