* 0826003
* Novel Nanowire Force Sensor for Cell Adhesion Study
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Xiaolin Zheng, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 09/30/2011
* USD 240,000.00

The proposal plans to develop a novel, nano-scaled, fast response silicon
nanowires based force sensor to measure the cell adhesion force that uses the
piezoresistive effect of silicon. The investigator will fabricate a silicon
nanowires array to study the mechanical interaction between a fibroblast (NIH
3T3 ) and its extra-cellular matrix.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merits&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;this is a very well written proposal but the idea
for using nanowires as force probes is not novel to the PI. However, the
application of such nanowires as force probes to measure cell adhesion forces is
novel, potentially leading to knowledge that is currently unavailable. The PI
conducted an outstanding literature review and has good technical knowledge of
the state-of-the-art in nanowire synthesis and their applications for force
sensors in biological systems. The PI also makes a very good effort to seek out
collaborators who have expertise in cell biology to assist in the
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader impacts, the proposed
research if successful will have significant scientific impact in the field of
nanosensors for cell interactions, adhesion and the dynamics of cell
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The review panel recommends that this proposal be
funded.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cell adhesion is critical for many fundamental
processes in living organisms and its malfunction can cause serious diseases.
The cell adhesion force is typically small and varies at the nanometer length
scale but the current cell adhesion force measurement largely relies on
microscale sensors. Nanoscale force sensors using nanowires will be developed to
enable new capabilities in the cell adhesion measurement. The proposed research
has four objectives: 1) developing methods to fabricate and assemble nanowire
force sensors; 2) quantification of the piezoresistive effect of nanowires
through electromechanical measurements; 3) investigating methods to
functionalize nanowires with the extracellular matrix proteins; and 4)
integration of force sensor arrays with the fibroblast for cell adhesion force
measurement. This project will advance the fundamental knowledge on the
mechanical and electronic properties of nanowires and provide critical
experimental data to understand on how cell adhesions affect the behaviors and
functions of cells. This project will be participated from the underrepresented
groups at the high school, undergraduate, and graduate levels in engineering.
Research results will be broadly disseminated through journal publications,
classroom teaching, conference presentations, and collaborations with other
research groups.&lt;br/&gt;