* 0826712
* DRU The Education Effect and the Demography of Risk: Comparing Unschooled and Schooled on Everday Reasoning and Decision-making about Alcohol Use
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Ellen Peters, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 09/30/2012
* USD 696,000.00

Explaining the Education Effect and the Demography of Risk: Comparing Unschooled
and Schooled on Everyday Reasoning and Decision-making Skills about Health
Behavior&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CO-PIs: David Baker, Penn State University; Martin
Benavides, The Group for Analysis of Development, Lima Peru; Ellen Peters,
Decision Research, Eugene OR&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This multidisciplinary project combines
cognitive science and the psychology of decision making with cross-cultural
sociology of education to test how formal schooling influences reasoning and
decision-making skills used to navigate everyday health risks. Basic education
is now rapidly expanding around the world, and demographic literature brims with
results showing the robust positive association between formal schooling and
health. The education effect is so large that education is often assumed to be a
major cause of the demographic transition of modern society, which consists of
reduced mortality and fertility, and longer life spans. While most demographers
and health researchers acknowledge the persistent and significant association
between formal schooling and positive health outcomes, why education has this
influence is not well understood and a multidisciplinary investigation of how
this effect occurs is the chief intellectual merit of the proposed study. It is
hypothesized that schooling, through the teaching of subjects like mathematics,
enhances reasoning, risk-assessment and decision-making skills that schooled
individuals bring to bear on everyday health risks.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
innovation of the proposed project is that it tests an explanation of
education?s association with health by comparing unschooled and moderately
schooled adults on their numeracy ability, cognitive skill, reasoning about
risk, and decision-making skills related to health behaviors in the Peruvian
Andes, where local conditions allow for a found-quasi-experiment on the effects
of education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this project include the
potential to design more effective education for the significant parts of the
world that have yet to reap the health benefits of the demographic transition
and must do so rapidly to emerge out of the extreme poverty that hinders their
long-term development. Hypothesizing links between schooling and basic
cognitive-skill enhancement and, through them, improved decision making is a new
approach to considering the wide impact of schooling on health behavior, a major
social issue facing the future of human society. Many non-government
organizations are attempting to use various educational approaches to improve
individuals? health decisions in poor nations. Without a clear understanding of
how to make the most of limited education resources, these efforts will not
yield the positive social change envisioned.