* 0826117
* Atmospheric Transport and Photo-chemical Transformation of Iron: Model Development, Application, and Verification with Surface and Satellite Data
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Nicholas Meskhidze, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2012
* USD 287,323.00

In this project, a coupled chemistry-aerosol-cloud-radiation model for the
production of water-soluble iron (DFe) in ambient particles will be developed
and applied to the transport and deposition of DFe to different parts of the
global oceans. The main hypothesis is that atmospheric transport and
transformation of mineral aerosols play an important role in mobilizing Fe from
highly insoluble mineral phases to water-soluble forms that are available for
biological uptake by phytoplankton. The objectives of this study are to reduce
uncertainties in assessments of DFe fluxes to the oceans associated with the
mineralogical composition of dust, crustal and combustion sources of Fe,
photochemical reductive dissolution of Fe oxides, cloud processing of aerosols,
chemical cycling of Fe, and model grid resolution. The GEOS-Chem (Goddard Earth
Observing System-Chemistry) model will be used with a recently implemented dust
iron mobilization mechanism. The model will be used to provide (1) coarse grid
simulations to estimate average fluxes of DFe to different parts of the global
ocean; (2) nested grid simulations to characterize regional features of Fe
dissolution and deposition of DFe in coastal regions; (3) sensitivity studies of
dust mineralogical composition and dissolution mechanisms; and (4) an assessment
of capabilities in modeling mineral aerosols.

This study will lead to an improved understanding of processes responsible for
the production of DFe in ambient particles and will facilitate the assessment of
the role of dust in ocean productivity and the carbon cycle. This research will
support the education of a diverse group of undergraduate and graduate students
in atmospheric science. Outreach projects organized by the Science House of
North Carolina State University will be carried out with a goal of increasing
student enthusiasm for science by partnering with K-12 teachers to promote
hands-on inquiry-based science learning.