* 0826365
* Modeling Building Downtime Due to Hurricane Impacts
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Nicholas Jones, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 08/31/2013
* USD 341,006.00

This project aims to develop a procedure for estimating building downtime as a
function of hurricane intensity, structural response, building content
damage/loss, and failure of infrastructure networked systems. Extensive losses
due to property damage, business interruption, and infrastructure failure in
recent natural disasters - 500,000 houses damaged/destroyed, 18,000 businesses
closed, and 1.75 million people were displaced in Hurricane Katrina - have
magnified the need to accurately predict these losses in future events. Given
the impact of past hurricanes on losses due to business interruption and
population displacement, it is imperative to provide a methodology for more
accurate estimation of building downtime for use in performance-based wind
engineering. Performance-based engineering (PBE) is a methodology that
incorporates desired performance levels, relevant to various types of
stakeholders, into the design process. This effort will be combined with an
ongoing hurricane insured loss estimation study of Florida in order to perform a
hurricane vulnerability assessment of a case study region. This work will build
on previous work by the applicants to develop damage and failure models
(accounting for network interconnection) for the following lifelines:
electricity, water distribution, and telecommunication. The results from these
models will be used to estimate the secondary effects that utility network
disruptions have on the recovery of buildings. The downtime model developed in
this study will be used to calculate downtime-related losses and population
displacement for typical single family homes in a Florida coastal study area.
These results will be compared to historical data to validate the model.

The downtime model developed in this project will serve as a vehicle to bring
together cutting edge research from various disciplines that addresses a glaring
need for downtime modeling of buildings exposed to hurricane force winds. The
incorporation of the downtime model developed in this project into MAEviz, an
open-source loss assessment visualization tool ensures transparency in the
methodology as well as broad and easy dissemination of the work to other
researchers. Additionally, the results of this project will not only provide a
critical new tool (downtime modeling) to a new paradigm of design (performance-
based wind engineering), but it will also educate a future generation of
professionals in multidisciplinary thinking. The results of this project will be
directly integrated into courses taught by the PIs, covering performance-based
engineering, HMAC, risk analysis, and policy analysis.