* 0826287
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Political Ecology of Food Sovereignty Movements in Neoliberal India
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2008,01/31/2010
* Krisnawati Suryanata, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 01/31/2010
* USD 12,000.00

Food sovereignty movements are part of a growing trend of alternative
agricultural movements that are based on the notion of local autonomy, whereby
food production, distribution and consumption are controlled by local
communities with the aim of increasing farmers' control over their farming
practices and thus their lives. The main objective of this research is to
understand the roles of localized social movements in mediating the impacts of
neoliberal economic policies in poor rural regions. Using a political ecology
framework that examines how global and local processes interact along with an
understanding of the history of agrarian transitions in the region, this
research uses the Deccan Development Society food sovereignty initiative in the
"hunger belt" of India as a case study. The main questions are: What
institutions have been crucial to food sovereignty movements? How do they
develop, what sorts of changes do they bring about, and how are they networked?
Who are the primary beneficiaries of food sovereignty? What is the impact of
food sovereignty on farmers in their particular agroecological environments?
What attitudes do diverse interest groups have toward food sovereignty
initiatives? This research uses both quantitative and qualitative data including
census data, surveys, participant observation, in-depth interviews,
institutional rules and regulations, and policies. Analysis includes
quantitative (statistical) and ethnographic (discourse and content analysis)
methods that will allow for both an in-depth understanding of a specific local
context as well as an appreciation of the broader implications of food
sovereignty for food security and rural livelihoods. The findings are expected
to support the hypothesis that, where food sovereignty institutions address the
diverse socioeconomic needs of small farmers and are embedded within their
cultural norms and where marginalization and the dependence on agriculture is
high, food sovereignty movements are most effective in alleviating agrarian
distress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will contribute to the growing
literature on agrarian transitions, alternative agriculture and localized social
movements, with respect to the impact of global agro-food regimes on the rural
poor. By drawing attention to the interrelated issues of gender, class/caste,
access to resources, and food security this research will highlight the
political and gendered struggles in local agricultural systems within the
increasingly corporate face of food production. Most studies of contemporary
agrarian transitions in Asia have focused on the inevitability of the market's
growing reach into the countryside, and the ways in which small farmers are
adapting to this global phenomenon. However, little is known with regard to the
role of localized social movements in affecting agrarian transitions. In the
face of the current global world food crisis, and its implications for food
security, this research serves to enhance our understanding of contemporary
alternatives to participating in the neoliberal global agro-food regime. The
broader impacts of investigating localized agricultural systems that espouse
food sovereignty principles opens avenues for participation of highly
marginalized and underrepresented groups, such as the Dalit (untouchable) and
other poor farmers, in the development discourse generally dominated by state
institutions and world markets. &lt;br/&gt;