* 0826145
* Nanoscale and Deterministic Doping of Semiconductors Via Molecular Monolayers
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Ali Javey, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 09/30/2011
* USD 243,297.00

One of the major challenges towards scaling of the electronic devices to the
nanoscale regime is attaining controlled doping of semiconductor materials with
atomic accuracy. To overcome this challenge, the PI's group has recently
developed a novel surface doping approach based on the self-assembled monolayer
formation on the surface of silicon substrates. The purpose of this proposed
project is to better understand the fundamental science associated with this
doping approach while exploring its feasibility for the fabrication of future
nanoelectronics by (i) carefully analyzing the impurity content incorporation,
(ii) demonstrating ultrashallow, sub 10-nm junctions by using laser annealing
for the diffusion of the dopants, (iii) mapping the dopant diffusion rates and
mechanisms, and (iv) extending the process to non silicon substrates, such as
gallium arsenide. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed project may lead the way for
addressing the crucial need for nanoscale doping, and if successful, the
monolayer doping method may have a major impact in the nanoelectronics field
with the potential of every manufactured transistor and electronic device
utilizing this approach. The project will involve the training of one graduate
and one undergraduate student. Furthermore, the project will be show cased as
part of an open lab on Cal Day, during which students from local high schools
will be allowed to tour the PI's lab and learn about the project. The nature of
this work and the training of the involved students will be highly
interdisciplinary, bridging the fields of chemistry and electrical engineering.