* 0826909
* Tropical Cyclogenesis and Climate: Physical Basis, Predictability and Prediction
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Carlos Hoyos, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 08/31/2012
* USD 525,675.00

Deficiencies in knowledge of tropical cyclogenesis hamper the ability to make
forecasts of individual tropical cyclones (TCs) beyond about 5 days. Further,
there is a limited physical basis for inferring TC characteristics from low-
resolution reanalysis products and climate model simulations. Furthermore,
scientists have been unable to make any substantive progress in determining a
link between hurricane and global warming, owing to current reliance on flawed
data sets and coarse resolution models. The Principal Investigators (PIs) are
addressing these uncertainties and deficiencies through theoretical analysis, a
comprehensive analysis of existing data, model experimentation and predictive
scheme development. They will use a combination of observation data sets and
models to investigate: (i) Genesis tropical cyclones: They will re-examine the
genesis criteria developed by Gray (1968) a number of decades ago, to assess
their utility and validity in the context of improved data sets, increased
theoretical understanding, and changes in the base state of the climate. (ii) TC
genesis predictability and predictions: Based on the development of a new set of
TC genesis factors, the PIs will construct a hybrid dynamical-empirical Bayesian
model for the forecasting the probabilities of TC risk in the 7-30 days forecast
horizon. (iii) TC intensity and frequency in a warming world: The PIs will use
the ARW (Advanced Research Weather Research and Forecasting) and CMIP-3 (Climate
Change Climate Model Inter-comparison Program's) simulations to investigate the
following hypotheses: * Average TC intensity will increase in the warmer
climate, and there will be a shift in the intensity distribution towards more
category 4 and 5 TCs; * The frequency of TCs outside the North Atlantic will
remain roughly constant in a warmer climate, while the frequency of North
Atlantic TCs will increase slightly; * TCs will continue to predominate in the
summer hemisphere even if the winter hemisphere sea surface temperatures are
sufficiently warm; * TCs are substantial contributors to the poleward energy
transports across 30 degrees north in the present climate and will remain so in
a warmer climate; * TCs are substantial contributors to the vertical transport
of heat and moisture in the atmosphere, both in the present and warmer climate.

Intellectual merit: This research will result in improved understanding of the
conditions for the formation of tropical cyclones. This improved understanding
will lay the foundation for improved projections of tropical cyclone activity
over a range of time scales and in a warming world.

Broader Impacts: The socioeconomic impact of improved tropical cyclone forecasts
and assessments of TC characteristics for the next century are substantial. The
PIs are very active in public outreach education on the topic of hurricanes and
climate change, and will continue to interact with policy makers, emergency
managers, and the private sector.