* 0826832
* DRU: Integrated optimization of evacuation and mass care sheltering for hurricanes
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Linda Nozick, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 08/31/2012
* USD 762,499.00

DRU: Integrated optimization of evacuation and sheltering for
hurricanes&lt;br/&gt;PI: Rachel Davidson, University of Delaware (UD).
Participating Institution: Cornell University.&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to improve understanding of and decision support for
evacuation and mass case sheltering in hurricanes. The task of moving tens or
even hundreds of thousands of people from a wide geographic area in only a few
days or hours under uncertain, dangerous conditions, getting them to safe
locations, and keeping them safe until they can return home is an
extraordinarily complicated process, and as Hurricane Katrina made abundantly
clear, the stakes are high. Despite a lot of progress, recent events and
unchecked population growth in hurricane-prone regions assure us that many
challenges remain. The traditional, conservative approach of evacuating everyone
thought to be at risk is no longer feasible in many areas in which there are
simply too many people and too little transportation capacity. We propose a
fundamentally new approach. In the past, math modeling in this application has
been limited to estimating the time required to clear a region, assuming many
characteristics of the problem are uncontrollable input (e.g., shelter
locations). Instead, we will develop sophisticated optimization models with an
expanded decision frame that focuses on higher-level objectives, such as
minimizing life loss, cost, and inequity, and considers the full range of
strategic and operational evacuation and sheltering strategies in meeting those
objectives, including for example, vertical evacuation and strategically
locating shelters. These models will be developed through a tight interaction
between sociologists and engineers to ensure they are firmly grounded in the
reality of people?s behavior. For the first time, the models will be based on
individual hurricane scenarios instead of conservative aggregations of many
events, and they will be dynamic, accounting for the fact that officials can
update their decisions as an event unfolds and information about the situation
changes. The project has 5 main steps: (1) determine a set of hurricane
scenarios for use in evacuation and shelter models such that they appropriately
represent the full range of possible events, but are few enough to allow
detailed analysis with each; (2) conduct focus groups of key decisionmakers and
stakeholders to identify and characterize appropriate decision objectives,
constraints, assumptions, and possible evacuation and shelter management
strategies; (3) using the focus group input, develop two mathematical
optimization models?one long-term strategic and one short-term operational?for
evacuation and sheltering decisions; (4) conduct surveys of affected citizens to
ensure that the optimization model assumptions and results make sense; and (5)
demonstrate the models through case studies in North Carolina and Florida. Any
evacuation and sheltering planning effort is only as effective as its weakest
link, so it requires a broad range of expertise from marine science,
transportation engineering, risk modeling, optimization, and behavioral research
collaborating closely. We have assembled this expertise on the project
team.&lt;br/&gt;This project will help begin to transform the way hurricane
evacuation and sheltering are conducted in the U.S., addressing many of the
known limitations of the current approach. The new understanding and
optimization models developed in this project will help local and state
emergency managers better plan for hurricane evacuation and sheltering, thus
reducing the deaths, injuries, and unnecessary expense associated with poorly
planned or executed response in future hurricanes. By collaborating throughout
the project with state and local emergency management departments and the
American Red Cross, the key agencies in charge of hurricane evacuation and
sheltering, we will ensure that study results are disseminated to practitioners
as quickly and effectively as possible. Three graduate students will participate
in all aspects of the research, each with at least two of the co-PIs on their
committees to ensure tight integration. By providing a substantive example of
truly interdisciplinary disaster research, the project will help facilitate the
transformation of the well-known Disaster Research Center, historically based in
sociology, into an interdisciplinary center. It will also help to launch the new
interdisciplinary graduate program in Disaster Science and Management at the
University of Delaware. &lt;br/&gt;