* 0826659
* Basin-scale distribution and activity of deep-sea protists in the North Atlantic Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2013
* Alexander Bochdansky, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 07/31/2013
* USD 540,256.00

Little is known about the distribution and ecology of eukaryotic microbes of the
deep sea water column. Most of these microbes are small heterotrophic
flagellates that feed on bacteria, where biomass in turn is fueled by the input
of dissolved and particulate organic material from the surface. This study seeks
to understand the distribution of eukaryotic microbes (i.e., protists) in the
context of large, basin scale variations in hydrographic and chemical
properties. The main hypothesis is that the abundance and taxonomic composition
of protists serve as sensitive indicators of the strength and type (particulate
or dissolved) of input of organic carbon into the deep ocean system. Samples in
vertical profiles targeting major water masses across the North Atlantic will be
collected. In addition, deep sea samples will be retrieved under pressure and
incubated at in situ pressure and temperature in four newly designed chemostat
systems. These cultures will be sub-sampled under pressure and examined for
nutrient concentration, as well as for the purpose of monitoring the abundance
of both prokaryotes and protists in the chambers. Using the same pressure
samplers in short-term incubations, the investigators will explore the activity
of deep sea protists by investigating the proportion of actively feeding
organisms on fluorescently labeled bacteria. They will enumerate deep sea
protists using a combination of fluorescence in situ hybridization and
traditional staining methods, and will support taxonomic classifications using
electron microscopy. Semi-automated epifluorescence microscopy with image
analysis capabilities will be used to scan major filter areas and probe for rare
microbes that normally fall below detection limits of other methods. In
laboratory experiments, the investigators will use the newly built culture
system to study pressure effects of eukaryotic protists while simulating
temperature and pressure changes that sinking particles are exposed to when they
sink to the abyss. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The deep ocean is
the largest habitat on earth. Among the three domains of life (i.e., Bacteria,
Archaea and Eukarya), the eukaryotic fraction has largely been ignored in the
microbial realm of this environment. New molecular methods make it possible, for
the first time, to not only accurately enumerate protists but also to classify
them according to their taxonomic affiliation. The investigators have a powerful
tool to better understand the role of protists in the deep sea and to use them
as sensitive indicators for the level of input of organic material. Protists may
also control bacterial populations on sinking particles and thereby influence
remineralization rates. As the deep sea differs in many ways from surface water
(high pressure, low temperature, scarce food resources, darkness), deep sea
protists provide excellent model organisms to address major research questions
in the areas of physiology, ecology and evolution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts: This is a collaborative research effort between Old Dominion University
and the Netherlands Institute of Sea Research. The exchange of technology and
ideas will benefit both institutions and student training. Deep sea research
provides a fascinating teaching tool for marine courses. The pressure chambers
will be incorporated into the biological oceanography core course for
undergraduate and graduate students at Old Dominion University in order to give
them hands-on experience in the exploration of pressure effects on biological
and biochemical processes. Biological processes are highly relevant for carbon
storage in the deep sea. The ocean's capacity to take up and store large amounts
of excess carbon from the atmosphere over long time periods is of utmost
importance to society in an era in which greenhouse gases accumulate in the
atmosphere and lead to climate change. Data of this research will be shared via
the national Ocean Carbon and Biogeochemistry (OCB) data repository at Woods
Hole and through the Integrated Marine Biogeochemistry and Ecosystem Research
(IMBER) framework. We will contribute to a planned permanent exhibit on the role
of marine microbes at Nauticus, a premier maritime museum and interpretative
center in Norfolk, with the title "Invisible world - the realm of microbial
oceanography". &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;