* 0826297
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Detecting Anthropogenic Forest Disturbances and Understory Density for the Study of Hantavirus in Paraguay
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2008,12/31/2009
* David Koch, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Ezekiel Kalipeni
* 12/31/2009
* USD 11,598.00

Landscape epidemiology is the study of the effect that landscape has on disease
occurrence, transmission, and persistence. Hence, the quality of landscape
epidemiology research frequently depends on the accuracy and reliability of land
cover information. For zoonotic diseases, this means a needed focus on the
aspects of the landscape that form the habitat of the host. Hantavirus, a
zoonotic virus hosted by rodents of the murine family, is one example of an
etiological organism whose dynamics are known to be related to landscape
factors. With some hantavirus reservoir species, forest disturbances are
important factors in disease transmission. Frequently, land cover maps developed
using existing remote sensing techniques consider only the binary distinction
between forested and deforested cover. Based on ongoing research, it appears
that forests with intermediate disturbances are in fact one of the key habitat
types associated with high hantavirus prevalence in rodent communities. Improved
methods are therefore needed to differentiate levels of disturbance remotely, in
order to map areas at risk for the occurrence and spread of hantavirus. This
research will address the question: How can we improve landcover mapping of
different types of forest and forest disturbances to facilitate landscape
epidemiology studies of hantavirus in the Paraguayan Atlantic Forest? Selected
plots representing a gradient of forest disturbance within the Mbaracayu
Biosphere in Paraguay will be field surveyed to determine understory and canopy
structure and composition. Each sample plot will have a nested sub-plot design,
with 100x100m plots to measure trees, a smaller plot in the center to measure
shrub density, and nine subplots to measure ground cover. These field data will
be used to relate the canopy and understory structures, as determined in the
field plots, to remotely sensed landscape metrics derived from object-oriented
image analysis at a variety of spatial scales. It is expected that this study
will lead to improved estimation of forest disturbances and differences in
understory density using remotely sensed imagery, with implications for studying
diseases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research in this project will more closely
tie the use of remotely sensed data to landscape epidemiology applications. The
developed techniques will be applicable to analyzing remotely sensed data in a
way that is more useful to studying the ecology of hantavirus, as well as a
range of other zoonotic diseases. Additionally, the techniques will be generally
applicable to landscape ecology and biogeography studies in forested landscapes.
Currently, detecting deforestation with remotely sensed data often is treated as
a binary task, forested and deforested, but in reality, there are many levels of
forest disturbance that can be important to various natural systems. This
research will improve the ability to detect and map different levels and kinds
of forest disturbance, enabling more detailed analysis of the ecological effect
of those disturbances. Other potential benefits of this study include improved
understanding of the Atlantic forest in Eastern Paraguay, a little known and
endangered ecosystem and biodiversity hotspot. As a Doctoral Dissertation
Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a
promising student to establish a strong independent research career.