* 0826995
* Study of Emerging Networks in Outbreak Response
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Ann Keller, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 08/31/2012
* USD 726,706.00

Study of Emerging Networks in Outbreak Response

Principal Investigators: Christopher Ansell, Ann Keller, Art Reingold

With an increasing global population and greater ease of transportation, the
threat of infectious disease pandemics is larger than it has been in the past.
Infectious diseases have the potential to spread rapidly across national
borders. In order to respond effectively, governments, experts, and
organizations must be able to coordinate information and activities with one
another. Yet, no two outbreaks are alike which makes it difficult for
organizations to take advantage of past experience to guide them in the face of
a new outbreak. This is especially true when the outbreak involves a new
disease. Information about the number and distribution of cases is rarely
complete and little may be known about the disease itself and how it spreads. In
such cases, experts have to learn about the disease as it occurs and face many
uncertainties that make communication and decision-making difficult. Under these
conditions, participants face substantial challenges in mobilizing a
coordinated, effective response. This study makes use of an international team
of researchers who will study the actors in key organizations as they respond to
any significant disease outbreak that occurs during the study period. The
project will use an internet survey to collect information from key participants
as an outbreak occurs. In addition, researchers will bring together the major
participants of an outbreak after the event to discuss the event itself and the
information collected on-line. The researchers will then analyze this
information to learn about the nature of the interactions between individuals,
organizations, and countries as they attempted to share information and
coordinate activities to mobilize an effective response. This study will
significantly improve our understanding of the interactions among participants
by gathering information about outbreak response efforts as they occur. This
represents an improvement over existing studies that attempt to recreate the
significant events of an outbreak after the outbreak ended. By studying the
events as they occur, this research will provide a more accurate picture of the
problems that arise as individuals, organizations, and governments who mobilize
in response to an international outbreak attempt to coordinate their activities.
By learning more about the successes and pitfalls associated with international
outbreak response, this research will develop strategies to improve the way that
the international community manages infectious disease outbreaks that cross
national borders.