* 0826588
* ETBC: Organic Geochemical Transformations and the Deep Biosphere -- Identifying the Food Sources for Microbes in Sedimentary Systems
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,01/31/2014
* Ian Gould, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 01/31/2014
* USD 1,528,590.00

Intellectual Merit: This research explores how geochemical processes support
microbes living deep in the Earth. A major challenge in understanding how life
can survive at depth is the identity and source of organic compounds that are
consumed by microbes. While some of these compounds are likely to be produced by
other subsurface microbes, this works focuses on the large inventory of
consumable organic compounds that comes from geochemical transformations of
organic matter that take place as sediments are buried and exposed to elevated
temperatures and pressures. Goals of the work are to examine, both theoretically
and experimentally, chemical reactions that occur at temperatures and pressures
greater than microbial life can withstand. These high temperature and pressure
reactions produce organic solutes that are transported upward into the inhabited
zones of the subsurface. The primary focus of the research is to determine how
reactions between hot water and organic matter generate small organic compounds
that ultimately feed the deep biosphere. Phase I focuses on hydrothermal
experiments of well-known reactions that transform simple hydrocarbons into
alcohols, ketones, and carboxylic acids at elevated temperatures and pressures.
Phase II explores these same reactions, but in the context of a more realistic
and thus complex geologic system that includes the clay minerals found in all
organic rich sediments and sedimentary rocks. Most of these reactions have not
been systematically studied under geologically realistic conditions. As a
result, our present understanding of these transformation mechanisms in nature
are speculative. This work produces rigorous results from which calculations can
be made to predict the microbial metabolic potential of areas deep within the
Earth?s crust. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This work provides organic
chemists with new methods to control reactions and provides geochemists with new
predictive, mechanistic models of organic matter transformations. New models
will inform those making site selections for future ocean and continental
drilling efforts that explore the deep biosphere and will allow us to better
understand the generation of petroleum. This project also provides a means to
predict where prospecting of new microbial species with unusual properties can
be found. The hydrothermal reactor approach may also provide green alternatives
to incineration or burial of organic waste. In terms of education and training,
the work supports post-docs, graduate students, and undergraduates, and supports
PIs whose gender is under-represented in the sciences. Public outreach will
include development new materials for the ?I?m College Bound? program. Graduate
and undergraduate researchers associated with this project will help develop new
geo/earth science demonstrations and coordinate student volunteers. The
demonstrations, assignments and lesson plans will be disseminated and published
on the "I'm College Bound" web site. &lt;br/&gt;