* 0826982
* Planning Visit:   Engineering and Medical Research Collaboration on the Dynamics of Human Thyroid
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2009
* Yossi Chait, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 07/31/2009
* USD 3,882.00

This Planning Visit proposal will provide travel support for Dr. Yossi Chait,
from the University of Massachusetts, to advance recent, online research
collaboration with Dr. Antonio Traino, director of the Medical Physics Section
in the Health Physics Unit at the University Hospital, Pisa, Italy. Dr. Traino
is a leading international researcher in the area of radiation therapy for
Graves' disease with emphasis on optimal computation of radioactive iodine dose,
and is arguably the most published researcher in this field during the past
decade. Dr. Chait?s research has focused on feedback control problems and more
recently on formal analysis of thyroid's iodine metabolism dynamics through
mathematical modeling. Dr. Traino's group has been collecting data on the
dynamics of activity and mass reduction in many patients treated at their
hospital. This data, not available elsewhere worldwide, offers the UMass
research team a near ideal data base for identification of key mechanisms and
structure in a patient-specific thyroid model. The objective of this visit is to
overcome the inherent differences between our respective disciplines
(engineering and medical physics) facilitating face-to-face meetings. This is
expected to advance our level of collaboration, both professional and
personally, to a point where in the near future we can explore numerous funding
sources in Europe and in the USA for this line of work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;