* 0826010
* Self-Assembling Ductile and Tough Bulk Nanostructured Alloys of High Thermal-Stability
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* M Ravi Shankar, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2012
* USD 306,000.00

The objective of this research is to develop a new class of alloys that by the
virtue of their composition and deformation processing can lead to the thermally
driven self-assembly of an optimal nanostructured material. This development
will first focus on elucidating the inter-relationship between thermo-mechanical
processing and the associated kinetics of microstructure evolution in the
prototypical ternary alloy systems. Electron microscopy will be employed for
exploring the self-assembly of the requisite nanostructural characteristics
during this evolution. Subsequently, the mechanical properties will be probed by
a combination of rate-dependent micro and nanoindentation experiments and
tension tests over a range of relevant temperatures. Ultimately, process schema
will be identified within a scalable manufacturing paradigm to potentially
enable the large-scale manufacture of bulk nanomaterial
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To realize the potential broad impact of this
research, an outreach program is envisaged in collaboration with the National
Center for Defense Manufacturing and Machining (NCDMM). Working with more than
20 Alliance Partners, NCDMM will play a critical role in the implementation of
our research by enabling the transfer of emerging materials technologies to the
defense manufacturing sectors. Complementing these efforts is an education and
training program that includes the development of a new course on nanomaterials,
the creation of industrial internships for students that are facilitated by
NCDMM, and exposing students to advanced electron microscopy and microanalysis
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;