* 0826445
* GOALI: Miniature Net-Shape Fabrication Method Using Thermoplastic Forming with Bulk Mettalic Glass
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Jan Schroers, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2013
* USD 367,120.00

The goal of this Grant Opportunities for Liaison with Industry (GOALI) research
project is to develop a miniature fabrication method based on thermoplastic
forming with bulk metallic glasses (BMGs). BMGS are a new class of engineering
materials with very high strength, elasticity and corrosion resistance that can
be processed like plastics when thermoplasically formed in their supercooled
liquid region. Within the proposed fabrication method the BMG is reheated into
the supercooled liquid region where it is molded under an applied pressure into
molds of various shapes and sizes. The correlation between forming pressure,
processing time, temperature and forming behavior will be established for
various BMG alloys on different molds to determine the optimal processing
conditions. In order to create 3-dimensional parts the fabrication method will
be comprised of a molding process, a hot-scraping method, and a surface
smoothening process, to yield high precision 3-dimensional miniature parts with
an ultra smooth surface finish. To develop a cost effective method silicon molds
have to be replaced. Since the required processing temperatures do not permit
the use of polymer molds, alternatively, the use of carbon molds which are
synthesized by the pyrolyzing of polymers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;If successful,
the results of this research will lay the foundation of a novel miniature
fabrication method based on thermoplastic forming with bulk metallic glass.
Determining of the correlation between processing parameters and forming
behavior can be used as a foundation of a model description of a wide range of
processes based on thermoplastic forming with BMGs. Within this method
3-dimensional miniature parts can be produced with highest precision and surface
smoothness in a cost effective manner. These processing advantages and the
superior properties of the BMG over currently used miniature forming materials
suggest that the proposed method might replace currently used miniature
fabrication methods as the most cost effective process. &lt;br/&gt;