* 0826097
* Analytical and Experimental Study of Pore Fluid Induced Damping and Effective Density in Saturated Soil During Shear Wave Excitations
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2008,10/31/2010
* Tong Qiu, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 10/31/2010
* USD 112,707.00

&lt;br/&gt;Saturated soil consists of a solid phase and a fluid phase.
Individual solid grains form a deformable solid skeleton with interconnected
pores filled with fluids. When saturated soil undergoes shear wave excitations,
the relative motion between the two phases has two effects on the dynamic
behavior of saturated soil: pore fluid induced damping (i.e., energy
dissipation) and effective soil density. The effective soil density is related
to the fraction of pore fluid that moves with the solid skeleton during shear
wave propagation, and is always smaller or equal to the saturated density. Due
to a lack of quantitative assessment of these two effects in published
literature, they are generally neglected in current geotechnical engineering
research and practice. However, recent research indicates that these two effects
are important for soils with high permeability (e.g., sands and gravels) and/or
under high-frequency excitations. The objective of this research is to provide
fundamental understanding, quantitative assessment, and practical solutions to
pore fluid induced damping and effective density in saturated soil. This
research is primarily motivated by the wide spread and increasing popularity of
geotechnical laboratory and field tests involving high-frequency shear waves
(e.g., centrifuge, bender elements, seismic CPT). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this research will be achieved through analytical study and
experimental testing. In the proposed analytical study, analytical solutions of
pore fluid induced damping and effective density will be derived based on a
framework that considers both Biot flow and squirt flow. The proposed
experimental testing will use resonant column tests to provide validation of the
analytical work and examine the effects of shear strain and specimen size.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will serve to bridge the gap between theory
and practice by developing solutions that can be easily used by researchers and
practitioners. It has the potential to transform the way in which researchers
and engineers interpret data and perform analyses relating to soil dynamics and
geotechnical earthquake engineering. Ultimately, the benefits will be the
reduction of losses to society as a result of earthquakes. Broader impacts also
include improving educational opportunities in the area of geotechnical
engineering at Clarkson University. A soil dynamics testing laboratory is
currently being developed to conduct research and educate students at both the
undergraduate and graduate levels. This research project will foster that effort
and spark students? interest in this profession. &lt;br/&gt;