* 0826373
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Simulating Social and Land-Use Adaptations to Climate Change on Mount Kenya
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2010
* Bryan Pijanowski, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ezekiel Kalipeni
* 02/28/2010
* USD 11,325.00

Societies around the world will be challenged by future climate change. Adaptive
capacity will be a function of the ability to act collectively at overcoming
those challenges. Communities with livelihoods tied directly to ecosystem
services, such as those that rely on agriculture for sustenance, are thought to
be most vulnerable. With limited access to agricultural chemical inputs and
modern technologies, those communities will need to rely on collective action to
adapt to climate change. The focus of this doctoral dissertation research
project is to examine the relative contribution of land-use diversity, social
capital, and institutional settings in adaptation to climate change along the
Eastern slopes of Mount Kenya, Kenya. This project is organized around the
general hypothesis that asserts that in a context of climate change, the
richness of local social capital and level of land-use diversity determines the
first phase of adaptation. In the subsequent phase, long-term adaptations to
climate change are sustained by robust institutions developing new land-use
rules and diffusing technological innovations. This research combines
qualitative, quantitative, spatially explicit methods with computer models to
analyze adaptations to climate change. To test this hypothesis, the doctoral
candidate will couple qualitative research methods, such as role-playing games,
surveys, and interviews, with quantitative tools, such as agent-based and neural
network models. The agent-based model and other results of this research will be
used to test the robustness of various adaptation scenarios.

Adaptation to climate change in developing countries has been targeted by the
international scientific community as a major human and scientific challenge.
This work will improve the understanding of the mechanisms of adaptation to
climate change in rural agro-ecosystems of developing countries. This project
will also benefit methodological, theoretical, and practical aspects of
socioecological research. First, from a methodological standpoint, the research
will constitute one of the few in-depth case studies that analyze adaptations to
climate change using qualitative, spatially explicit, and empirically grounded
agent-based modeling techniques. Second, from a theoretical point of view,
examining adaptation to climate change will enhance socioecological frameworks
proposed in geography, ecology, political science, and sociology. Finally,
understanding the role of land-use in climate change adaptation is likely to aid
natural resource managers and decision makers in developing countries that
grapple with these complex issues. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising
student to establish a strong independent research career. This award is jointly
supported by the NSF Geography and Regional Science Program and the NSF Office
of International Science and Engineering.

