* 0826698
* Travel Support Grant to attend the Fourth International Nanotechnology Conference on Communication and Cooperation.  To be held on April 14-17, 2008 in Tokyo, Japan.
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2009
* Sanjay Banerjee, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 04/30/2009
* USD 30,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt; Travel Support Grant to
attend the Fourth International Nanotechnology Conference on Communication and
Cooperation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective:&lt;br/&gt;The objective
of this proposal is to request travel funds from NSF to enable faculty and
students from the US to attend the Fourth International Nanotechnology
Conference on Communications and Cooperation (http://www.inc4.jp/) from April
14-17, 2008 in Tokyo, Japan. In addition, we plan to invite some of the younger
members of the faculty, who will present posters highlighting their
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;This conference is
being sponsored by SRC-SIA, NSF, IMEC, JEITA-JSI, and several European and Asian
companies It will feature invited speakers and poster presenters from industry,
academia, and government who will describe how to ?foster communication and
cooperation on nanotechnology subjects among the organizers, sponsors and the
world scientific community to stimulate and support economic growth in the 21st
century."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;Electronics technology
has been highly leveraged and has been the major enabler of the computer,
communication and consumer industries in the last 60 years, and has propelled
the growth of the global economy to multi-trillion dollars. Most of the building
blocks of these industries will reach fundamental limits by the end of the next
decade. It is of fundamental importance that these limits are overcome in the
next 10 years, perhaps through the use of nanotechnology. Global senior
researchers, industry leaders and policy makers from North America, Europe and
Asia will hold discussions on a variety of efforts in nanoscience, along with
opportunities for collaboration &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;