* 0826124
* GOALI: Biogeography-Based Optimization of Multiple Related Complex Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2014
* Dan Simon, Cleveland State University
* Standard Grant
* Christiaan Paredis
* 07/31/2014
* USD 539,467.00

The research objective of this GOALI award is to develop advanced optimization
methods for product design. These methods are based on the mathematics of
biogeography, which is the study of the distribution, migration, speciation, and
extinction of biological species. Biogeography is nature?s way of distributing
species. This research will explore the feasibility of using the concepts of
biogeography to aid in general problem solving. The research includes the
investigation of biogeography theory, the development of biogeography-based
problem-solving methods, the application of the methods to general product
design, specifically automotive design, and benchmark testing of these methods.
Deliverables include Internet-based biogeography optimization software for
general-purpose product design optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful,
the results of this research will provide a framework for optimization based on
biogeography theory that has the potential to greatly improve our ability to
design products which possess a high number of variable parameters. These
methods will be used early in the design process, before the detailed product
design has been developed, to support the designer in exploring a wide range of
design options. The software developed as a result of this research will be
available for solving a variety of optimization problems. Close collaboration
with the industrial partner, General Motors, will provide the opportunity for
the research team to test these methods on industrial problems. Graduate
students will gain industry experience through summer internships at GM. The
minority population of Cleveland State University provides a rich environment
from which to recruit minority students for involvement in this research.
Dissemination will occur through journal publications, industrial seminars and
presentations at technical conferences.&lt;br/&gt;