* 0826093
* Nanoporous Metals Incorporated into MEMS and NEMS Devices for Enhanced Functionality
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2011
* Jeffrey Kysar, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 06/30/2011
* USD 279,978.00

The research objective of this award is the incorporation of nanoporous gold
into micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS) and nano-electro-mechanical systems
(NEMS). Nanoporous gold is fabricated by selectively dissolving silver from a
gold-silver metal alloy using various chemical etchants. The resulting
nanoporous gold films will be several hundred nanometers in thickness and will
have pores and interconnecting ligaments that are between 5 and 50 nanometers.
Nanoporous gold is a particularly desirable system because of its resistance to
corrosion and oxidation and also because the gold surface can be tailored or
functionalized to be sensitive to adsorption by various biological and chemical
agents. The nanoscale and microscale devices to be fabricated in this project
will consist of layered cantilever beams, with one of the layers consisting of
nanoporous gold and the other layer consisting of various different materials
depending upon the application. When chemicals or biological species come into
contact with the nanoporous gold, the cantilever beam will develop a curvature
which can be detected using various optical methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, the results of this research will lead a set of scalable methods and
techniques that are amenable to the large-scale fabrication of submicron sensors
and actuators using nanoporous metal films. This will enable the fabrication of
various sensors and actuators which could have direct application in many
different areas such as chemical and biological sensing and actuation and
control of MEMS and NEMS devices.&lt;br/&gt;