* 0826233
* Collaborative Research:  Improvement of MEMS Performance by Structural Vibrations - Theory and Practical Implementations
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2011
* Kevin Murphy, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 07/31/2011
* USD 50,000.00

Sticking contact (adhesion) between moving components in Micro-ElectroMechanical
Systems (MEMS) is a major problem limiting reliability. Sticking contact,
referred to as ?stiction failure,? is fatal to the component; stiction prevents
the individual component from operating properly and, hence, jeopardizes the
reliability of the overall device. Preliminary experiments, performed by the
investigators, indicate that electrically induced structural vibrations can lead
to the initiation of stick-release. The purpose of this research endeavor is to
create a theoretical foundation, validated by experiments on real MEMS devices,
for using electrical excitation to drive MEMS components in order (i) to prevent
adhesion (through mechanical dithering) and (ii) to repair stiction failures.
This non-contacting (noninvasive) approach will enable stick-prevention and
stick-release of a component without causing damage to the component or its
neighbors. Moreover, the electrical actuation may be built into the MEMS chip,
using the existing functionality of the chip to overcome adhesion. This is a
cost effective, easy-to-implement approach that may be used in-situ. Also note
that the framework developed here will also be applicable on nano-scale devices
(NEMS). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is broken into an experimental and
theoretical component. The experimental portion of this project involves using
simplified geometries (micro-cantilevers) and real MEMS components (gear
systems, mirrors, etc.) to validate the model results and to demonstrate the
utility of electrically induced vibrations in both stiction prevention and
stiction repair. Theoretical models will be created to develop a more complete
understanding of the fundamental mechanics involved in the dithering and stick-
release processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently there are no commercially
available MEMS or Nano-Electro Mechanical&lt;br/&gt;Systems (NEMS) with
contacting/sliding parts due to the reliability issue caused by adhesion
failures. To enable their commercial introduction, practical techniques for the
prevention of stiction and repair of failed devices under normal service
conditions are required. The proposed methodology is a viable approach, enabling
commercialization. The general framework developed here may be extended to nano-
devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational portion of this project
integrates MEMS vibrations testing into a required undergraduate lab course.
This will give students hands-on experience with MEMS and will demonstrate that
near field forces (negligible in macro-scale tests) may not be ignored in all
micro-scale tests. Outstanding undergraduates and particularly those from under-
represented groups (note that the UNM is a Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI)),
will be involved in the research.&lt;br/&gt;