* 0826259
* Precision Microprofile Extrusion with a Wall Slip Condition
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Donggang Yao, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 07/31/2012
* USD 291,604.00

The research objective of this award is to develop and investigate a novel
precision microprofile extrusion process, the basis of which uses a field-
induced material transport mechanism for creating a conformal fluidic layer on
the microextrudate. To create a thin conformal fluidic layer, a polymer blended
with a small amount of miscible low-molecular-weight or oligomeric additive is
extruded through a long die channel, causing enhanced phase separation to occur.
This shear-induced phase separation, in turn, causes the low-molecular-weight
fluid to migrate to the die surface, thus forming a conformal fluidic layer and
creating a wall-slip condition for the polymer extrudate. Due to wall slip, the
flow stresses and thus the amount of die swell are minimized. Furthermore, due
to the inherent miscibility of the fluidic layer with the polymer extrudate the
surface tension effect is greatly reduced or eliminated. The main research
activities will be 1) to demonstrate the technical feasibility of this novel
microprofile extrusion process, 2) to gain a fundamental understanding of field-
induced phase separation in microprofile extrusion and, 3) to formulate a
predicative model for this new process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful
complication of this research will lead to a novel manufacturing process for
precision microprofile extrusion. Precision microprofiles offer unique functions
(e.g., enhanced surface activities, diffractive effects, wave transmission
efficiency, etc.) that cannot be realized by their circular counterparts.
Although precision microprofiles are highly desirable in the emerging
biochemical, biomedical and telecommunication industries, a capable process for
fabricating them is yet to be developed. The new process would therefore fill a
technical gap and create new market sectors for a wide variety of applications.
Moreover, the knowledge gained on the enhancement of field-induced phase
migration would be particularly useful in the development of other innovative
processes, potentially in the areas of coating, lubrication, and selective
surface modification. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;