* 0826276
* Exploiting Parametric Effects in Resonant Nanosystems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Arvind Raman, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2012
* USD 360,727.00

Though resonant, electromechanical nanosystems have been shown to offer distinct
potential in applications ranging from radio-frequency (RF) filtering to highly-
sensitive mass sensing, their practical implementation is currently impeded by
the comparatively-small output signals they produce, and by their comparatively-
low quality (Q) factors of resonance. While on-chip, low-noise amplifiers can be
used to partially negate these constraints, an alternative, and in many ways
more attractive approach, is to realize output signals of sufficient (usable)
amplitude by exploiting dynamic phenomena, namely parametric amplification
and/or parametric resonance, within the resonators themselves.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project, incorporating both analytical and
experimental activities, seeks to investigate the nonlinear dynamics and
stability of parametrically-excited, high-frequency nanoelectromechanical
systems (NEMS), such as nanotube and nanowire resonators, in order to
significantly improve their performance in emerging applications such as
nanomechanical, radio-frequency (RF) signal processing, nanomechanical mass
detection, and ultra-fast sensing and actuation. The research effort will
initially focus on the development of multi-physics, distributed-parameter
models of representative, electrostatically-actuated nanoelectromechanical
devices. These models, incorporating realistic noise sources, will be
systematically discretized and analyzed using standard perturbation methods. The
results of these analyses will be used to identify regions of stable and
unstable operation, to develop predictive design tools, and to distill promising
device designs. Single-walled carbon nanotube resonators based on these designs
will be subsequently fabricated and tested, using the fabrication and electrical
characterization suites available at Purdue University?s Birck Nanotechnology
Center, to verify predicted dynamic behaviors. Ultimately, the work will develop
a refined understanding of the complex nonlinear behaviors associated with
parametric effects at the nanoscale and, with this understanding in hand, will
actively exploit these nonlinear behaviors to realize improved performance
metrics and device outputs of sufficient amplitude to be of use in practical
implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To ensure the rapid distribution of
pertinent research results, the project will leverage the cyber-infrastructure
of the nanoHUB, the science portal of the NSF?s Network for Computational
Nanotechnology (NCN), which provides online services for research, learning, and
collaborations. Specifically, the PI?s will develop and deploy on the nanoHUB a
comprehensive software tool for the simulation of nanotube/nanowire resonators
with different geometric configurations, material properties, transduction
mechanisms, and noise sources. Scientists and students working worldwide will be
able to use this tool to predict the dynamic range, nonlinear phenomena,
mixing/filtering, and noise effects of such resonators, leading to the better
design of nanoelectromechanical systems. The online tool will be supplemented by
freely-available, online user guides, tutorials, and an introductory lecture on
?Micro and Nanoresonators?. These resources, with others, will be profitably
utilized in the development of a new class focusing on the dynamics of
MEMS/NEMS, as well as tutorials that the PIs intend to offer at major
international conferences. Under-represented undergraduate students will assist
in the development of the online resources through specifically targeted SURF
(summer undergraduate research fellowship) endeavors at Purdue
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;