* 0826583
* Collaborative Research: Dynamics of Running on Variable Inclines
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* John Schmitt, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2011
* USD 118,535.00

The ability to develop legged robots that can effectively run over flat,
inclined, uneven and deformable surfaces is critical to a wide range of civilian
(e.g., search and rescue) and military (e.g., reconnaissance, mine detection)
applications. This task has proven particularly problematic to traditional
control strategies, yet many animals, unlike their synthetic counterparts, are
able to transcend complex environments such as jungles, caves, deserts,
buildings, and piles of rubble with remarkable ease. Despite their miniscule
size, insects can function in almost any environment by means of their ability
to climb, crawl, or run as the situation demands. Although recent progress has
been made in the development of bio-inspired robots capable of locomotion over
uneven ground, and others that can (slowly) climb sheer surfaces, no legged
machines currently exist that can dynamically operate in a combination of
vertical and horizontal regimes. The recent discovery that rapidly climbing
cockroaches and geckos utilize their legs to actively pull the body toward the
feet, rather than pushing the body away as in running, has inspired a new
dynamic model for vertical running and the construction of the first dynamic
climbing robot. The salient feature of this climbing model and robot is the
intentional utilization of large lateral pulling forces when rapidly climbing.
Since these pulling motions observed experimentally do not appear to provide an
obvious energetic advantage, we hypothesize that this type of side to side
climbing is driven primarily by stability considerations. This project pursues
an integrated study of insect biomechanics, dynamic modeling, and robotic
synthesis to determine the importance and proper utilization of lateral
oscillations in running and climbing over various degrees of incline.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study seeks to answer these questions not only to
provide insight into animal biomechanics, but also to produce guiding principles
that can be utilized to develop the next generation of dynamic legged robots. In
particular we aim to understand the connection between neuromuscular control
strategies in insects and functional performance in changing environments (i.e.
slope and substrate), develop reduced order models to determine how lateral
motion pattern contribute to improved stability and locomotion performance, and
develop a novel robotic test platform to empirically test the predictions of the
bio-inspired locomotion models and provide insight into how lateral dynamics can
be explicitly utilized to improve the mobility of legged robots over varying
terrain and substrates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;