* 0826184
* Collaborative Research: Mathematical Modeling and Experimental Study of Femtosecond Laser Machining of High Aspect Ratio Microstructures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Benxin Wu, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/2011
* USD 100,000.00

The research objective of this collaborative project is to develop and verify a
physics-based model to reveal and quantitatively understand the fundamental
physical processes of femtosecond laser-matter interactions in high aspect ratio
microstructures. The study employs a combination of experimental and
mathematical modeling approaches. Femtosecond laser-matter interactions in high
aspect ratio microstructures will be experimentally observed using the pump-
probe imaging, optical emission spectroscopy, and other techniques. Important
process parameters, such as laser ablation rate, laser- induced plasma (due to
the target vaporization and/or hydrodynamic expansion) and shock wave
propagation speed, plasma temperature and electron number density, will be
measured. The numerical model is based on the solution of Maxwell?s wave
equation and hydrodynamic equations, and will be improved and verified by
comparing simulations with measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successfully
completed, the benefits of this project will be to set up a solid science base
for femtosecond laser-matter interactions in high aspect ratio microstructures.
This will establish femtosecond laser micromachining as a direct, flexible, and
single-step technology that can realize a precise and controlled production of
high-aspect ratio microstructures, which will have a big impact on
microelectromechanical system, automotive, aerospace, and optics industries,
where the demand for high aspect ratio microstructures has been increasing. The
research results will be published in related journals and presented at
technical conferences. Direct interactions with companies will be performed for
research result dissemination. This interdisciplinary project provides a good
opportunity for the training of graduate students. Undergraduate students and
students from underrepresented groups will also be involved in the project.
Animation demonstration kits based on the project results will be sent to the
high schools in the neighborhood of Illinois Institute of Technology, which have
high minority enrollment. This will promote the interest of high school students
in science and engineering.