* 0826547
* Computational Design Tool Development for Multilevel Optimization of Product-Material Systems Under Uncertainty
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2009,03/31/2013
* Masoud Rais-Rohani, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Collopy
* 03/31/2013
* USD 385,138.00

The research objective of this award is to develop a computational design tool
for multilevel optimization of hierarchical product-material systems under
uncertainty. Through systematic decomposition of computational material models,
microstructure-property relationships can be tailored to satisfy competing
system-level design goals such as performance, reliability, and robustness. A
consistent top-down cascading of requirements and bottom-up propagation of
capabilities and uncertainties that span length scales ranging from nano-to-
micro, micro-to-meso, and meso-to-macro is desired. Development of advanced
metamodels for approximation of cause-effect relationships will enhance the
efficiency of the design tool while addressing key optimization concerns related
to highly nonlinear and noisy responses. Cyberinfrastructure will be used to
integrate the components into a comprehensive tool, effectively forming a
virtual organization for multidisciplinary research. The effectiveness of the
design tool will be evaluated by investigating a number of benchmark
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research will
enhance modern engineering design methodology by expanding our knowledge of
material microstructure design as an integral part of the product design
process. This research will provide a platform for the exploration and
understanding of interactions among the elements of material microstructure and
their sensitivities to external influences (e.g., static or dynamic loading).
Moreover, it will result in the development of a sophisticated
cyberinfrastructure and associated technologies which will contribute toward the
ability to design products with vastly different classes of materials such as
advanced lightweight alloys, nanophased fiber-reinforced polymer composites,
metal-matrix composites and powder metals. Involvement of graduate and
undergraduate students in this research and the integration of related topics
into courses in design optimization, aerospace structural design and
inelasticity will broaden the impact of the proposed research. Middle and high
school students representing different demographics including underrepresented
groups will be recruited to participate in the research through summer
internship opportunities. The results of the research will be disseminated
through publication in archival journals and presentations at national
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;