* 0826594
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Comparative Space-Time Dynamics
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2010
* Sergio Rey, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 02/28/2010
* USD 1,500.00

The study of economic inequality and convergence continues to attract attention
becoming a dynamic academic landscape where an interdisciplinary literature has
evolved. This interest has been reflected in the spatial and temporal thinking
in this research domain, that is, the analysis of spatial patterns of economic
convergence and the temporal dynamics of geographical inequality. However, the
literatures of process analysis (time series analysis) and form analysis
(spatial pattern analysis) are largely isolated from one another. Consequently,
the integration of these two rich and growing literatures offers opportunities
for a truly spatially integrated social science. Hence, the aims of this project
are two-fold: first, to develop new space-time measurements and inferential
approaches to compare regional economic structure and interactions; second, to
further the understanding of the role spatial dependence plays in economic
growth. The objective of this project is the cross-fertilization of
distributional dynamics and spatial pattern analysis using geometric indicators.
This research will apply these new methods to compare the Chinese space-time
economic structure with that of the United States. In addition, these methods
will be implemented in the Open Source software package STARS: Space-Time
Analysis of Regional Systems that facilitates the study of space-time economic
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The increasing availability of space-time data has
outpaced the development of space-time analytical techniques across social
sciences. The integration of space and time would generate much closer
interactions among geography and other social sciences in general, while
providing new perspectives for the role of geography in economic development.
Comparative analysis of spatial economic growth will help to narrow the gap
between growth theories and their empirical testing. This will better our
understanding of the role of space in different regional economies. From a
policy perspective, the development of space-time explicit indicators will
provide policy makers and urban planners with new tools to design and evaluate
poverty eradication programs by identifying space-time clusters of poor regions.
While the substantive focus of this research is on regional income dynamics, the
methodological issues examined are relevant to the study of a wide class of
phenomena that have spatial and temporal dimensions. The developed methods are
expected to have implications in areas such as comparative space-time dynamics
of land use evolution, disease diffusion, crime hot spots, socioeconomic
inequalities, among others.&lt;br/&gt;