* 0826205
* Deciphering planktonic predator-prey interactions: a mechanistic approach
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Susanne Menden-Deuer, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2013
* USD 600,000.00

Heterotrophic protists are important consumers of phytoplankton biomass and
productivity in marine microbial food. Despite considerable effort both in the
laboratory and the field, oceanographers lack a mechanistic and predictive
understanding of the foraging ecology of these predators. This lack of
understanding of the population dynamics and ecology of marine planktonic food
webs is rooted in a mismatch in investigative scales: uptake of nutrients and
prey, that drive plankton growth and grazing rates, occur at the microscopic,
individual level, whereas their ecological significance and most of our
investigations occur at much larger scales. However, processes at these
different scales are tightly linked because there is a causative relationship
and feedback between predators, microscopic movements and behavioral responses
and the ultimate, macroscopic predator population distribution and encounters of
environmentally relevant variables. Using recently developed theoretical and
empirical methods that overcome this mismatch in scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this study the investigator will quantify planktonic predator-prey interactions
in the laboratory and embed these empirical observations in a theoretically-
motivated model that predicts predator distributions and consumption rates.
Predator movements and population distributions will be simultaneously
quantified, ranging in observation scales from micrometers and seconds to meters
and hours. Coverage of this vast range of scales provides the opportunity to
link processes that are separated over several orders of magnitude. Therefore,
the microscopic causes of macroscopic processes can be quantified. These
automated video observations will be collected within large (liters) observation
volumes in which the distribution of prey is stable and manipulated to include
gradients and patches. Spatially structured prey distributions will be used to
test the importance of prey type, abundance and distribution on the movement
behaviors and grazing rates of a taxonomically and functionally representative
set of heterotrophic protists. The empirical results will be embedded in a
theoretically-motivated encounter rate model that predicts predator population
distributions and grazing rates. These model simulations aim to identify key
factors necessary to characterize predator foraging behaviors and success.
Predator grazing rates will be quantified through several, independent
approaches. Comparison of these redundant but independent measures provides the
opportunity to identify key factors driving the process. Tight integration of
laboratory and theoretical work will improve model assumptions, validate model
predictions and most importantly, provide a tool that parameterizes complex
biological processes. With this theoretical framework, this research will
develop a mechanistic understanding of the factors driving plankton
distributions and population dynamics. Ultimately, a mechanistic understanding
of protist foraging behaviors is key to predicting the ecological role of these
phytoplankton predators and thus, the population dynamics of planktonic food
webs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide training for a graduate
student and undergraduate interns to gain quantitative expertise through the
integration of theoretical, empirical and mathematical approaches. Given the
opportunity, The PI will focus recruitment efforts of both graduate and
undergraduate students on minority candidates. Her continued involvement and
demonstrated track record with minority serving programs will be an asset in
that endeavor. For the oceanographic community, this work demonstrates a novel
approach to deciphering processes in complex biological systems. Through
integration of empirical data with a well established theoretical framework, the
mechanistic linkages between the driving microscopic processes and their
ecologically relevant, macroscopic outcomes will be established. The proposed
work will provide the necessary parameters to include predator behaviors in
ocean ecosystem models.