* 0826191
* Collaborative Research: Elastic and Viscoelastic Characterization and Modeling of Polymer based Structures for Biological Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2008,12/31/2013
* Xin Zhang, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Robert Carter
* 12/31/2013
* USD 225,428.00

The research objective of this award is to contribute to the scientific
understanding of the mechanisms of the mechanical response of soft polymer
materials so as to permit the design and construction of effective micro/nano
structures and devices for biomedical applications. Elastic and viscoelastic
characterization and modeling of a soft polymer material, namely
polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS), will be performed. Such a polymer material will be
probed at different scales from bulk down to the micro/nano levels using punch
tests, and nanoindentation techniques. The results will be implemented into a
viscoelastic finite element analysis model developed in tandem. The validated
model will ultimately be utilized to determine the mechanical forces of living
cells from the measured deflection of PDMS pillar arrays. To this end, the
proposed research would entail a balance between characterization of the
viscoelastic material and the development of a theoretical or numerical
viscoelastic modeling for cellular force measurement applications.

The scientific insights from the in-depth study of the viscoelasticity of PDMS
will contribute to the analysis of many other soft polymer materials at
micro/nano scales commonly used in biomedical industries. The vision is to
expand the science and engineering community's capacity to probe soft polymer
materials at small scales by developing both new theoretical models and
experimental methodologies. These characterization techniques and platforms will
allow scientists to ask profound and previously intractable questions related to
biomedical research, and to obtain quantitative empirical answers with
resolution sufficient to characterize the soft materials in small scales. This
award will implement and disseminate an educational and training program that
develops interdisciplinary modes of thought at the boundary of bio- and nano-
mechanics through integrated research opportunities in micro/nano
characterization of soft polymer materials. The project will incorporate
undergraduate and graduate research, graduate education at both institutions and
also outreach to high-school students.