* 0826552
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Child Labor Reform in Great Britain, Germany, &amp; the United States
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2009
* Bruce Carruthers, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2009
* USD 7,500.00

SES-0826552&lt;br/&gt;Bruce Carruthers&lt;br/&gt;Elisabeth
Anderson&lt;br/&gt;Northwestern University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
dissertation project is a comparative history of child labor policy development
in Great Britain (1833-1891), Germany (1839-1903), and the United States
(1880-1938), focusing particularly on the impact of changing cultural
conceptions of childhood on the evolving content of child labor policy in each
country. The research relies on a combination of secondary historical, published
primary, and unpublished archival materials. These data will be analyzed to
trace changes in child labor policy and in discourses surrounding the problem of
child labor in each country over the course of the nineteenth and early
twentieth centuries. This research promises to make valuable empirical and
theoretical contributions to historical and political sociology in several ways.
First, it will identify how and why child labor policy trajectories differed
across countries. Furthermore, because child labor laws were the first type of
state intervention into the free labor market, the project will offer valuable
insight into the political and ideological origins of protective labor
legislation more generally. Finally, by analyzing how changing ideas about
childhood and child employment shaped the evolving content of child labor laws,
the research promises to contribute to the scholarly understanding of the
relationship between cultural ideas and policy change. In particular, it should
help to specify more precisely how cultural ideas influence the policymaking
process. By contributing to social scientific knowledge about the cultural,
political and economic conditions facilitating the development of American and
European child labor reform policy, this project also promises to yield
information pertinent to the contemporary problem of child labor in developing
countries. The project, which will show how American and European reformers were
able to transform child labor policy in spite of strong resistance from
employers and impoverished parents, can shed light on the conditions needed to
enable similar reforms in the developing world.&lt;br/&gt;