* 0826701
* Thinking About, and Interacting with Living and Mechanical Agents
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2008,02/28/2014
* Julie Adams, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 02/28/2014
* USD 749,991.00

Recent advances in artificial intelligence and robotics are confronting
individuals of all ages with a series of category-defying entities that combine
features of living and nonliving things. As such, these entities increasingly
challenge people's basic understanding of mind and intelligence. The goal in
this project is to explore adults' and children's beliefs about a range of
living and mechanical agents, and to test how these beliefs affect people's
ability to track, remember, and understand mechanical agents in two specific
computer interfaces. First, it will explore a computer interface designed to
allow a human operator to interact with and control a set of semi-autonomous
robots. The second environment will be a teachable agent system in which middle
school children learn about complex science phenomena, such as river ecosystems,
by actively teaching an animated software agent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project represents one of the few research programs to empirically test people's
understanding of living and artificial agents, and it will employ a conceptual
framework that starts with na√Øve understandings of mind (e.g. "Theory of Mind")
and applies them to engineered environments where these understandings are used.
This framework describes the conditions under which participants apply different
agent concepts, and can help understand how these beliefs might change over time
as people interact with novel agents. Although the framework is not yet a
complete theory, it represents a broadened approach to reasoning about both
typical and novel living and mechanical agents that goes beyond existing dual-
process models of Theory of Mind. These experiments also make links between
concepts about agents, and the deployment of these concepts in realistic high-
load perceptual tasks, so they can make an important contribution to our basic
understanding of how knowledge affects vision.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The findings
from this project may have important implications for educating both children
and adults to deal with novel intelligent decision making technologies that move
beyond the simple command-and-response cycle inherent to most current computer
applications. Previous research by the PIs has already documented ways in which
different people vary in their approach to these technologies (e.g. older and
younger adults seem to have subtly different beliefs about the nature of
computer intelligence), so this project may help improve the accessibility of
novel agent-technologies to a wide range of different populations. More
generally, because this research uses interactive educational tools and
realistic robot-command systems to explore agent-understanding, it has the
potential to improve user interfaces supporting social learning environments
that focus on self-regulated learning, and that facilitate the effectiveness of
human-machine emergency response teams. These technologies confront users with
challenges to their most basic understandings of intelligence and thinking, and
our research has the potential to guide both children and adults as they become
successful users and creators of the interactive technologies of the
future.&lt;br/&gt;