* 0826842
* AOC:   Health Information Technology as an Agent of Change for Improving Health Care Delivery Processes
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2013
* Isa Bar-On, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 09/30/2013
* USD 749,985.00

Health care delivery in the U.S. is experiencing severe and worsening problems.
Costs are higher than in other countries and continue to increase, yet the
overall quality of care delivered is not improving. Increasing demand for health
care as baby boomers become elderly is further straining the care delivery
system. Thus, dramatic changes are needed in health care delivery in the U.S.
over the next decade. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;One proposed solution is computer
systems designed for health care, called health information technology (HIT).
These HIT systems, particularly electronic health records (EHR) that store
patients? medical history and their interactions with physicians, promise
significant improve¬ments in quality, effectiveness and productivity of care
delivery. Yet simply installing HIT without significantly changing existing work
processes is unlikely to produce needed results. What is needed is an in-depth
under¬standing of how HIT and process design techniques should be conceptualized
and applied in health care. &lt;br/&gt;This project develops theories that can
transform health care delivery processes in the U.S., through a deep
understanding of the changes needed to make effective use of HIT and process
design techniques. The questions we address are: What capabilities does an EHR
provide and which are used by health care organizations? Which characteristics
of the health care context, including characteristics of countries, the
physician and nursing professions, and health care organizations, enable and
inhibit the ability of health care organizations to take advantage of what EHR
systems provide? What are the dynamics of change by which EHR capabilities
affect care delivery processes? How and why do new EHR systems improve or reduce
the quality and productivity of health care delivery processes? How do health
care organizations and individuals working in them need to change to make the
most effective use of new EHR systems? Answers to these questions will provide
the knowledge needed to transform health care delivery processes in the
U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This team will conduct multiple case studies of EHR
implementation in health care organizations to understand the dynamics of change
as the EHR implementation alters health care delivery processes. The case
studies will be carried out at our partner organizations, Fallon Clinic, UMass
Memorial Health Care, Canada?s single payer system in British Columbia, and two
of Israel?s four Health Fund systems. These four settings provide different
health care contexts, enabling us to observe and learn from their differences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improving the quality of health care delivered in the U.S.
as well as reducing its cost has become a critically important societal goal.
The health care system is reaching a breaking point, and needs to be changed.
Simplistic solutions, however, will not work. Solutions require an
interdisciplinary approach and the holistic, in-depth understanding of the
variety of forces influencing change that will be studied in this project. The
work produced will provide a foundation for a larger community of researchers
transforming HIT and process design ideas to solve health care delivery
problems.&lt;br/&gt;