* 0826782
* HSD: RUI: Collaborative Research: Interdisciplinary Research and Methods for Assessing Dams as Agents of Change in China
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2008,03/31/2012
* Michael Donihue, Colby College
* Standard Grant
* James Z. Wang
* 03/31/2012
* USD 162,641.00

To sustainably meet the simultaneous and growing demands for water, energy, and
environmental quality while protecting the welfare and tradition of affected
communities, a broader view of dams is needed. To address this need, this
interdisciplinary research project will apply a new tool for evaluating the
relative costs and benefits of dam construction based on multi-objective
planning techniques. The Integrative Dam Assessment Modeling (IDAM) tool is
designed to integrate biophysical, socioeconomic, and geopolitical perspectives
into a single cost/benefit analysis of dam construction. Each of 27 different
impacts of dam construction will be evaluated both objectively (e.g., flood
protection) and subjectively (i.e., the valuation of said flood protection) by a
team of decision makers. By providing a visual representation of the costs and
benefits associated with two or more dams, the IDAM tool will allow decision
makers to evaluate alternatives and to articulate priorities associated with a
dam project, making the decision process more informed and more transparent. The
IDAM tool will be an evolutionary step in dam evaluation. Coupled with event
chronologies and hotspot mapping of conflicts, household surveys, public-
participatory geographic information systems, and hydrologic modeling, the
proposed process will be used to investigate hypotheses regarding the
assessment, minimization, and distribution of hydropower impacts across cultural
and organizational levels and to engage stakeholders in the design process
through a decision theater.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significant intellectual
contributions of this project will include the use of a uniquely
multidisciplinary, integrative model to understand the effects of dams through a
controlled study of a complex social and environmental system in China. The
project will make several pragmatic contributions related to policy and decision
making through disciplinary and interdisciplinary investigation. The project
therefore will increase understanding about the interplay of multiple impacts of
dam construction in a variety of geographic contexts. Because this collaborative
effort will includes opportunities for research in undergraduate institutions,
this project will support high-quality research by faculty members at two
undergraduate institutions and encourage the integration of research and
education. Substantial coordination and capacity building will occur across
organizations, levels of experience, and disciplines. A broad dissemination
strategy is aimed at strengthening research, teaching, and public outreach about
society environment interactions in the U.S., Asia, and elsewhere. Finally, this
decision-support process will yield both new knowledge and accessible tools for
improving institutions' ability to manage the social and environmental dynamics
associated with dams as agents of change. An award resulting from the FY 2008
NSF-wide competition on Human and Social Dynamics (HSD) supports this project.
All NSF directorates and offices are involved in the coordinated management of
the HSD competition and the portfolio of HSD awards.