* 0826469
* Distributed Control of Constrained Compartmental Systems, with Applications to Large-Scale Infrastructures
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2012
* Cedric Langbort, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* George Chiu
* 06/30/2012
* USD 210,436.00

The research objective of this project is to develop novel regulation methods
for linear compartmental networked systems, which can directly and jointly
address the physical &lt;br/&gt;and communication constraints typically imposed
on these systems. &lt;br/&gt;Compartmental systems can be thought of as a
collection of interconnected reservoirs exchanging flows of some material
according to global conservation laws.&lt;br/&gt;Because this material
represents a physical quantity such as a number of vehicles or a mass of fluid
these regulation methods must be able to generate the desired closed-loop
behavior without producing commands requiring these variables to become
negative. In addition, communication between various reservoirs is often
limited, and the commands must thus be computed based on local measurements
only. The proposed approach builds on tools from the theory of robust and
nonlinear control, and exploits the particular structure of compartmental
systems to make design problems tractable for large problems, while
incorporating time-varying parameter variations, random perturbations, and
uncertainties. Particular effort and attention will be focused on the
application of these methods to set-point regulation, output tracking, and
disturbance rejection in compartmental models recently proposed for air traffic
flow in the National Airspace System and &lt;br/&gt;large-scale, gravity driven,
irrigation networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to the wide
range of processes that can be modeled as compartmental systems, we expect the
tools resulting from the proposed research to benefit many important technical
and societal applications in addition to irrigation networks and air traffic
flow control. &lt;br/&gt;Examples include chemical production processes and some
distributed computing scenarios. &lt;br/&gt;The technical results will be
disseminated within the air traffic control community &lt;br/&gt;through close
collaboration with the NASA Ames research center.
Undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;students will be actively involved in the construction
of an Irrigation Board &lt;br/&gt;testbed for irrigation simulation and its
validation. This testbed will also be used as a teaching device, as part of a
course for local high school students on the challenges of
water&lt;br/&gt;conservation and its possible engineering solutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;