* 0826356
* Cyber-Enabled Predictive Models for Polymer Nanocomposites: Multiresolution Simulations and Experiments
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2013
* R. Byron Pipes, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Robert Carter
* 12/31/2013
* USD 1,280,020.00

CMMI 0826356&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cyber-enabled predictive models for polymer
nanocomposites: multiresolution simulations and experiments&lt;br/&gt;PI:
Alejandro Strachan, School of Materials Engineering, Purdue
University&lt;br/&gt;This CMMI project will develop an experimentally-validated,
predictive modeling framework to describe the mechanical response of polymer
nanocomposites. While the framework will be applicable to a wide range of
materials this effort will focus on polyimides reinforced with carbon nanotubes
and graphene sheets and the fundamental phenomena that govern the mechanical
properties of these materials, including: i) the role of particle
functionalization on dispersion and interfacial strength; ii) changes in polymer
structure and properties near the particles; and iii) nucleation and propagation
of mechanisms of inelastic deformation and failure. To achieve these objectives
this project will utilize multi-resolution theoretical and experimental
techniques starting with electrons and atoms via ab initio and molecular
dynamics simulations and atomic force microscopy and also capturing mesoscale
and macroscopic phenomena via phase field micromechanical modeling and
mechanical characterization experiments. &lt;br/&gt;This project will seek to
maximize its impact and outreach to the research and educational communities by
cyber-enabling the simulation tools and deploying educational content online via
nanoHUB.org (developed by NSF?s Network for Computational Nanotechnology).
nanoHUB enables users to run live simulations using simply a web-browser. Such a
cyber-enabled, predictive tool for the simulation of polymer nanocomposites has
the potential to help design next-generation materials with improved strength
that will impact established industries including aerospace and automobile as
well as emerging applications like micro electro-mechanical systems (MEMS). It
is expected that this resource will be used by a large number of scientists and
engineers in industry and national labs thus facilitating the technology
transfer from academia to the end users who can transform it into products that
benefit society. &lt;br/&gt;