* 0826437
* Matrix Confinement Effects in Composites and Nanocomposites:  Experiments and Molecular Modeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2008,10/31/2011
* Sindee Simon, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 10/31/2011
* USD 250,000.00

The research objective of this award is to understand matrix confinement effects
in thermosetting composite and nanocomposite materials, and in particular, to
evaluate the importance of intrinsic size effects, surface effects, and residual
stress effects. The scientific approach involves using a novel model for
thermosetting composites and nanocomposites ? cure and constraint of the
thermosetting resins in nanopores. Cure in nanopores is the inverse problem of
thermosets cured in the presence of nanoparticles and nanotubes; however, the
nanoconfined system is a simpler model because issues of agglomeration and
dispersion of nanoparticles are not relevant and because a broader range of
surface interactions can be realized. Experiments and complementary molecular
modeling will focus on isolating intrinsic size effects, surface effects, and
residual stress effects by changing monomer structure, resin/nanopore surface
interactions, nanopore size, and the coefficient of thermal expansion of the
confining nanoporous matrix. Deliverables will include the development and
dissemination of new scientific knowledge, training of graduate engineering
students, and development of a week-long module on composites for junior high
school girls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research
will facilitate design and optimization of nanocomposite and composite systems
by providing a better understanding of confinement effects on matrix properties.
Example applications include composites and nanocomposites used in aerospace and
nanoelectronics. The results of the research will be disseminated by
presentations at national and regional forums and by publication in both
conference proceedings and archival journals. The graduate engineering students
involved in the research will receive training in all scientific aspects of the
project, as well as professional development training. A week-long module on
composites for the junior high school girls interested in science and
engineering will also be developed.&lt;br/&gt;