* 0826838
* Collaborative Research: Evaluating Nutrient Reductions to Control Cyanobacteria and Ensure Large Lake Sustainability: Lake Taihu (China) as a Model for North American Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Steven Wilhelm, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2012
* USD 111,532.00

CBET-0826838 Steven Wilhelm, University of Tennessee Knoxville

Eutrophication in freshwater systems has led to a global proliferation of
cyanobacterial blooms deemed harmful because they foul water intakes, disrupt
foodwebs, fuel hypoxia, and produce secondary metabolites that are toxic to
consumers and users of affected waters, ranging from zooplankton, fish,
shellfish, cattle, domestic pets, to humans. As such, Cyanobacterial harmful
algal blooms (CyanHABs) seriously impair major freshwater drinking water
supplies, fisheries, agricultural (irrigation) and recreational use. A
particularly troubling aspect of the CyanoHAB problem is the proliferation into
previously pristine large lake, reservoir, and river systems. These include: the
Laurentian Great Lakes, major reservoirs in the US Midwest and West, lakes,
rivers and estuaries of the Southeast, and large lakes across the globe,
including China's third largest lake, Taihu. The objective of this research is
to deploy an interdisciplinary, international (USA-China) science-based approach
for assessing, controlling, and mitigating CycanHABs threatening the
sustainability of large lakes, focusing on Taihu as a case study. In situ
nutrient dilution bioassays will be deployed, designed to determine thresholds
below which CyanoHAB growth and proliferation can be controlled. The hypothesis
that dual nutrient (N and P) input constraints will be needed for long-term
control of CyanoHABs in Taihu will be tested. Bioassays will complement ongoing
field and mesocosm circulation and nutrient cycling studies by Chinese
colleagues. A program of research, education, and partnership with Chinese
researchers will provide a 'looking glass' into how future CyanoHAB events might
be dealt with in North American systems. The inclusion of students focused on
Environmental Science and Studies (UNC-CH's Institute for the Environment) and
Science 'Journalism (UT's School of Journalism) will facilitate rapid and
widespread dissemination of materials to all levels (K-12, collegiate, and
general public).