* 0826410
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Changing Face of the Andean Peatlands: The Effects of Climate and Human Disturbance on Ecosystem Structure and Function
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2008,01/31/2011
* Dale Vitt, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 01/31/2011
* USD 12,000.00

Peatlands store nearly thirty percent of global soil carbon, an amount
equivalent to twenty-seven years of global carbon emissions. Peatland ecosystems
have a positive balance of carbon accumulation under normal conditions, but
global warming could turn these ecosystems from net sinks to sources of carbon.
Global changes are affecting tropical mountains in the same degree as they are
affecting boreal forests. These changes have reduced the extent of the glaciers
and pushed the different vegetation types upward, including the tropical alpine
region known as paramo. Andean peatlands have been considered to be more
affected by local environmental conditions than global changes, but the
functional similarity between them and boreal peatlands indicates that Andean
peatlands are more susceptible to global changes than previously thought. The
function and structure of Andean peatlands are almost unknown and this doctoral
dissertation research project aims to locate the Andean peat-forming vegetation
in the conceptual framework of boreal peatlands by answering four questions. 1)
What is the distribution of the different peat-forming plant communities across
elevation, precipitation, and human intervention gradients? 2) What is the
relationship between peat-forming vegetation in the Andes and their
environmental conditions? 3) Are there observable changes in the carbon balance
of the Andean peat-forming vegetation in the last 200 years? 4) Are the changes
in species composition observed in the peat related to environmental changes in
the last 200 years? Surveys of the peat-forming vegetation will be carried out
in twenty-four sites at different elevations, conditions of precipitation, and
human activity. Cores taken from each site will show evidence of the changes in
peat function and structure during the last 200 years, while the chronology will
be controlled using lead-210 radioactive decaying. The relationship between the
current peat-forming communities and their environmental conditions provide the
framework to identify and recreate recent changes in the Northern-Andean forests
climate and environment in the context of human intervention and global change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research begins with a working hypothesis that Andean
peatlands are more connected to boreal peatlands than previously thought. The
alpine ecosystems in the Northern Andes, or paramos, have high levels of
endemism and provide multiple ecological services to local communities.
Peatlands in the Andes regulate water flow used by nearly forty percent of the
population in Andean countries; however their fate in the context of climate
change and human intervention is unknown. This research will model the extent of
these changes and provide basic science for the oncoming amelioration programs.
Understanding the high elevation peatlands in the Andes give us the opportunity
to project our research beyond the scientific limits and return the knowledge
acquired to the local communities, as well as training of local scientists in
peatland vegetation science.