* 0826871
* HSD: Market Integration and Climate as Drivers of Change in the Mexican Maize System: Multi-Scale Interactions in Livelihood and Land-Use Change
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2013
* Hallie Eakin, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Jessica Robin
* 08/31/2013
* USD 627,316.00

Understanding the sensitivity of food systems to global change is limited by
high uncertainties associated with the cross-scale interactions between the
natural environment and the cultural landscape. Defining what might be within a
suite of plausible futures requires a baseline scenario that captures the
factors that are most significant in shaping decisions at different levels of
governance, and which highlights the current, changing and interacting
sensitivities of the system to stressors associated with both climate change and
economic and cultural globalization. This project will create such a baseline by
assessing the drivers and evolving social outcomes of one of the world's most
important food systems: the Mexican maize system. Building on prior research
that anticipates climate change will have negative impacts for Mexican maize
production, and the globalization of agricultural markets is further challenging
the future of maize in Mexico, an interdisciplinary team of social and
biophysical scientists will investigate Mexican agricultural vulnerability in
terms of a complex food system, in which individual decisions to plant or not to
plant maize are hypothesized to manifest as landscape scale transformations. The
research team also expects that global to regional price signals and climatic
variability will affect local food production and land use outcomes differently
across the Mexican landscape, as a function of regionally-specific cultural,
economic, demographic, ecological and political factors. The project involves:
a) a description of the changing national geography of maize production and the
associated socioeconomic, institutional, and demographic correlates; b) an
analysis of climate trends and variability as related to maize production,
yields and water availability for irrigated farming; c) an econometric analysis
of the spatial patterns of maize price volatility in three maize-producing
states in order to evaluate the contribution of maize price volatility to farm-
level risk and d) an evaluation of the drivers (e.g., prices and climate) and
outcomes (land use, perceptions of food quality, and household maize
expenditures) of maize abandonment / persistence at the farm-level through case
studies in the states of Sinaloa, Mexico and Chiapas. A combination of
approaches will be used, including exploratory spatial data analysis (ESDA),
econometrics analysis (spatial, time-series, and spatial panels), agro-climatic
analyses, and household livelihood surveys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
interdisciplinary and multi-method project involves experts in economic
geography, econometrics, spatial analysis, livelihood assessment, climatology,
agroecology and public policy in Mexico and the United States. It will provide
the foundation for subsequent research on the development of scenarios of future
social-ecological change and vulnerability of food security in Mexico. The
project consolidates a strong international collaborative research community,
involving Arizona State University, University of California Santa Barbara, the
Colegio de Mexico (Mexico City), the Colegio de la Frontera Sur (Chiapas), and
the National Institute of Forestry, Agriculture and Livestock Research (INIFAP,
Mexico City). The project aims to enhance this network throughout the project's
implementation, by inviting Mexican experts external to the project to
participate in part of the annual project coordination meetings to share their
research and insights. Graduate students from the U.S. institutions will
collaborate with research counterparts in Mexico. The approaches and findings
from the project will be used as case material for graduate and undergraduate
courses in earth system science, regional analysis, development economics and
sustainable food systems. The diagnostic and analytical results of this project
will be disseminated through a variety of forums to maize policy experts of the
national agricultural secretary (SAGARPA), state agriculture ministries in
Sinaloa, State of Mexico and Chiapas, non-governmental organizations interested
in land use change and maize diversity, and to the academic communities in
Mexico and the U.S. The project's results will also be disseminated to Mexican
authorities responsible for climate change initiatives nationally in order to
contribute to the efforts of these agencies to comply with international climate
change agendas.