* 0826792
* Genome Scrambling in Caulobacters and their Phages
* BIO,EF
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Bert Ely, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 07/31/2012
* USD 368,069.00

This project is a full partnership between Dr. Bert Ely at the University of
South Carolina and the Eau Claire High School Science Club. The ECHS Science
Club was started in 2006 by Dr. Ely and Ms. Lagodia Sewell and Nicole Albertine,
two ECHS Biology teachers. Their goal was to promote better education in a low-
income neighborhood school. The Eau Claire High School is an inner city school
in Columbia, SC, approximately three miles from the University of South Carolina
campus. Approximately 95% of the ECHS students qualify for free or reduced-cost
lunch. ECHS has recently been declared a failing school according to the
definitions resulting from the No Child Left Behind Act. But the Science Club
has been a complete success. There is great interest in the club amongst the
students. To this point, they had identified and purified phages from
environmental sources, isolated high quality DNA from many of the phages in Dr.
Ely's collection, and contributed to the bioinformatic analysis/annotation of a
bacterial genome. These efforts have set the stage for this project: Caulobacter
and their phage. The PI got the idea of developing a student project on
Caulobacter phage genomes after reading a paper by Dr. Graham Hatfull involving
high school students in a study of Mycobacteriophages. Caulobacter spp. are
broadly distributed in aquatic environments. Most bacteriophages that infect
members of the genus Caulobacter have a common type of phage morphology and have
an exceptionally large head that contains a large (200 kb) genome. Based on
genome analysis in the Ely lab, these phage appeared to have undergone extensive
genome rearrangements. Furthermore, two Caulobacter genomes also appeared to
have undergone extensive rearrangements. The goal of this project is to
characterize this apparent genome rearrangement or 'scrambling' in Caulobacter
and their phage. These investigators (i.e., both Ely and the Science Club
members) will also look for evidence of gene transfer as a result of this
scrambling with gene transfer occurring between host and phage and between phage
and phage. The lead investigator will assist in data analysis and interpretation
and all will be coauthors on the paper. To increase the likelihood of success of
this project, summer internships are being provided to the high school students
so they can focus on their research and not take part time summer jobs. One of
the teachers will incorporate some of the Caulobacter genomic research into her
coursework.