* 0826614
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Refugees and Citizens: Political Conflict and Social Organization
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Loic Wacquant, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2009
* USD 7,500.00

PI and co-PI: Loic Wacquant and Silvia Pasquetti

Institution: University of California, Berkeley

Title: Doctoral Dissertation Research: Refugees and Citizens: Subaltern Politics
and Social Organization in West Bank Camps and Israeli Cities

0826614

Abstract

This dissertation investigates how spatial constraints and legal statuses
combine to shape social organization and collective self-identification within
subproletarian populations. This dissertation is a comparative ethnographic
study of subaltern politics under two different spatial-legal contexts: a
Palestinian refugee camp in the West Bank (Jalazon camp) and an Israeli Arab
minority neighborhood (in the Israeli city of Lod). A main research question
animates this research: What form of politics prevails in West Bank refugee
camps? How does it differ from local politics in Arab minority neighborhoods
inside Israel? Why does it differ? A main hypothesis guides this research:
despite many similarities in class, religious and cultural terms, camp dwellers
and urban minorities radically differ in their collective organizing and their
collective self-identification. This overarching hypothesis can be divided into
several hypotheses: H1) West Bank camps have more in-site associations and
centers than Israeli Arab urban neighborhoods; H2) camp associations and centers
provide a high level of internal organization but re-produce internal divisions
as they tend to be captured by political factions or extended families; H3) camp
dwellers perceive themselves as national actors engaged into a collective
struggle for recognition; H4) Palestinian urban minorities remain at the margins
of the association-building process around which Arab nationalist elites inside
Israel organize; and H5) Arab urban minorities do not speak the language of
national self-determination, but, rather, they protest the state policies that
criminalize their neighborhoods. This dissertation utilizes three main
methodological components: a) participant observation of the daily interactions
between local administrators and local populations both within institutional
sites and in the streets; b) oral histories with the local populations; and c)
formal interviews with the in-site and out-of-site administrators. This project
advances a relational approach to the effects of state spatial and legal
constraints: the genesis and rationale of these policies, their local
implementation, and the practices of the subject populations within their daily
surroundings. It also strives to clarify the conditions under which a high level
of internal organization within a poor community translates into actual
collective efficacy. Broader impacts of this research include: disaggregating
the category of ?the subalterns? and showing how their engagement into politics
is not limited to individual exit or mob-like reactions; contributing to
building bridges among scholars of sociology, geography, law and post-colonial
studies; and enhancing public understanding of Arab marginalized communities,
which are often portrayed as violent masses.