* 0826119
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying Predictability in Nonlinear Multiscale Systems with Applications to Tropical Cyclone Prediction
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Wen-wen Tung, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2013
* USD 180,000.00

Quantifying dynamical predictability is a fundamental problem in dynamical
systems, having enormous social and economic implications. The task is
especially challenging in nonlinear multiscale systems involving a vast-range of
interacting spatial-temporal scales. Outstanding examples of multiscale
phenomena include electrical power outages, earthquakes, tsunamis, and tropical
cyclones (TCs). TCs in particular, are responsible for billions of dollars of
damage annually in the United States alone. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To take into
account the growth of inevitable uncertainties in the initial conditions and/or
the uncertainties in the computational model formulation, ensemble forecasting
has been developed and found important applications, especially in weather and
climate forecasting, including TC forecasting. Currently, with simple models,
one would choose as many ensembles as possible, with each ensemble containing a
large number of members. When the forecast models become increasingly
complicated, however, one would only be able to afford a small number of
ensembles, each with limited number of members, thus sacrificing estimation
accuracy of the forecasts. An even more serious limitation with the ensemble
technique is that it cannot be applied at all, when the model equations are not
available, which is often the case in practice. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major
objective of this project is to develop a new theoretical framework and a
practical technique, called ?pseudo-ensemble? technique, for quantifying
dynamical predictability, so that understanding of ensemble forecasting can be
fundamentally advanced, forecast accuracy from weather to climate scales can be
drastically improved, and computational complexity and data storage in
forecasting can be tremendously reduced. These shall be achieved by unifying
statistical, dynamical, and different information theoretic approached used in
ensemble forecasting. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ?pseudo-ensemble? technique in
particular, shall be applicable to the important situation that observational
data are available but the exact dynamical model equations are unknown. This
thus shall allow determination of practical predictability of important weather
and climate systems including floods, TCs, winter storms, and monsoons. The PI
will recruit students from underrepresented minority and women
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the proposal include
establishment of an international collaboration with the National Center for
Typhoon and Flooding Research (NCTFR) in Taiwan. The project will directly train
both graduate and undergraduate students. The research results will be
disseminated through various channels including the Purdue Climate Change
Research Center and the NSF TeraGrid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;