* 0826198
* Chromium Remediation and Recovery Using Microbial Fuel Cell Technology
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Massoud Pirbazari, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Debra Reinhart
* 08/31/2011
* USD 316,466.00

CBET- 0826198&lt;br/&gt;Nealson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal involves the
application of microbial fuel cell (MFC) technology for the removal of chromium
(Cr), a carcinogenic metal commonly found in the soils and aquifers of polluted
locations, such as brownfield or Superfund sites. The proposed approach has
unique advantages over the existing treatment techniques it would capitalize on
the metal reducing capabilities of Shewanella in the cathode compartment of a
MFC to remove the soluble and mobile Cr (VI) species through reductive
precipitation while providing supplemental electrical energy to the system.
Preliminary studies in the PI's lab have demonstrated the ability of prototype
systems to effectively reduce and remove hexavalent chromium species from
solution. The proposal will develop a microbial fuel cell to use organisms
capable of reducing hexavalent chromium to form an insoluble precipitate within
the cathode compartment. The research will result in a greater understanding of
the metal reducing ability and biological pathways in metal reducing bacteria
for hexavalent chromium species. The results of this study may be also extended
to other pollutants. Until now, the focus of applied MFC technology has been
wastewater treatment by microbial consortia in the anodic compartment.
Application of MFCs to heavy metal remediation will yield new avenues of
research with respect to fuel cell biocathodes and MFC modeling. This research
will result in a greater understanding of the metal reducing ability and
biological pathways found in metal reducing bacteria (MRB). Members of the
Shewanella genus will be used as our model organisms because the genomes of
strains to be utilized have already been sequenced. This will be of great
importance in future genomic and proteomic studies; discoveries regarding metal
reduction pathways and functionality can be extended to other MRB species and
communities. The results of this study may be also extended to other pollutants
such as arsenic, uranium, and technetium.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development of the proposed MFC technology will
provide highly beneficial and desirable interdisciplinary collaboration focusing
on protecting the environment and public health. In addition to being an
effective tool for metal remediation and recovery, the development of the MFC
system as proposed would be an exciting educational tool for both general
audiences and students of multiple disciplines