* 0826335
* Collaborative Research: GEOTRACES particulate intercalibration
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* James Bishop, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2011
* USD 507,479.00

Large sampling and methodological biases, with reported differences as large as
200%, continue to confound the marine geochemical research community involved in
water-column particulate sampling. When the GEOTRACES Intercalibration Cruise
(IC) program was designed, the extent and reality of reported differences had
not been fully appreciated. The resolution of this problem remains an urgent
priority. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, researchers at the University
of California Berkeley - Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory and the Woods
Hole Oceanographic Institution will participate in the US-GEOTRACES IC study.
The UCB/LBNL team will deploy Multiple Unit Large Volume in-situ Filtration
System (MULVFS) as part of the IC study. MULVFS is a unique, highly flexible,
and reliable system with an unparalleled and globally tested ability for
collection of particulate and dissolved species from the sea. MULVFS collects
size fractionated particulate samples from 10000 L volumes of seawater at 12
depth horizons in the upper 1000 m. Subsamples will be provided to other IC
experiment participants. LBNL/UCB will analyze particulate samples from bottle
and McLane pumps as part of the IC experiment. MULVFS will also be used for
simultaneous comparison of different particle capture and size separation
devices (e.g. McLane, Challenger, Kiel pump filter holders), filter types, and
adsorber systems. This work has been highly coordinated with the GEOTRACES IC
PIs and participants as well as with members of the GEOTRACES Science Steering
Committee. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work that will be carried out through this
award is designed to eliminate investigator and sampling approach dependency for
GEOTRACES particulate sampling and will reconcile the various sampling
approaches to be used in this program. Work will support multi-investigator
particulate matter IC studies using MULVFS in both the environmentally easy
locations such as the BATS and SAFe site and in physically dynamic and
biologically variable locations such as in the Gulf Stream and California
Current. MULVFS was designed to retain particles in strong current flows of the
Gulf Stream. Comparison with other particle sampling methodologies in both
challenging and non-challenging environments will lead to understanding and
resolution of biases /differences that are both substantial, documented in
published literature, and further documented in this proposal. Such an inter
calibration has never been done before. Furthermore, MULVFS greatly improves the
efficiency of the IC experiment by providing high resolution baseline profiles
of trace metals and nuclides in the upper water column. GEOTRACES places high
priority on particulate matter samples being representative in composition and
size distribution of the particulates naturally occurring in the water column
whether or not the water column is warm, cold, quiescent or physically dynamic
or biologically variable. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The proposed
work tackles the very real problems of method-dependent particle sampling and
pre analysis biases (large particle loss from some pumps, large particle
settling loss before filtration in bottles, poor sample preservation, etc.). It
will be of relevance to all members of the oceanography community who engage in
particle studies. &lt;br/&gt;