* 0826143
* Fracture of Adhesive Bonds under Mixed Mode Loading: Experiments in a Dual Actuator Load Frame and Numerical Simulations
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* John Dillard, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Demitris Kouris
* 07/31/2012
* USD 468,218.00

CMMI 0826143&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fracture of Adhesive Bonds under Mixed Mode
Loading: &lt;br/&gt;Experiments in a Dual Actuator Load Frame and Numerical
Simulations&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;D. A. Dillard, D. C. Ohanehi, R. C. Batra, J.
G. Dillard&lt;br/&gt;Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, Virginia&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Under prior NSF support, a novel dual-actuator load frame was developed with
capabilities to easily vary the fracture mode (relative amount of shear and
opening displacements imposed) for fracture testing of adhesively bonded beams.
The unique capabilities allow for a wide range of studies investigating fracture
of adhesive systems and practical engineering joints. The current project will
investigate the effect of changing different fracture modes on fracture energies
and crack propagation under slow, cyclic fatigue, and impact loading situations;
how applied stress state interacts with chemical surface treatments in
determining failure; and the development of fracture envelopes useful in
engineering design. New numerical techniques will be developed and used to model
the material response under the applied loading conditions and also guide
specific experiments to gain new insights into the fracture of bonded beams
under different loading conditions.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; Adhesive bonding has
become an essential means for joining components in a wide range of
applications, including automotive, aerospace, civil infrastructure, biomedical,
and microelectronic fields. &lt;br/&gt;The improved understanding of bond
failure obtained through this research offers opportunities for safer and more
durable bonded structures. Two doctoral and several undergraduate students will
participate in the proposed experimental and numerical modeling effort,
obtaining significant experience in testing, mathematical modeling, numerical
analysis, and effects of loading rates and adherend surface pretreatment on
bonded joint performance. The research will train scientists who will design
safer, lighter, stronger and more economical bonded joints. Results will be
disseminated through premier technical journals, at conferences, and a web site.
&lt;br/&gt;