* 0826042
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Spatial and Temporal Habitat Use of Elephants in the Serengeti Ecosystem: A Predictive Modeling Approach Using Multiscale Satellite Imagery
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Anna Estes, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 08/31/2010
* USD 12,000.00

The conservation of Africa's remaining elephant populations and their habitats
has emerged as one of the continent's greatest wildlife management challenges.
In savanna ecosystems in sub-Saharan African, elephants are one of the major
sources of disturbance influencing vegetation dynamics and structure. In rural
areas adjacent to protected areas, elephants are also major contributors to
human-wildlife conflict. Both human-elephant conflict (HEC) and the impacts of
elephants on woody vegetation have the potential to intensify as elephant
populations recover after the intense poaching of the 1970s and 1980s, while
former elephant range becomes increasingly restricted by human settlement. The
25,000 square kilometer Serengeti ecosystem in northern Tanzania and southern
Kenya is one of the best studied savanna ecosystems in the world. However, very
few studies on elephant population dynamics or ecology have been conducted in
recent decades, which represents a significant knowledge gap given the
importance of elephants in shaping this ecosystem, and the changes in climate,
vegetation cover and human and elephant populations that have occurred during
the past decades. This project will employ a combination of field measurements
of vegetation structure, optical and radar remote sensing, and satellite
tracking of elephants in the Serengeti ecosystem of Tanzania to map savanna
structure at multiple spatial scales. These mapped variables will be used to
predict elephant presence/absence (obtained from satellite telemetry) within
quantitative distribution models, which will improve understanding of the
following aspects of elephant ecology: 1) the habitat variables that influence
elephant habitat selection within a savanna ecosystem, and the scales at which
these operate; 2) the factors that predict elephant use of human-dominated
landscapes, and thus HEC. Time-series radar and optical satellite images will be
used to identify patterns of woody vegetation change in the study area. The
observed trends in vegetation change will be evaluated against models of
elephant habitat use, remote sensing derived fire histories, and climate data to
better understand the role of elephants as agents of change in the Serengeti
ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will use techniques novel to
investigations of elephant habitat selection and their impacts on savanna
woodland structure, making significant contributions both to the fields of
savanna ecology and wildlife-habitat interactions. It will be one of the first
studies to use remote sensing technology at landscape scales to address the role
of elephants as ecosystem modifiers. The project will further contribute to a
growing field of study focused around HEC, by providing a landscape-scale
assessment of the factors contributing to elephant use of human-dominated areas,
and will provide information essential to appropriate ecosystem management in
one of Africa's best-known wildlife areas. Results of the study will enable
protected area managers to incorporate information both on the impacts of a
growing elephant population on savanna habitats, and on ecological correlates of
HEC, into management and mitigation plans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
co-funded by NSF's Office of International Science and Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;