* 0826672
* A Comparative Syntactic Description of Five Arabic Varieties
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,02/28/2014
* Elabbas Benmamoun, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Maling
* 02/28/2014
* USD 312,897.00

In each Arabic-speaking country there are at least two linguistic varieties that
occupy the linguistic space, Standard or Formal Arabic, and Colloquial or Spoken
Arabic. Standard Arabic, which is acquired mainly through formal education, is
relatively uniform across the Arabic-speaking world, while Colloquial Arabic,
which is natively acquired in the home and within the community, displays a
great deal of dialectal variation at the lexical, phonological, morphological,
syntactic, and discourse levels. For example, Standard Arabic has specific
negatives for present, past, and future tense sentences, but most colloquial
dialects have only one negative whose syntax and morphology may differ from one
dialect to another. The goal of this project is to provide a detailed parallel
syntactic description of five Arabic varieties, representing the main
geographical regions of the Arabic world from the Atlantic ocean in Africa to
the Gulf in Asia: Standard Arabic, Egyptian Arabic, Jordanian Arabic, Kuwaiti
Arabic, and Moroccan Arabic. Data will be collected on a large number of
syntactic constructions and patterns, which will be described and analyzed for
each of the five varieties of Arabic. In addition to data from electronic
corpora, the PI and his assistants will collect, describe, and analyze
additional data from print and audiovisual media and from native Arabic
speakers. The project will provide graduate and undergraduate students with
training in research in comparative syntax, Arabic language and linguistics, and
data collection and analysis.

The comparative syntactic description will provide an additional resource for
enhancing research on Arabic within various fields, particularly syntax,
computational linguistics, and first and second language acquisition. It will be
a resource to the Arabic language students and teachers that can be used to
better understand how the dialects relate to each other and to Standard Arabic.
The availability of such resource would help programs develop curricula that
better reflect the diglossic reality of the linguistic situation in the Arabic-
speaking world.