* 0826506
* US - Nigeria Student Research Collaborations:   A Hydro-Climatologic Study of Lake Chad
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2010
* Jejung Lee, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* DeAndra Beck
* 07/31/2010
* USD 49,718.00

Professor Jejung Lee of the University of Missouri, Kansas City will lead this
pilot project to establish a strong international research program for US
minority and female undergraduate students at Lake Chad in Nigeria. The specific
objectives of the project are as follows: a. Providing US minority and female
students with hands-on international research experiences in hydro-climatology
at the Lake Chad; b. Building an international collaborative network to educate
students to become geoscientists with global experience; c. Increasing the
number of minority students with research experience in earth sciences; d.
Establishing a research platform between institutions in the US and Nigeria, e.
Creating opportunities for graduate studies for minority undergraduate students
from Lincoln University, an HBCU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
project team consists of academic experts from various fields including
hydrogeology, soil physics, climatology, GIS, and satellite and remote sensing
from both countries. Students will work on specific research projects during
their time in the field in Nigeria. At a post-field investigation workshop, they
will learn to interpret and integrate their across fields and so be able to
answer important scientific questions about Lake Chad. The post-field
investigation workshop will also engage local scientists who are studying Lake
Chad, allowing students to expand their knowledge and understanding via face-to-
face discussions with other scientists. This program will expose students to
international activities in geosciences and allow them to build a strong
academic network for their continuing studies or careers in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The recruitment of underrepresented
students will be firmly established through two links: one with Lincoln
University and another with GEOPATHS, an NSF funded project that Co-PI Adegoke
is leading to attract minority and female students from high schools to the
geosciences field in college.