* 0826173
* Stochastic Resonance in Coupled, Nonlinear Oscillators
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2008,12/31/2013
* Balakumar Balachandran, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 12/31/2013
* USD 311,943.00

Over the last two decades, stochastic resonance, a nonlinear phenomenon in which
the addition of noise to a stochastic system leads to a coherently amplified
response, has been explored to explain the dynamics of systems ranging from the
Earth?s climate to sensory neurons in a monkey?s ear. Although considerable work
has been carried out in the context of physical and biological systems, the use
of noise for the benefit of nonlinear mechanical and structural systems, in
particular, their transduction properties, has not been widely explored. This is
to be addressed here by developing a fundamental understanding of the phenomenon
of stochastic resonance in coupled, nonlinear mechanical and structural systems,
and use this understanding to develop novel mechanical and structural design
methodologies that incorporate the advantages of stochastic resonance for
enhancement of the mechanical transduction capabilities and signal detection
capabilities of these systems. It is expected that this understanding will help
use noise in a constructive manner in the design of nonlinear systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a fundamental standpoint, as stochastic resonance is
relevant to physical systems (periodic recurrences of ice ages, ring lasers,
Schmitt triggers, optical devices, magnetic systems), chemical systems, and
biological systems (sensory neurons), the findings of this study are expected to
be important for a wide range of nonlinear systems including many outside
mechanical and structural systems. For example, certain aspects of the study
will carry implications for frontier research areas such as quantum metrology
and quantum computation. From an application standpoint, the extension of the
advantages of stochastic resonance in resonator arrays to the micro-scale and
nano-scale can produce commercial benefits in the areas of sensing technologies
and nanodevices. Finally, the application of stochastic resonance in nano-scale
science to specific problems in a systematic manner is expected to be important
for the education of future generations of students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;