* 0826178
* Mobility Strategies in Middle Class Families
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Irene Browne, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2011
* USD 64,305.00

SES-0826178&lt;br/&gt;Irene Browne&lt;br/&gt;Belisa Gonzalez&lt;br/&gt;Emory
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This pilot project studies the role of
discrimination in the mobility strategies of middle class immigrant Mexican and
Dominican families in the Atlanta metropolitan region. Through in-depth
interviews, the PIs address the following research questions: 1) Does the
experience of discrimination influence decisions about where to live, what
schools children attend, and which organizations to join (mobility strategies)
among middle class parents of Dominican and Mexican descent?, and 2) Does the
practice of discrimination towards other groups influence mobility strategies
among middle class Dominican and Mexican descent parents? This comparative
project moves beyond the Black/White paradigm of paths to upward mobility. It
brings new theoretical and empirical knowledge that will help us to better
understand how race and ethnic group relations shape the intergenerational
transmission of class advantage among these distinctly different Latino groups.
By focusing on Atlanta, the study will provide insight into race, ethnic and
class dynamics within one of the new immigrant destinations, where historically
black/white race relations are encountered, challenged and potentially
transformed. The PIs will interview a small sample of Mexican families and
Dominican from four neighborhoods. The pilot study will enable the PIs tp
ascertain the feasibility of locating middle class Mexican and Dominican
families across a range of neighborhoods in the Atlanta metropolitan area.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: Study results can inform policy to combat
the continued racial and ethnic inequality in housing and schooling. By
identifying the mechanisms through which discrimination influences pivotal
decisions that affect the fate of middle class Mexican and Dominican children in
Atlanta, the research will identify potential barriers to mobility and discover
opportunities for cooperation and coalition-building among historically
disenfranchised groups.