* 0826477
* Development and Deployment of a Versatile In Situ Underwater Miniature PIV System (UWMPIV)
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2013
* Qian Liao, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 12/31/2013
* USD 372,358.00

Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV) is an ideal technique to characterize turbulent
flow structures at smaller scales, such as the dissipation rate of turbulent
kinetic energy (TKE), rate of strain, and vorticities. It is, however, difficult
to be adapted to field studies due to the requirement of high power lasers, high
performance CCD cameras and full-fledged image acquisition computer systems,
which are not suitable for submersible configurations. The PI's propose an
alternative solution by using a class IIIb Diode Pumped Solid State (DPSS) laser
which is powered by batteries. A light sheet is created by steering the
continuous-wave laser beam through a rotating mirror, thus ensuring adequate
light energy for illuminating small particles (~10 mm to ~100 mm) in natural
waters while at the same time keep the exposure time of particle short to avoid
blurred images. A preliminary system has been built with an ultra-mobile
computer and a USB-based signal generator. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI?s
propose to improve the prototype UWMPIV system, so it can measure flows with
higher speed and turbulence level and can adapt its orientation with shifting
mean flow direction to avoid measurement error induced by out-of-plane motions.
The improved system will be compact, versatile and allow for long-term
observations (several days). The UWMPIV will be set up as a free-floating system
that measures the vertical profiles of small-scale turbulence structures,
including the dissipation rate, enstrophy and surface divergence immediately
below the air-water interface. The purpose is to provide understanding of free
surface turbulence and its effects on gas transfer through the air-water
interface. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs
do a very good job of outlining how this compact in-situ PIV system will be used
in education and public outreach. As well as being used for labs and case
studies in various civil engineering courses, the proposal has money for two
graduate students. The collaboration with Discovery World at Pier Wisconsin
sounds like an excellent opportunity to reach the public. PIV could provide a
very different perspective of ocean flows, as it resolves 2D fields with
exceptional detail. This is very seldom achieved with typical ocean
observations, which are generally sparse.