* 0826207
* Drexel &amp; The University of Orleans--IRES in Plasma Medicine
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Kevin Scoles, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 08/31/2012
* USD 140,000.00

Fridman 0826207&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Engineering, particularly through its
convergence with life sciences, creates many exciting opportunities for career
and personal development. Despite such opportunities, many undergraduates have
not been well informed and still hesitate to seek or explore careers in
engineering. The challenge to the academic community is clear: new learning
methods must be implemented and the excitement associated with research and
discovery has to be conveyed to a broad cross-section of undergraduate students.
The objective of this International Research Experiences for Students proposal
is to address this challenge by engaging a cadre of undergraduate students in
the emerging area of plasma medicine. This award is supported jointly by the
Office of International Science and Engineering and the Division of Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plasma medicine is a quickly developing area of
medical technology which brings recent developments in atmospheric pressure room
temperature plasma physics and engineering to bear on important medical problems
such as wound healing, infection control, and skin cancer. Drexel University and
its partner institution, the University of Orleans in France, have been at the
forefront of this area by developing specialized plasma discharges and
investigating mechanisms of interaction between plasma and living tissues.
Participating undergraduates will engage in laboratory discovery and
experiential learning through a split research assignment at Drexel University
and the Groupe de Recherches sur l'Energétique des Milieux Ionisés (GREMI) based
at the University of Orleans. Students will take part in one of three projects:
physical and chemical kinetic mechanisms in plasma medicine; surgical plasma
treatment technology; and non-thermal plasma in liquids and tissues. Over a
three-year period, the proposal will fund four U.S. undergraduate students per
year to spend six weeks in France collaborating with researchers from GREMI. The
research experience will be integrated into Drexel's co-op program.