* 0826012
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Multi-Scale Influences of Climate on Upper Treeline Dynamics Along a Latitudinal Gradient in the Rocky Mountains, USA
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2008,12/31/2009
* Kurt Kipfmueller, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ezekiel Kalipeni
* 12/31/2009
* USD 11,988.00

Broad-scale increases in temperature are expected to continue throughout the
Rocky Mountains in the future. Paleoecological and contemporary research suggest
that the elevational extent of upper treeline is sensitive to temperature
fluctuations, yet the corresponding influence of precipitation acting in
conjunction with warmer temperatures remains less clear. This uncertainty is
highlighted in studies from Canada and Sweden where upper treeline advance has
been confined to south-facing slopes, suggesting a non-linear relationship with
climate. Our current knowledge of upper treeline dynamics is largely based on
local, small-scale studies that lack an understanding of regional, large-scale
patterns and processes. The goal of this doctoral dissertation research is to
determine the influence of climate on the spatiotemporal dynamics of upper
treeline in relationship to multiple spatial scales along a latitudinal gradient
in the Rocky Mountains. This study will utilize a precipitation dipole that
exists at 40 degrees north latitude in the western United States to demonstrate
the relative influences of temperature and precipitation on upper treeline
dynamics on contrasting north- and south-facing slopes. Dendrochronological
techniques will enable the reconstruction of tree establishment and colonization
dates at upper treeline. Climatic controls on tree establishment will be
investigated using PRISM and SNOTEL climate data along with statistical
techniques, including correlation, multiple regression, and Superposed Epoch
Analysis. If tree establishment is broadly synchronous among sites, that may
suggest the overriding importance of temperature in regulating upper treeline
ecotonal dynamics. Conversely, if pulses of regeneration differ between mountain
ranges, then the spatial and temporal alignment of temperature and precipitation
regimes would appear to be most important.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of
this research fill both a theoretical gap in our understanding of the influence
of climate change on upper treeline and a physical gap in the network of data on
upper treeline sites in the Rocky Mountains at local and regional scales.
Identifying and understanding the causes of regional variability in climate-
dependent ecological processes, such as the elevational advance of treeline,
constitute vital questions that should be incorporated into future climate
change scenarios. Mountain regions are particularly sensitive to the relatively
rapid rates of anthropogenic climate change, with potentially severe impacts on
ecological, hydrological, and social systems. Revealing the impacts of climate
change on upper treeline forests in the Rocky Mountains will help provide the
necessary framework for advancements in knowledge concerning vegetation change
due to global warming. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award,
this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish
a strong independent research career.