* 0826897
* Social Coordination Dynamics: Intertwining Self With Others
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2008,03/31/2013
* J. A. Scott Kelso, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Tran
* 03/31/2013
* USD 748,776.00

On an ordinary day, people perform actions that affect other people's behavior
resulting in outcomes that affect both. Such social interactions are dynamic,
far ranging, and usually require an exchange of information between the parties
involved. A simple example is two persons modifying their approach to an
elevator to accommodate each other's passage through the narrow space. More
complex situations involve a teacher providing guidance to a pupil based on the
pupil's own actions or training foreign military personnel to accomplish some
function that depends on the latter's previous experiences. How are such social
interactions to be quantified and understood? What goes on in a person's brain
when they interact with another and what principles and mechanisms govern the
coordination between brains? The investigators of this project constitute an
interdisciplinary team whose expertise spans physics, cognitive science and
neuroscience. They use the concepts, methods and tools of coordination dynamics,
the science of coordination, to investigate both the behavioral and neural
underpinnings of social behavioral interactions. The basic experimental paradigm
involves coordination of movements between two people or between an individual
and a computer avatar endowed with human-like capabilities. Pairs of people
perform simple actions in front of each other and the investigators monitor key
behavioral and neural variables that reveal how strongly each affects the other.
By testing specific predictions of a mathematical model of coupled dynamical
systems, the investigators aim to understand how social coordination evolves in
time and to determine the respective strength of one person's influence on
another. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern technology is always seeking to enhance
human experience and productivity. The notion of 'others' has been expanded to
include not only real human beings but also cyber-individuals, as evident in the
increasing roles played by robotics and virtual environments in everyday human
transactions. In crucial experiments, a human subject interacts with a virtual
partner, an avatar driven by the investigators' mathematical model of coupled
dynamical systems, thereby allowing the investigators to manipulate parameters
(the 'personality' or 'attitude' of the virtual partner) that are not normally
accessible in studies of live interactions. Thus the present project may not
only uncover rules of ordinary social coordination but also offer a principled
approach to human-machine interaction. In addition, the project will disseminate
knowledge about complex systems and dynamical approaches to human social
behavior. The investigators will train undergraduate and graduate students in
advanced methods and analysis techniques that cut across the behavioral and
social sciences, the physics and mathematics of coupled dynamical systems, and
neuroscience and brain imaging. The development of new measuring instruments
that may apply to any arbitrary social interaction is a target. Such training
aims to bring forth a new generation of interdisciplinary scientist who will be
equipped to integrate studies of brain, behavior and social function within a
much needed dynamical framework.