* 0826513
* Novel Computational Simulation Methodology for Complex Structural System Analysis
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Sashi Kunnath, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 09/30/2012
* USD 260,000.00

This project will establish a new structural engineering computation paradigm by
developing a novel meshfree simulation methodology for the analysis of complex
structural systems. Inelastic large deformations, and material separation and
complex failure modes are special features of structural response in
performance-based limit states, and existing finite element technology has
proven to be inadequate to address these features efficiently in structural
design simulations. Thus, there is a need to explore and develop new tools to
efficiently analyze and accurately predict the performance of structures in the
era of simulation-based design of the civil infrastructure for unconventional
loads with large deformation response. The adoption of maximum-entropy meshfree
methods in conjunction with stable nodal-integration schemes within a co-
rotational formulation is conceived to overcome the current limitations of
finite elements. Outcomes from the project include a new methodology to
facilitate the assessment of existing infrastructure to extreme loads and
procedures to enable simulation-based structural design.

The outcome of this research effort will spur new innovative methods to deal
with nonlinear analysis of complex structural systems subjected to extreme loads
such as earthquakes, blast and impact. External collaboration with researchers
at the National Institute of Standards and Technology will provide an excellent
opportunity to initiate graduate student exchange and hence enable the
development of a strong foundation in experimentation and simulations for
improved design of structural systems. The project also includes an educational
component that seeks to introduce undergraduates and K-12 students to exciting
and emerging methods in structural computation thereby encouraging them to
pursue careers in structural engineering and eventually contribute to the
national effort to preserve and protect the nation?s infrastructure.