* 0826983
* DRU: Modeling Nuclear Disaster Risk: The Effects of Perceived Risk and Radiation Exposure on Post-Chernobyl Psychosocial and Behavior Outcomes in Ukrainian Residents
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2013
* Thomas Borak, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 09/30/2013
* USD 640,000.00

DRU: Modeling Nuclear Disaster Risk: The Effects of Perceived Risk and Radiation
Exposure on Post-Chernobyl Psychosocial and Health Behavior Outcomes in
Ukrainian Residents&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RoseMarie Perez Foster, Principal
Investigator&lt;br/&gt;University of Colorado, Boulder, Institute of Behavioral
Science, Natural Hazards Center&lt;br/&gt;with participation of research
personnel from&lt;br/&gt;Colorado State University&lt;br/&gt;Academy of Labor
and Social Relations, Kiev, Ukraine&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project aims to develop models of
human nuclear disaster risk that will more scientifically inform the complex
psychosocial and health behavior consequences of radiological and other toxic
disasters. This will be accomplished through study of a representative sample
population exposed to the Chernobyl nuclear accident in Ukraine ? the largest
nuclear disaster caused by an industrial plant malfunction. Previous research on
nuclear catastrophes such as Hiroshima, Three Mile Island and Chernobyl, have
clearly pointed out that the psychological and behavior consequences of these
events reverberate in the long term, delving deeply into a community?s life for
years after they have been exposed to the nuclear accident itself. Anxiety-
ridden survivors lie in wait of dreaded illnesses; inhibit employment, social
and outdoor activities; restrict family births fearing congenital malformation;
overuse substances; and utilize medical services in far larger proportions than
nonexposed fellow countrymen/ women (WHO, 2006; Havenaar et al. 2003; Yamada
&amp; Izumi, 2002). For some survivors, these behavioral consequences are
further exaggerated by serious mental health disturbance and radiogenic cancers.
As yet, it remains unclear how much of the long lasting behavioral consequences
of radiation disasters are explained by the radiation dose itself; or by a
community?s ?perception? of the potential risk it has been exposed to. Our study
team will investigate this question.&lt;br/&gt;The study will conduct a
probability sampling of current residents in the Kiev and Zhitomir oblasts
(states) of Ukraine. The research team, consisting of a research psychologist,
radiation physicist, hazards sociologist and medical consultant, will: (1)
reconstruct levels of radiation dose from exposure to Chernobyl radionuclide
fallout for each study participant; (2) measure long-term psychosocial and
health behavior consequences of the nuclear disaster in the population and (3)
endeavor to understand the complex relationships among radiation dose exposure,
perceived radiation exposure, and risk projections for illness. Given its unique
combination of scientists, it is the first time that individual external
radiation dose from a nuclear incident will be so carefully reconstructed for a
study focused on human psychosocial behavioral effects. The findings will also
offer more refined multidisciplinary knowledge on the interaction between
physical toxic exposure and the perception of risk ? a bio-psycho-social
conundrum in academic research (Slovic, 2000). &lt;br/&gt;The current study is
viewed as having a direct impact on the prevention of adverse psychosocial
consequences associated with communities exposed to nuclear accidents. More
broadly, the project addresses ramifications of the increasing portent for
nuclear disaster events, given the proliferation of nuclear power plants and
waste sites; growing capacity of nations to mount nuclear weapons programs; and
the potential for political groups to perpetrate radiological terrorism. These
concerns for human safety and well-being are paramount at this time. We believe
that scientifically derived risk communication and education about these hazards
will be powerful tools in mitigating their psychosocial consequences in the
global community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;