* 0826461
* High Temperature and Sustained Load Effects on Structural Bonded Repairs in Civil Infrastructure
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Charles Bakis, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 07/31/2012
* USD 168,000.00

The proposed investigation uses experimental and analytical methods to evaluate
the effects of temperature and sustained loading on reinforced concrete
structures strengthened with externally bonded fiber reinforced polymers. It
includes the individual components of the strengthening system and the
concrete/epoxy interface, and uses this information to model the long-term
structural performance of strengthened systems. The robustness of the proposed
numerical analysis procedures stems from the innovative use of fracture and
damage mechanics approaches to characterize the individual materials and
interfacial properties of strengthened systems. Therefore, the analysis will be
capable of predicting the behavior of strengthened structures of any
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Upon successful completion of the project, the
research and engineering communities will have a better understanding of the
dual mechanisms of time dependent deformation and degradation of adhesion in the
strengthened system and how these mechanisms affect the remaining structural
strength and safety. The investigators have detailed plans for integrating their
activities and findings into the profession, in their university teaching, and
in outreach programs targeting underrepresented groups. Thus, the research will
contribute: (i) new experimental data on the effects of time and temperature on
strengthened system performance; (ii) a new modeling approach for overall
structural performance based on material and interfacial properties; and (iii)
knowledge dissemination and human resource development for the benefit of the
research community, practicing engineers, and students.&lt;br/&gt;