* 0826778
* HSD: Changing Societal Attitudes Towards Water Scarcity: Ethanol Production and Increasing Groundwater Depletion of the Ogallala Aquifer
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2013
* Mark Burkey, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Kelley Crews
* 02/28/2013
* USD 757,528.00

Limited oil stocks and growing gasoline prices have stimulated the production of
ethanol and other biofuels; in turn, this will lead to increased depletion of
available water resources, since irrigation of biofuel crops and the production
of ethanol both use large amounts of water. Thus, water availability will become
an even greater concern in the semi-arid region that encompasses the eight U.S.
states overlying the Ogallala aquifer. This region is of paramount importance
for understanding societal response to increasing water scarcity, as it has long
been an area where a farmer?s need for irrigation conflicts with other growing
needs for consumption. Competition over water between groups such as farmers,
rural communities, businesses, and urban municipalities is expected to become
even more heated. This project will employ the latest geospatial technology to
define an efficient and representative sample of the Ogallala aquifer region.
Agriculture and the ethanol industry are prominent in this area of the country,
and the study will use innovative survey methods to gauge attitudes toward
alternative municipal water conservation schemes. The results of the survey will
allow the investigators to develop a flexible model into which communities in
the Ogallala aquifer region can input demographic, geographic, and economic
information to calculate what policy mix of price rationing and regulatory
measures would be most effective in achieving a particular level of municipal
water conservation. It will also allow evaluation of the response of communities
more or less dependent on the ethanol industry to alternative policies for
watear conservation. The results will significantly enhance understanding of
which municipal water conservation strategies the most promise in addressing
water use challenges linked to the emerging ethanol
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The multidisciplinary team of researchers
includes expertise in geology, geography, geographic information science,
demography, natural resource economics, econometrics, and empirical modeling.
The project will make strong contributions to broadening participation by
underrepresented groups. The lead institution is an historically black
university with a student body that is nearly 90% African American, a
collaborating institution has nearly 25% Hispanic students, and many students
will be engaged in the research. The methodology and results of the study will
be incorporated into the classes taught by the PI and co-Pis, contributing to
the education of future agribusiness managers, environmental scientists, and
policymakers. Two of the four CoPIs are female, and a female is directing the
survey project. The investigators will collaborate extensively with community
and agricultural managers, and with scientists and academics in disciplines
ranging from engineering to law. The results of the project will be reported to
a broad audience, including stakeholders in the region, via presentations at
professional conferences of agricultural and environmental economists,
publications in peer-reviewed outlets, and the web pages of the investigators.
The results will contribute to solutions for allocation and conservation of an
often limiting resource, water. This award is made as part of the FY 2008 Human
and Social Dynamics (HSD) portfolio, following a competition that involved
participation from all NSF Directorates and Offices. HSD awards are administered
through specific programs that may change over the duration of the award.
Management of all HSD awards is coordinated on an NSF-wide basis.