* 0826512
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Information, Understanding and Choice in the Chicago Public Schools
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2009
* Thomas Cook, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2009
* USD 4,800.00

SES-086512&lt;br/&gt;Thomas Cook&lt;br/&gt;Lori
Delale-O?Connor&lt;br/&gt;Northwestern University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;School
choice is currently a topic of contention in both empirical and theoretical
literature. The assumption that families will make informed choices underscores
all school choice theory. However, information access and dispersion are
barriers to school choice in its myriad forms. Because choice places the onus
for information gathering and quality control on the parents and/or students,
how families choose is an important aspect of school choice that has
implications for the design and outcomes of individual choice systems, as well
as larger education reform. This dissertation project examines how families make
school choices, focusing in particular on the networks, knowledge, and
motivations that affect these decisions. The three main questions that animate
this research are: What factors influence parent/student decision making?, How
does information and information gathering differ across different subgroups?,
and What is the role of ?defaulting? within a choice system? The study is set in
the Chicago Public School system, where open enrollment policies allow parents
and students to choose the high school they will attend from a variety of
options, including remaining in their assigned neighborhood school. To examine
how choice occurs in this context, the study employs three methods: survey, in-
depth interview and ethnography. The survey consists of demographic information
and general questions about information sources, content, and implementation
used for making the high school decision. The in-depth interview asks parents to
expand on their thoughts and knowledge about the choice process. Finally,
ethnography situates school choice in its larger context.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. This project will contribute greater
understanding of both the mechanisms that drive school choice, as well as the
success and failure of educational policies surrounding choice. Such insight is
important both empirically and theoretically. Because school choice is
increasingly part of the educational landscape in the U.S., understanding how it
works and, in turn, how to improve it is key to remedying systemic ills. In
addition to policy impact, the study contributes to larger social science
literatures on choice, decision-making, socio-cultural boundaries and neo-
liberalism, all topics of interest in sociology and the social sciences more
broadly. Further, this project offers insight into the actual processes
underlying choice, rather than merely relying on outcomes as an indication of
process. In this way, it allows a nuanced look at the impact of choice policies,
including that of default settings. &lt;br/&gt;