* 0826975
* Microbial Ecology and Diversity: Genomics and Metagenomics in a Yellowstone Hotspring
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Isaac Klapper, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 08/31/2010
* USD 99,986.00

The PI believes that there are unexploited and transformative opportunities for
developing a field of "physical microbial ecology" where non-trivial problems of
mathematics, micro- and macro-scale physics, and microbial biology are combined.
The aim of the proposed work is to immerse the PI and a graduate student in the
methods and materials of a state of the art microbial ecology laboratory, the
Ward microbiology lab (Department of Land Resources and Environmental Sciences,
Montana State University). The proposed work is meant to familiarize the PI and
the designated graduate student in the methods and results of molecular-based
microbial ecology, including both its strengths and weaknesses. The long term
outcomes include addressing the following question: how do microbial ecology,
microbial diversity, and the physical processes inherent in microbial
communities interrelate? A second expected outcome will be developing a
capability for effectively communicating and collaborating with microbial
biologists, and developing a capability for training mathematics students to do
the same.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Ward Lab has investigated microbial mat
communities that exist in the effluent channels of alkaline siliceous hot spring
in Yellowstone National Park for 30 years as models of microbial community
composition, structure and function. The PI, together with the graduate student
will join the Ward lab for one year in order to engage in three projects:
introducing them to contemporary molecular methods of analyzing microbial
community composition and structure while simultaneously integrating results
into modeling efforts (thereby also introducing the cooperating biologists to
mathematical possibilities).(i) Community diversity and community topography
juxtaposition will be studied using sampling and construction of psaA clone
libraries, in conjunction with microsensor measurements, followed by ecotype
analysis. The purpose is to identify influence of fluid flow and attendant
effects (e.g., shear force, temperature gradients, variations in diffusive
boundary layers, etc.) on community diversity. (ii) Synechococcus temperature
adaptations will be measured, using a fluorescene activated cell sorter, and
compared with adaptations resulting from other physical quantities, particularly
light parameters, with the purpose developing sufficient data for comparison
with models of temperature-based speciation. (iii) A current study, by an
undergraduate student in the Ward lab, focused on population shift (quantified
through psaA data) due to environmental perturbation, e.g. changes in light
intensity or quality, will be analyzed and modeled.