* 0826325
* Analytical Approaches for Assessing the Revenue Aspects and Environmental Impacts of Demanufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Elif Akcali, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 07/31/2012
* USD 324,846.00

The goal of this research is to ensure the economical and environmental
efficiency of reverse supply chains for demanufacturing. Demanufacturing is
concerned with the reclamation of the residual economical and environmental
value of end-of-life products by disassembling them and recovering components
and materials for reuse. This research will focus on the development and
analysis of integrated supply and demand management strategies as well as
disassembly and recovery operations management policies for reverse supply
chains for demanufacturing. Explicit consideration will be given to factors that
influence the complexity of demanufacturing in practice. These factors pertain
to the characteristics of supply in the disposal market, bill-of-material
structure of the end-of-life product, disassembly and recovery cost structures,
and characteristics of demand in the reuse market. This research will
concentrate on the development of analytical models and domain-specific solution
methodologies to provide analytical and computational tools that allow for a
comparison of economical and environmental performance implications of
alternative integrated supply and demand management strategies and disassembly
and recovery operations management policies for demanufacturing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will be important for the analysis of
environmental legislative initiatives and the development of public policies for
the design and operation of economically sound and environmentally safe reverse
supply chains for demanufacturing. Moreover, as this research agenda has been
developed in collaboration with local industry partners in Florida, the research
will help with the identification of emerging best industry practice and foster
stronger interactions between the industry and academic partners. Graduate and
undergraduate engineering students will benefit from the planned educational
material development and industry outreach activities. In addition, the
development of environmentally oriented service projects for student
organizations will help raise the environmental awareness of future generations
of engineers.&lt;br/&gt;