* 0826341
* Mechanical and Piezoelectric Characterization of ZnO Nanowires for Energy Harvesting Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Paul Ro, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 06/30/2011
* USD 106,000.00

Piezoelectric nanowires have been recently demonstrated for converting
mechanical energy (e.g., ambient vibration or body movement) into electricity.
However, the fundamentals involved in the energy harvesting process are not yet
clearly understood due to the lack of well-characterized electromechanical
properties of these nanowires. The objective of this research is to investigate
the coupling between mechanical and electrical properties of ZnO nanowires. A
microelectromechanical platform will be developed to test the mechanical and
piezoelectric properties of ZnO nanowires at both quasi-static and dynamic
conditions. The experiments will be carried out in-situ in scanning electron
microscopy to quantitatively measure their mechanical properties and probe their
fracture mechanisms. The piezoelectric constants will be measured
simultaneously. Fundamental issues of piezoelectric nanowires, such as size
effects and strain-gradient effects (uniaxial loading versus bending) on
electromechanical coupling, will be addressed.

If successful, the proposed research will: (1) Provide a wealth of experimental
data on the mechanical and piezoelectric properties of ZnO nanowires at various
time scales and loading conditions of relevance to the vibration energy
harvesting. (2) Enable further understanding of the energy harvesting process at
the nanoscale and offer better design guidelines for nanoscale energy
harvesters. (3) Develop universal nano instrumentation for systematic
characterization of electromechanical-coupled properties of other 1D
nanostructures. (4) Train future nano researchers in nanoscale property
characterization and nanodevice design by the integration of the proposed
research into the curriculum. (5) Lead to the involvement of underrepresented
minorities in the nanoengineering research and education through local education
and outreach activities.

