* 0826703
* Collaborative Research: Dynamics and Stability of Metallic Foams: Network Modelling
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Stephen Davis, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 07/31/2012
* USD 364,318.00

The research objective of this award is to develop a process and theory for
making members of porous metals by the freezing of liquid/gas foams. A primary
problem with liquid foams is that adjacent bubbles coalesce very rapidly
(milliseconds) turning the foam into one large bubble. In this investigation a
continuous process that freezes the bubbles in place creating a uniform array of
pores within the solid will be designed and modeled. To accomplish this one must
study the fluid flow and heat transfer in liquid foams, determine the rates at
which different physical processes occur and devise a protocol for the control
of these. A mathematical representation of a multi-bubble foam will be
constructed to monitor how the foam coarsens and to determine the best way to
freeze the material. Asymptotic methods, numerical simulation and analysis will
be combined to suggest experiments to yield proof of concept of the
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful this work is expected to result in a
process to create porous metals that are as strong or stronger than the
comparable solid but with one-tenth the weight. Such materials would be useful
in the manufacture of airplane, rockets, ships, and automobiles. This research
will enable the creation of metals of precisely controlled porosity and will
impact the understanding of complex, nonlinear physical phenomena governed by
free boundary problems containing a large expanse of scales. The potential,
long-term impact of the research in society will include improvements in energy
efficiency, environmental cleanliness, safety, and conservation of material
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Materials
Processing &amp; Manufacturing (MPM) Program, of the Civil, Mechanical, and
Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI) Division, by the Fluid Dynamics Program, of the
Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems (CBET) Division,
and by funding provided from the Directorate for Engineering (ENG) to support
Inter Divisional Research. &lt;br/&gt;