* 0826749
* Workshop on Materials Science and Materials Engineering Education - Educating the Enablers of Tomorrow's Technologies, Arlington, VA, 9/17-19/08
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2008,08/31/2009
* Ian Robertson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Carmen I. Huber
* 08/31/2009
* USD 115,000.00

This award provides support for a two-day workshop that would bring about 60
participants together to discuss the issues, challenges and opportunities in
"Materials Education" and devise strategies for synergizing all stakeholders
involved for further progress. "Materials Education" here refers to
interdisciplinary education in the fields of materials science and materials
engineering including physics, chemistry, engineering, and increasingly bio-
related materials. This meeting will be held in early Fall at a venue near NSF.
The workshop discussions will be focused on 4 topics: (1) Educating the public
about the relevance of materials research through successful outreach; (2)
Materials education for K-12 students and teachers; (3) Revolutionalizing
undergraduate education toward flexible curriculum that includes
multidisciplinary training; (4) Materials education for graduate students to
prepare materials scientists and engineers with the skills to succeed in today's
global research and development environment. The participants are expected to be
those in a position to introduce change in the educational programs not only at
their institutions but on a national level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The meeting
format includes half-day sessions consisting of keynote speeches and break-out
group discussions followed by a common panel discussion on each topic. The
anticipated outcome is a roadmap to enhance materials science and materials
engineering education at all levels. A report which captures the conference
discussions and recommendations to guide future planning by the materials
community, professional societies, funding agencies, and others with strong
materials education initiatives will be published within a few months following
the conference. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop is jointly funded by the
Division of Materials Research(DMR), Physics (PHY), and the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) within the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
(MPS) directorate and by the Division of Research on Learning in Formal and
Informal Settings (DRL) and Undergraduate Education (DUE) in the Education and
Human Resources directorate.