* 0826441
* Integrative Situated Design: Linking Functions and Affordances Through Form
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Georges Fadel, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Collopy
* 07/31/2012
* USD 348,536.00

The objective of the proposed research is to develop a design methodology to
support the design of situated engineering artifacts. In this research,
situatedness refers to the context in which the product is used. This design
framework will capture both function and affordance in the design process.
Function-based design methods represent the conversion of energy, materials, and
information into an abstract solution-neutral product representation that
facilitates storage and retrieval of potential design components in a design
repository. Affordance-based design methods focus on modeling interactions
between users, the environment and the product. Currently, no design repository
exists to support affordance-based design. Combining these two approaches will
lead to a design methodology that overcomes limitations of each method,
resulting in a unique new approach to product design that incorporates both
function and affordance. A proof-of-concept repository will be developed to
support this combined design method. A testbed for demonstration and validation
will be created using design problems supplied by local industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results from this research will provide
a formalized approach that integrates aspects of mechanical engineering design
and industrial and product design. Traditionally, these disciplines are largely
decoupled during the development of technical systems. Graduate and
undergraduate mechanical engineering students will greatly benefit through
course work and research that integrates multiple design disciplines, including
industrial design, human factors analysis, art and architecture. Specifically,
mechanical engineering students will work closely with other disciplines to
understand and formalize these artifact interactions. Through this research,
students will have the opportunity to interact with local design-manufacturing
firms to explore design problems. Example applications include the design of
industrial packaging machines, automobile subsystems, and consumer power tools.
The results of this research will be disseminated through a variety of channels
including academic and technical conferences.