* 0826289
* Nuclear Nano-Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Kevin Peng Chen, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2012
* USD 360,007.00

In the last two decades, the nanotechnology revolution has led to a number of
new materials, novel processing techniques, and complex nano-systems with
extraordinary functionalities. This program will push nanotechnology into new
frontiers in nuclear engineering. It explores interdisciplinary research
opportunities that bridge nuclear engineering and nanotechnology.
&lt;br/&gt;Novel nano-materials and nano-structures will be used to develop new
means of harnessing nuclear energy and efficiently convert it into electric and
optical energy. Long-life, miniaturized nuclear batteries will be developed to
provide sustained ?ÝW-level power for support of mission-critical micro- and
nano-systems. A contamination-free fabrication technique will be developed to
monolithically integrate micro-scale radioactive isotopes with on-chip nano-
devices. New devices for power generation and sensing will be explored for
homeland security and biomedical applications. This program will also leverage
recent advances in novel nanostructures for the detection of radioactive
materials. &lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary research, fusing nanotechnology and
nuclear engineering, will spark new opportunities in their respective areas of
science and technology. Isotope micro-power sources will dramatically improve
the operational life of micro- and nano- systems used for unattended
applications, which span remote exploration, unmanned military operations and
implanted devices. The chip-scale development of micro-isotope sources will
enable detailed studies of radiation effects at the cellular level. This may
lead to improved cancer treatment using radiation therapy. The use of novel
nano-structures promises to speed the development of high-sensitivity radiation
detectors for homeland security and for environmental protection. The proposed
education efforts will offer students a refreshing perspective that bridges the
small nano-world with giant nuclear power plants. &lt;br/&gt;