* 0826958
* DHB:  Longitudinal Analysis and Modeling of Large-Scale Social Networks Based on Cell Phone Records
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* David Hachen, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 09/30/2012
* USD 711,770.00

This project develops novel computational approaches and analytical tools to
meet the challenges and opportunities for social network analysis brought by the
availability of large-scale longitudinal data generated by the usage patterns of
modern communication devices, such as cell-phones. This type of data has several
key advantages including the fact that it is statistically extensive (coming
from millions of users), purely observational (void of any bias induced by
obtrusive measurements), and longitudinal (spanning several years). The extent
and longitudinal character of such data brings challenges that can only be
tackled by an orchestrated multidisciplinary approach invoking social science,
physics methods developed for large-scale interacting particle systems,
mathematical statistics and data analysis, and computer science methods for data
mining, and agent-based modeling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will focus
in particular on generating 1) Novel computational and analytic methods for both
cross-sectional and longitudinal analysis of large-scale social network data,
based on advanced nonlinear time-series methods, community detection algorithms,
and probabilistic relational models; 2) Stochastic mathematical models for
network behavior coupled across several levels of analysis, including node,
dyad, triad and group levels, and 3) A data-driven stochastic individual-based
simulation (SIBS) framework with predictive capability for macro-level system
behavior, implementing the dynamic models from 2). The SIBS design will allow it
to be used as a hypothesis generation multilevel framework for social dynamics,
and as an application, it will be employed to uncover the modalities for
efficient, targeted spread of information in large-scale dynamic social
networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The suite of methods developed, and the SIBS
with its design transparency and parallelism provide data-driven, feature
extraction tools for addressing social science questions, as well as aiding
mechanism-design and decision-making in practical situations. In particular,
they are expected to directly impact applications both within the commercial
(product delivery, health-care services, etc.) and non-commercial (urban
planning, emergency alert systems, etc.) domains.