* 0826366
* Plasmonic Nanofocusing Scanning Probe for Controlled Nanomanufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Xiaojing (John) Zhang, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2011
* USD 348,001.00

The research objective of this award is to provide a scanning probe-based,
laser-assisted, cost-effective and controllable nanomanufacturing tool with
sub-5nm resolution. The approach will be to develop a novel near-field scanning
probe to concentrate optical energy by directly fabricating a nanometer-sized
photonic confinement structure on a patterned silicon probe tip, and to use the
probe for efficient laser light transmission and coupling at the nanoscale. The
key technologies involve the fabrication of multi-layer optical phase gratings
on the probe tip, and experimental characterization of probe actuation and light
concentration on the probe tip. The focused laser beam out of the probe tip
allows one to manipulate nanostructures, such as quantum dots, nanotubes and
nanowires, on a variety of substrates. The new scanning probe can be batch
fabricated in an array format, with the potential to be integrated in a
commercial near-field scanning optical microscope so that one can detect the
nanostructures during manufacturing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this
research will have a significant impact on the field of manufacturing integrated
bio-nanosystems. It will pave the way for future development of a variety of
hybrid nanoscale devices and systems critical to future electronics, healthcare,
pharmaceutical and defense applications. The educational objective of this
proposal is to train the next generation of bioengineers to configure nanoscale
structures to dissect basic scientific phenomena at the cellular and molecular
levels through developing undergraduate teaching modules, research training
program and creating an online learning center and workshops. &lt;br/&gt;