* 0827103
* Comparative Innovation Policy: Best Practice in National Technology Programs
* SBE,NCSE
* 03/01/2008,08/31/2008
* Charles Wessner, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Rausch
* 08/31/2008
* USD 35,000.00

Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The global economy is characterized by
increasing locational competition to attract the resources necessary to develop
leading-edge technologies as drivers of regional and national growth. One means
of facilitating such growth and improving national competitiveness is to improve
the operation of the national innovation system. This involves national
technology development and innovation programs designed to support research on
new technologies, enhance the commercial return on national research, and
facilitate the production of globally competitive products. The Board on
Science, Technology, and Economic Policy (STEP) is studying selected foreign
innovation programs and comparing them with major U.S. programs. The analysis
includes a review of the goals, concept, structure, operation, funding levels,
and evaluation of foreign programs similar to major U.S. programs, e.g.,
innovation awards, S&amp;T parks, and consortia.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Statement of Objectives
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of this review of Comparative Innovation Policy,
the STEP Board is convening a symposium on "Understanding Research Science &amp;
Technology Parks: Global Best Practice." The conference will bring together
leading figures from governments, universities, and science and technology
parks, both from the United States and around the world. The goal of the
conference is to &lt;br/&gt;increase policy makers' understanding of the role of
S&amp;T parks as sources of innovation and regional growth, while also reviewing
their contributions to government missions and to the commercialization of
university research. An important characteristic of S&amp;T parks is their
diversity. Accordingly, the conference will examine a broad range of S&amp;T
parks, including both university- and laboratory-based parks as well as the
large-scale industrial models often undertaken in Asia and Europe. While
recognizing the diversity of objectives and the differences in scope and scale
of activity, the conference will seek to identify common challenges faced by
S&amp;T parks both in the U.S. &lt;br/&gt;and abroad, including evaluation and
the need for appropriate metrics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Committee is assessing foreign programs using
a standard template, convening a series of meetings to gather data from
responsible officials and program managers, and encouraging a systematic
dissemination of information and analysis as a means of better understanding the
transition of university and laboratory research into commercial products with
the goal of improving the operation of U.S. programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to generating greater awareness of foreign policies and programs,
especially among Members of Congress and their staff, the study will produce an
overview report that includes findings and recommendations addressing the issues
outlined above at the conclusion of the overall study. These findings and
recommendations will then be widely disseminated.