* 0827460
* Biological Dynamics at Intermediate Time Scales
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Alan Hastings, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 08/31/2012
* USD 460,192.00

The goal of this project is to develop a general theory for the dynamics of
biological systems at intermediate time scales. At short time scales, the
current state or the current direction of a biological system provides a good
description of the future state. At very long time scales, systems settle into
predictable patterns that are relatively easy to study. Intermediate time scales
lie in between these two states and may include rapid, and harder to predict yet
important, changes in system behavior. As a first step toward understanding
intermediate time scales, specific case studies based on a) ecological models
with a small number of interacting species, b) neural models with a few neurons
or c) epidemic models will be studied numerically on a computer. These numerical
results will then be generalized using mathematical theory based on the study of
dynamical physical systems. The resulting generalizations will allow the
determination of when phenomena like turbulence (apparently irregular changes in
population size) or bursting (rapid, apparently random large changes in
population size separated by periods without change) will arise in systems with
interacting species distributed over space, and also in a variety of other
biological systems.

The theory developed will be general and of wide applicability across levels of
biological organization ranging from the cellular level to neuroscience to the
dynamics of individual populations to ecosystems. A particular set of important
applications will be fisheries management, the impact of global climate change
on ecosystem services, and the dynamics of diseases, all of which will require
prediction on scales appropriate for human dominated systems. In the course of
this work postdoctoral scholars and graduate students will receive
interdisciplinary training that will develop the human capital to meet future
challenges in understanding complex biological systems.