* 0827392
* United States Leadership in International Geographical Science
* SBE,BCS
* 12/15/2008,11/30/2012
* Ronald Abler, Association of American Geographers
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 11/30/2012
* USD 53,425.00

Whereas many national and a few regional organizations of geographers engage in
cross- and multi-national research, the International Geographical Union (IGU)
is the only body that attempts to coordinate, advance, and refine geographical
theory, methods, and practice on a global scale. The IGU's evolving complement
of commissions, task forces, and special committees provides geographical
scientists in every country of the world with opportunities to compare their
basic research ideas and assumptions, their techniques, and their research
results with those employed or realized by scholars from different ideological,
linguistic, social, and political realms, to the mutual benefit of all parties
who engage in such exchanges. In the realm of collaboration with other
specialists, the IGU offers the world's geographical scientists ready access to
the opportunities and projects sponsored by such global interdisciplinary
organizations as the International Council for Science (ICSU) and the
International Social Science Council (ISSC), among others. The purpose of this
project is to augment the infrastructure of international geographical science
by enabling the investigator to fulfill the responsibilities of President of the
IGU more effectively and more completely than would be feasible in the absence
of the financial assistance this award provides. Project support will permit the
investigator to work essentially full time on IGU operations, planning, and
projects with the goal of sharpening the organization's focus, streamlining its
administration, and putting most of its effort into addressing salient
multinational multidisciplinary problems. In common with many academic
organizations, the IGU has in the past exhibited a tendency to pursue too many
projects simultaneously, as opposed to focusing on a small number in depth. The
investigator believes that greater intellectual returns will accrue to
international geographical science if the IGU can be convinced to establish more
stringent priorities for the allocation of the limited funds and human energy
such a volunteer organization can muster. He intends to lead the IGU in that
direction by insisting, in his capacity as IGU President, that all IGU programs
and projects be assessed and selected on the basis of 1) comparative advantage
with respect to other specialties in the international science community, and 2)
with respect to the opportunity costs each adopted program or project
entails.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A streamlined, more robust International
Geographical Union will be a major infrastructural advance in the international
geographical sciences. As the dilemmas arising from human use and abuse of
natural earth systems become ever more pressing, the insights geographical
scientists are superbly qualified to produce regarding the operations of coupled
human-natural systems become increasingly trenchant, especially at the
continental and global scales that are the IGU's primary purview. Geographical
science in the United States will be enhanced and enriched by the investigator's
role in augmenting the familiarity of domestic scientists with the contrasting
viewpoints, experience, and case studies produced by overseas scientists. The
investigator's leadership of the organization will also provide increased
opportunities for United States scientists to serve as chairpersons or steering
committee members of IGU commissions and task forces, as the IGU president plays
a key role in the nomination of individuals for such positions. This project
will thus contribute substantially to maintaining and enlarging United States
leadership in the international geographical sciences and related specialties.