* 0827921
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:Â Professional Affiliation, Training, and Decision-making.
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2009
* Timothy Dowd, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2009
* USD 7,500.00

SES-0827921&lt;br/&gt;Timothy J. Dowd&lt;br/&gt;Rachel A. Askew &lt;br/&gt;Emory
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professionals are decision makers, routinely
diagnosing, evaluating, and treating their clients' problems. Those few studies
that examine a single client population treated by multiple professional groups
often find differences in decision making based on a provider's professional
affiliation but offer little explanation for these differences. According to
theoretical literature at the intersection of organizational and cultural
sociology, professional affiliation may influence clinical decision making by
shaping the institutional lenses through which clinicians view their clients.
This study focuses on clinical trainees from different mental health professions
in order to examine how professional socialization processes may shape decision
making, and asks: 1) To what degree do professional mental health trainees'
judgments about diagnosis and recommendations for treatment vary? 2) Does
professional affiliation help explain some of the variability in trainees'
clinical decisions? 3) What are the mechanisms through which university training
shapes clinical trainees' views of their work and decisions regarding their
clients? This mixed-methods case study will focus on advanced clinical trainees
enrolled in three training programs - the top professional training programs in
psychiatry, clinical psychology, and clinical social work in Georgia. In order
to assess the amount and source of variation in clinical decisions, trainees
will be asked to evaluate an identical written case study of a patient
manifesting symptoms of anxiety and depression. The study will measure students'
case conceptualizations and clinical decisions regarding the case study via a
self-administered survey. In order to explore the mechanisms through which
university experiences shape professionals' views of their work and decisions
regarding clients, the co-PI will conduct in-depth qualitative interviews with a
subset of students from each of the three professional schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: In the face of several potentially
rationalizing trends affecting the mental health arena (e.g., the spread of
managed behavioral care), this study gauges the degree to which mental health
trainees are actually interchangeable in their dealings with clients, a question
critical for consumers of mental health care and one that contributes to medical
and organizational sociology. By examining the mechanisms through which
university training affects professionals' everyday decision making in a
contested jurisdiction, this study seeks to shed light on how individuals come
to understand their surroundings and create blueprints for action, questions
central to the sociology of culture and cognition and the sociology of
professions. Finally, identifying factors that help shape mental health
professionals' clinical decisions will be important for narrowing the gaps that
exist in the quality of mental health services currently provided to Americans.