* 0827404
* GOALI - The Effects of Triboelectrification on Granular Flow, Mixing and Segregation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Troy Shinbrot, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
*  Ashok S. Sangani
* 08/31/2012
* USD 511,999.00

CBET-0827404&lt;br/&gt;Shinbrot&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pound for pound, common
wheat flour contains nearly twice the explosive power of TNT. To harness this
power requires only that flour particles be suspended and exposed to a spark.
Consequently, industries expend significant efforts to control static charging
in powders. Despite these precautions, static discharges regularly cause fatal
dust explosions. Less dramatically, electrostatic charging of particles is
widely applied industrially, for example in conventional printing5,
electrocoating6, and filtration, as well as in more modern applications such as
crystal self-assembly. Electrification is ubiquitous in natural granular systems
as well, where it influences Aeolian sand transport9 and geological
sedimentation patterning. Surprisingly, after centuries of study, some of the
most basic properties of electrification of solids defy explanation. As one
brief example, anyone who has received a shock after scuffing their shoes on a
nylon rug in wintertime can attest that insulators, which lack free charge
carriers, transfer charge more readily than conductors. This effect has been
extensively studied and proven to be independent of the ability of conductors to
carry charges to ground.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
&lt;br/&gt;Nowhere is the importance of granular electrification more pressing
than in pharmaceutical development. Probably the best known example of this is
in the aerosol delivery of pharmaceuticals, used both for pulmonary therapeutics
(as in asthma) and to deliver drugs that either will not survive in the
digestive tract (e.g. insulin) or are otherwise unsuitable for other dosage
forms (e.g. agents with low water solubility, or macromolecules that are too
large to diffuse transdermally). Aerosolization depends critically on control of
particle charging to prevent aggregation and to promote delivery to the deep
lung. Less widely known, it has recently been demonstrated that many of the flow
and mixing complications that plague granular processing are directly
attributable to electrostatic charging. Such complications include spontaneous
segregation of mechanically indistinguishable materials, and aggregation of
grains into complex clusters that can alternatively impede or augment a granular
flow depending on subtle experimental details. Until recently, no major research
program has dealt with these basic, yet practically important, problems:
industrially, they are addressed on a trouble-shooting basis where little is
learned for the long term, and fundamentally, their root causes are ignored. The
objective of this proposal is to advance the understanding of granular behaviors
in the presence of static charging. A major part of this work will be to produce
experimentally validated computational tools. This will improve existing
industrial granular processes that are notorious for poorly understood mixing
and flow difficulties, and will produce new insights into very basic, yet
deceptively complex, granular behaviors. The methods that will be used to
achieve this objective combine focused experiments in generally applicable
geometries side-by-side with the development of direct computational simulations
of flow, mixing, segregation, and aggregation of charged grains.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;One does not need to look hard
to find broad implications of this research. On the industrial side, the
implications are clearcut: in the pharmaceutical industry, beyond aerosol
applications, entire production plants and product lines are not infrequently
shut down due to failures to control granular flow and mixing, and better
understanding of granular electrostatics will improve the reliability of these
processes. Further afield, there is a longstanding, unresolved paradox in
geophysics that grains in sandstorms generate large charge gradients although
they have little beyond other sand grains to rub against. Despite both field and
laboratory investigations, the sources of these gradients remain elusive as they
depend on poorly understood dynamics between charged particles. Mechanisms have
also recently been proposed to link granular charging to Martian landforms.
Granular electrostatics also will impact new technologies, including
nanocomposites under development for applications such as high energy Lithium
batteries, and novel semiconductor devices. These applications involve the
preparation, processing and mixing of grains with highly charged crystal habits,
and will benefit from the improved understanding of both the basic and the
applied sciences of charged particle behaviors that this proposal will bring.
The research in this proposal will be integrated with educational and outreach
initiatives including graduate, undergraduate and high school research training
in particle technology. In addition, the Rutgers PI's will continue to target
the recruitment of women and minorities.