* 0827467
* Promoting Student Education at the 12th Annual Green Chemistry &amp; Engineering Conference
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2009
* Liz Gron, American Chemical Society (ACS)
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 05/31/2009
* USD 30,100.00

CBET-0827467&lt;br/&gt;Young&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The annual Green Chemistry and
Engineering Conference (www.GCandE.org) is organized each year by the American
Chemical Society Green Chemistry Institute (ACS GCI) with the active involvement
of the American Institute of Chemical Engineers, U.S. government agencies, and
academic and industry organizations. The purpose of the annual conference is to
create interdisciplinary bridges among scientists and engineers who use
chemistry as a tool to develop breakthrough advances for sustainability. Now in
its 12th year, the annual conference focuses on topics that are relevant to
fundamental research in all aspects of chemistry and chemical engineering. The
next conference is scheduled for 24-26 June 2008 and will be held in Washington,
DC, in connection with a ceremony recognizing the winners of the Presidential
Green Chemistry Challenge Awards. Through this award, ACS GCI will support
student education and participation in green chemistry and engineering
(GC&amp;E) through educational activities at the conference, providing students
with &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- travel scholarships to participate in the GC&amp;E
Conference; &lt;br/&gt;- a judged, student poster session at the GC&amp;E
Conference; and &lt;br/&gt;- instructors for a one-day, free, GC&amp;E Student
Workshop preceding the conference, on June 23, 2008.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. Green chemistry and engineering are
important for the future of our society. The science community must actively
recruit the best new minds to this science through education. The theme of the
12th annual GC&amp;E conference is 'Using Green Chemistry &amp; Engineering to
Advance Sustainable Solutions'. The program will include cutting-edge research
and cross-cutting themes in education, making the business case, and industrial
applications. Students participating in the GC&amp;E workshop and/or conference
will have a unique opportunity to engage in topics not commonly encountered in
traditional university courses and conferences. Educational workshop discussions
and technical conference talks will be given in diverse areas such as:
analytical methods and technologies, bio-based materials and processes,
catalysis, education and outreach, environmental decision making and metrics,
new materials, process design, renewable fuels, solvents and solvent systems,
and synthesis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. Through the design of
chemical reactions and processes that reduce or even eliminate negative impacts
on human health and the environment, green chemistry and green engineering
approaches seek to achieve the twin goals of economic prosperity and
environmental sustainability. Green chemistry and engineering are important
tools in preventing pollution at the source and providing solutions to global
sustainability challenges. This highly interdisciplinary workshop and meeting
will be an excellent opportunity for students to learn to present their
research, learn the latest developments in green chemistry and green chemical
engineering, and expose themselves to the broader economic, social and political
context in which these developments occur. Educating the innovators of tomorrow
is a crucial part in securing the well-being of the future.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Students will have an excellent opportunity to learn about the newest
research developments in their areas, dialog with other academic, industrial,
and governmental researchers, advance their participation in professional
societies, and expand their network of professional contacts. Interaction and
collaboration will generate new knowledge that will help to define our
sustainable future.