* 0827592
* Extension of Metabolic Control Analysis and Biochemical Systems Theory to Stochastic Systems
* BIO,EF
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Hong Qian, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 12/31/2012
* USD 659,868.00

The objective of this project is to develop a theory of perturbation analysis
for stochastic biochemical reaction systems and to use this theory to uncover
the stochastic properties of a variety of biological network motifs. Cellular
processes are controlled by networks of interacting proteins, genes and small
molecules. Traditionally such systems have been described using a
continuum/deterministic model, often based on differential equations. In these
models it is assumed that the concentrations of the various molecular species
can be described using continuous variables. In a number of cases this is quite
reasonable because the number of molecules of any particular species can be
large. However there are some cellular subsystems, such as gene networks, where
the number of molecules might be as low as a few. In such systems a continuous
model is inappropriate. Moreover, because the molecular numbers are so small,
the stochastic nature of chemical processes becomes a dominant feature. In this
project the deterministic theory will be reformulated in order to develop a
general analytical theory of noise propagation in biochemical networks. The
project will use the theory to understand the stochastic properties of different
network motifs and to make predictions which can be tested experimentally.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biological cells contain millions of molecules randomly
colliding and reacting. The net effect of all this activity is noise, called
stochastic noise. Electrical engineers have to deal with unwanted noise in
electronic circuits all the time and they go to great efforts to eliminate it.
Experimentally, noise in cells can be measured but what is lacking is an
understanding of how this noise behaves in such complicated systems. If noise
could be better understood, engineers would be in a better position to control
it. This project will develop a mathematical theory that will allow scientists
and engineers to understand and predict how noise spreads inside a cell. This
project impinges on many areas of science, including molecular biology, computer
science, control theory, signal processing and electrical circuit theory.
Undergraduate and graduate students will participate in this project and they
will be trained in multidisciplinary science. &lt;br/&gt;