* 0827141
* Graduate Student Travel to EM'08 Inaugural International Conference of the ASCE Mechanics Institute
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2009
* Bojan Guzina, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Glaucio H. Paulino
* 04/30/2009
* USD 9,600.00

Graduate Student Travel to EM?08 Inaugural International&lt;br/&gt;Conference of
the ASCE Mechanics Institute&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Roberto Ballarini, Bojan
Guzina and Steve Wojtkiewicz&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The proposed research involves bringing together
mechanicians from diverse fields to present and discuss the most recent advances
in mechanics, and to identify the role of mechanics in enabling future advances
in technology. The venue will be the Inaugural International Conference of the
American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) Mechanics Institute (EM08). This
conference will be distinctive in that the organizers have expanded the
participation of previously held ASCE mechanics (which focused for the most part
on solid and structural mechanics) to include fluid mechanicians (thus re-
uniting two fields that some argue have been divorced for many years),
physicists, mathematicians, medical researchers, and representatives from
industry. Participants from around the world have committed to presenting
research on modern topics such as multi-scale modeling of synthetic and advanced
materials, stochastic mechanics, biological structures, stream restoration,
large-scale geological processes, and cancer detection. The intellectual level
of the conference will set the bar for future mechanics meetings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The graduate student travel funds requested will enable
the participation of sixteen of the brightest graduate students from across the
United States. These students will present their research to world-class
academics and researchers, they will learn about the most recent advances in
mechanics, and they will be inspired to continue working in and contributing to
the field. The students? participation will also facilitate cross-pollination
between students from different fields. The EM08 forum will help cultivate an
environment that allows for the anticipation of, and adaptation to new
challenges that engineers face thereby facilitating professional growth to
ensure the challenges are met.&lt;br/&gt;