* 0827350
* AOC: Publicly Driven Investment, Neighborhood Change and Household Behavior
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2013
* Daniel Griffith, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,000,178.00

Broad changes in urban structure have caused increased concentrations of poverty
in the United States. Research over the last 25 years has demonstrated effects
of neighborhood context on individual and social outcomes, including educational
performance and attainment, risky behavior and health, child bearing, and family
structure and decision making. In response, extensive local public policy and
investment has been directed at low income neighborhoods, often called economic
or community "development," with the goal of changing neighborhoods and
improving individual well being. However, there has been little scientific
research on the impact of these investments and policies. Previous studies have
compared outcomes in different neighborhoods, or studied people who move from
one neighborhood to another. This study focuses on the same neighborhood before
and after significant publicly-driven investment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the
study, observations of neighborhood conditions, responses on household surveys,
results from economic experiments, reports from students, parents and teachers,
and administrative school district data are collected. This study exploits
geographic location to test how publicly-driven investment changes the physical
and social landscape of a neighborhood and the well-being of its residents. This
study takes advantage of a unique opportunity to study a poor neighborhood in
Dallas, Texas that will experience significant public investment within the next
five years, including a light rail project that will bring three stations. In
addition, transit oriented development zoning, philanthropic and nonprofit
activities, a HOPE VI award, and tax increment financing districts will
encourage private investors to develop the neighborhood. We expect that these
projects will drive significant change especially around the stations, while
change will be less dramatic as distance from the stations increases, creating
"treatment and control groups" for comparison and implementing a scientifically
valid study. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The neighborhood is primarily African-
American and Hispanic and the research involves African-American and Hispanic
student research assistants for data collection and research support.
Additionally, community-based workers participate in the collection of data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our documentation of the impacts of publicly-driven
investment in a poor urban neighborhood will yield valuable insights to city
planners and policy makers. The data is of interest to other social and
behavioral scientists, including researchers in public health, education, and
many other fields. The results illuminate the costs and benefits of public
investment for neighborhood change.