* 0827094
* DHB Collaborative Research: Dynamics of Initial Trust and Cooperation: The Role of Embodied Emotion Cues
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Cynthia Breazeal, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 08/31/2011
* USD 230,000.00

This project investigates a question fundamental to social and economic
interactions: Can individuals accurately assess the trustworthiness of
unfamiliar others and, if so, through what mechanisms? Decisions to trust
constitute a necessary element for the development of stable partnerships and
societies. Yet, in the face of the many benefits that come with delayed
exchanges, the decision to trust another is often a precarious one. The
individual who first extends effort or provides resources is necessarily in the
unenviable position of risking that the other will not reciprocate.
Consequently, adaptive functioning relies not only on trusting others, but also
on the ability to decide if one's partner is worthy of trust. Interestingly,
however, previous efforts designed to uncover the signals of trustworthiness
have been relatively unsuccessful. Building off initial research by members of
the project team which demonstrates that trustworthiness of new partners can be
discerned at greater than chance levels, the current project explores a novel
route by which individuals may assesses the intentions of potential partners.
Rather than looking for specific cues to trustworthiness in isolation, the
process of assessing trust will be reconceptualized as a dynamic and iterative
one. In short, the project will examine whether decisions to trust are not based
simply on reading the cues of others, but rather on a dynamic "dance" whereby
partners engage in nonconscious mimicry, and in so doing, are able to use
perceptions of their own bodily states to infer their partner's feelings and,
thereby, predict their motivations. To investigate this possibility, the
research team will conduct experiments examining the interplay of emitted
nonverbal signals and mimicry on decisions to trust within the context of
behavioral economic games. Moreover, given that many facets of these phenomena
often occur outside of human awareness and control, newly developed social
robots will be used as interaction partners for humans in several experiments.
These robots provide not only exacting control over relevant expressive
parameters that is not possible in humans, but also the opportunity to test
proposed models by allowing the robot to predict the trustworthiness of human
partners. Taken as a whole, this project not only holds potential to increase
understanding of the processes the underlie the initial emergence of trust-based
relationships, but also to refine the physical and computational architecture
that enable robots to infer motives and predict actions of humans and, thereby,
increase their utility and value as interaction partners.