* 0827040
* DHB: From Social Routines to Early Language: Tracking Neural, Cognitive, and Family Influences from Infancy into Preschool
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Sarah Creel, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 08/31/2012
* USD 750,000.00

Human infants must learn complex skills to interact effectively with parents and
other humans, but these social skills emerge at somewhat different ages in
different infants. How can we explain this variability? How do infants attend to
their social world, and thereby learn routines to interact effectively with
other people? This project follows a group of 45 healthy toddlers who have been
tested extensively from 3 to 18 months of age on a variety of changing cognitive
and emotional responses to social stimuli. The same infants have been observed
regularly at home in interactions with their parents. The current project asks
how these toddlers' emerging social skills reflect their individual differences
in cognition and emotion as infants, and on the different social input provided
by their parents. The project focuses on changes in language and imitation
skills from 18 to 24 months of age, and the brain dynamics that underlie these
skills. The toddlers who were tested and observed starting at 3 months of age
will be invited to participate again at 20 to 24 months of age. New sessions
will use a unique system at UC San Diego: a Mobile Brain Dynamics (MoBI)
facility for recording EEG (electroencephalographic) and body motion-tracking
data simultaneously from two people. The project will use this system to record
toddlers and parents as they engage in three types of interactions: 1) toddlers
following parent's pointing (or line-of-gaze), 2) toddlers reacting to words
spoken by parents, and 3) toddlers imitating parents' simple actions. These
interactions represent important social achievements for toddlers. Advanced EEG
analysis will be performed on electrical potentials measured on toddlers' and
parents' scalps. At the same time special cameras will record the positions of
their heads and arms. This design will therefore yield a continuous record of
changes in the toddlers' and parents' brain electrophysiology (reflecting their
thinking and emotional reactions) and body positions as they interact. In
addition, toddlers will complete a battery of behavioral and language tests.
This project will pioneer a new paradigm for studying the social development of
young children, and yield the most complex and complete data available on how
early social-attention behaviors relate to early language and imitation, and
brain processes underlying these relations. The results will have implications
for early childhood education, treatment of developmental disabilities, and
parenting practices.