* 0827087
* Enhancing Diversity in Science
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2009
* MaryAnn McCabe, Society for Research in Child Development
* Standard Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 07/31/2009
* USD 12,360.00

This grant provides support for a retreat of professional associations and
scientific societies focused on Enhancing Diversity in Science. Participants
include professional association and scientific societies representing a range
of scientific disciplines as well as representatives from federal agencies and
private foundations. The goal of the retreat is to spawn collaboration among
organizations where currently it has been lacking, but is essential to enhancing
the recruitment and retention of underrepresented minorities in science. The
retreat will forge new opportunities for these organizations to work together,
learn from each other and integrate approaches. In turn, it is envisioned that
this collaboration across organizations will enable key areas of progress, such
as the development and utilization of outcome measures to assess program
effectiveness. The retreat is modeled after other successful action-oriented
meetings (e.g., Wingspread/Johnson Foundation conferences) which include
catalyst panels of experts in addition to both small breakout and general group
discussions. The retreat agenda centers on identifying (1) obstacles to the
recruitment and retention of underrepresented minorities in science, and (2)
successful models and future initiatives. The ultimate aim of the meeting is to
arrive at new recommendations for action on the part of associations and
societies as well as identify possible collaborative, policy and funding
opportunities to support broadening participation in the sciences.