* 0827805
* COSEE - New Collaborations: A Partnership to Assemble "An Introduction to Our Dynamic Ocean" Course
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Laura Murray, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 08/31/2011
* USD 150,000.00

The goal of this proposed new collaboration between the Center for Ocean
Sciences Education Excellence (COSEE) Coastal Trends and Queen Anne's County
Public School (QACPS) district is to use the Ocean Literacy: Essential
Principles and Fundamental Concepts as the foundation for formalizing a
semester-long entry level secondary school ocean science course.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose a partnership between COSEE Coastal Trends,
housed at an ocean research institution (University of Maryland, Center of
Environmental Science, Horn Point Laboratory) and QACPS in rural coastal MD.
Curriculum team members will assemble an entry level Ocean Science course
entitled An Introduction to Our Dynamic Ocean from existing lessons designed to
utilize real-time and near real-time data and scientific discoveries. The course
will be pilot-tested by teachers in Queen Anne's County, Maryland and throughout
the COSEE Coastal Trends region (MD, DE, and VA). Once published, it will be
disseminated as a model for other school systems in Maryland and the COSEE
Network. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In making this an active course based on ocean
research and exploration, we will engage students in learning about the ocean
and its impact on Earth's processes. Such newly gained knowledge directly
answers the call for better public understanding of the ocean and its role in
our lives. Integrating ocean research and exploration into the course will
assure a connection to authentic science. Rigorous assessment and evaluation of
the course development process and the course curriculum will result in both a
successful partnership between a scientific and an education entity, and a model
ocean science course for entry level secondary science students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By targeting all students as they enter secondary school,
this course will reach out to students underrepresented in the sciences.
Increasing ocean science literacy among this population will support the
community-wide goal of increasing ocean science literacy in the general public.
The influence of this project will be expanded by dissemination of the
assembled, pilot-tested, refined and formalized course to other school districts
in the Mid-Atlantic region and throughout the COSEE network.