* 0827595
* Dynamics of Layering in Biological Systems
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Carlos Robles, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 08/31/2012
* USD 750,000.00

Many important biological systems are layered. Examples include microbial
biofilms, epithelial tissues, developing embryos, intertidal populations, and
temperate forests. A challenge for theoretical biology is to develop models for
these complex systems. This project proposes a three-pronged approach to meet
this challenge. First, complex three-dimensional computer models are used to
simulate the dynamics of a layered system. Second, mathematical probes are
derived to help understand and predict dynamics in different portions of the
system. Third, an 'equation-free' modeling technique is used that infers the
dynamics of macroscopic variables from the behavior of complex models. These
alternative approaches will be tested by applying them to the population
dynamics of marine mussel beds. To broaden these results into a general theory,
the investigators plan two symposia on the dynamics of layered biological
systems. Experts from diverse fields such as microbial biology, developmental
biology, cell biology and ecosystem science will scrutinize similarities and
differences among disparate layered, biological systems with the goal of
advancing theoretical biology by developing models for complex biological
systems in which layering evolves through the dynamics of self organization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New theory resulting from this project will aid in our
understanding of phenomena as diverse as microbial fouling, the healing of
wounds, and the propagation of forest fires. The project's investigators have
established a highly successful partnership between California State University
at Los Angeles and California Institute of Technology to increase the numbers of
minorities entering careers in engineering and science. As a continuation of
this partnership, and a broader impact of the current project, three graduate
students and a postdoctoral associate, likely from underrepresented groups, will
receive interdisciplinary training in applied mathematical biology. These
students will also participate in a new interdisciplinary environmental science
Masters Program designed and implemented by the Cal State - Caltech partnership.