* 0827297
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Politics of Inequality: Income Distribution and Corporate Restructuring in the Airline Industry, 1968-2005
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2009
* Donald Tomaskovic-Devey, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2009
* USD 7,500.00

PI: Donald Tomaskovic-Devey&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Co-PI: Dustin Avent-
Holt&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Politics of
Inequality: Income Distribution and Corporate Restructuring in the Airline
Industry, 1968-2005&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0827297&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project examines the restructuring of the airline industry to provide
insight into the rise of income inequality. The examination will focus on a case
of fundamental economic reorganization, the deregulation of the airline
industry. Through the 1978 Airline Deregulation Act the airline industry was
legislatively transformed from a highly regulated industry to one guided by open
and unregulated competition. The research is guided by three interrelated
questions. First, what were the causal mechanisms that led to the deregulation
of the airline industry? Second, how did firms and other actors in the industry
reconstruct the market institutions and social relations of the post-
deregulation airline industry? Finally, how did the post-deregulation
reorganization of the airline industry?s institutions and social relations
affect the trajectory of profit and income inequality between and within airline
firms? To answer these questions, the investigators will combine an historical
analysis of the airline industry with firm-level income distribution data from
1968 to 2005. The historical analysis focuses on the mobilization and political
arguments of central actors in and around the airline industry, coupled with a
statistical analysis of firm-level wage and profit data from 1968 to 2005. The
goal of the project is to explain how economic reorganization occurs and how it
influences income inequality trends. Empirically, the project will examine the
airline industry as an example of economic changes in the U.S. toward free-
market policies and organization. Theoretically, the project will focus on
recent changes in the organization of the economy to understand the growth in
income inequality. As economic policy is now guided by the assumption that
unregulated markets generate economic prosperity it is crucial to assess this
claim broadly. Economic policy is often only evaluated in terms of macro-
economic growth, yet the distribution of the benefits of growth is crucial to
understand the full impact of free-market economic policy. By focusing on a
prototypical case of the recent shift in economic policy towards unregulated
markets this research will be able to assess the impacts of such economic
reorganization on economic inequality, crucial to understanding individuals'
current economic situation and overall life chances.