* 0827051
* Deep Trench Single-cell Genomics
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* Douglas Bartlett, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2014
* USD 658,000.00

Microbial diversity in deep-sea environments is high, where microbial evolution
and distribution have been influenced by extreme factors such as high pressure,
low temperature, low carbon and no light. Scientists from the University of
California San Diego and University of Puerto Rico-Mayaguez will explore the
biodiversity of microorganisms of particularly extreme deep-sea environments -
deep-sea trenches - by focusing on one site, the Puerto Rico Trench, the deepest
part of the Atlantic Ocean. Deep trench prokaryotes (bacteria and archaea) are
expected to possess novel enzymes and cell properties which allow them to
survive and grow under these extreme conditions. One major goal of this project
is to study the genomes of these microorganisms to understand what capabilities
they have evolved to live in this harsh environment. Another goal is to evaluate
the extent and diversity of novel protein families in the genomes of these deep
trench microbes. &lt;br/&gt;Water samples collected from the trench and
maintained under very high pressure (80 MPa or 11,000 psi), will be examined
using single-cell genomic technology. A careful sorting procedure will be
developed to avoid contamination, chimeras (hybridization of two or more
different genomes) and other artifacts of sample handling. These researchers
will collect two hundred individual cells from the water sample by
micromanipulation and amplify their genomic DNA in nanoliter volume microfluidic
chambers. They will perform 16S rDNA (universal marker gene) sequencing on each
sample as an independent genetic identifier. They will then select genomic DNA
candidates with novel phylogenetic characteristics for further full genome
sequencing. The closed and assembled genome sequences will be annotated to
assign gene function. These researchers will compare these genome sequences with
sequences from various marine metagenomic datasets and will also compare the
extent and diversity of novel protein families in these genomes to the large
number of protein families identified in the Global Ocean Survey dataset. These
researchers expect to discover anticipated as well as unexpected properties of
deep sea microorganisms in this manner. Their outreach activities will include
multiple workshops with the deep sea microbiology community and the development
of an international conference on High Pressure Bioscience and Biotechnology.
The genome sequences will also become a rare community resource since microbial
samples from deep sea trenches are very difficult to obtain.