* 0827110
* MS PHD'S in Earth System Science Professional Development Program: A Track 2 Full-Scale Project
* GEO,GEO
* 02/15/2008,07/31/2013
* Ashanti Johnson, Institute for Broadening Participation
* Continuing Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 07/31/2013
* USD 1,334,850.00

Minorities Striving and Pursuing Higher Degrees of Success in Earth System
Science (MS PHD'S) Initiative's Professional Development Program Abstract The
Minorities Striving and Pursuing Higher Degrees of Success in Earth System
Science (MS PHD'S) Professional Development Program provides a supportive
environment within which four cohorts of 25 undergraduate and graduate
underrepresented minority students develop strategies and professional skills
necessary to pursue meaningful careers in Earth system science and engineering
fields. In collaboration with three NASA organizations, seven professional
societies, a national consortium of research institutions, one formal and two
informal education institutions; MS PHD'S participants engage in research
exposure, professional development, mentoring and community building activities
undertaken at MS PHD'S organizational partner meetings, NASA facilities, science
museums, and the National Academies, in Washington, D.C.

The MS PHD'S Professional Development Program facilitates three phases of
activities that provide information regarding future funding, education and
career opportunities; and on-going communication and mentoring support via
membership within a virtual community comprised of peers, researchers, and
educators. Phase I includes student participant and mentor orientations, initial
mentor-mentee partners' interactions, networking, professional development,
broad Earth system science and engineering exposure, a tour of NASA Ames
Research Center facilities tour and MS PHD'S community building activities that
occur in San Francisco, CA in conjunction with the American Geophysical Union
fall meeting. Phase II enables student participants to receive additional Earth
system science and engineering exposure, mentor-mentee interaction and
networking at one of seven MS PHD'S professional society partners' meetings.
During Phase III participants engage in brownbag discussions, government agency
visits, and dialogues with professional society and foundation representatives.
In addition to these Phase III activities, while in Washington, D.C. students
receive $1,000.00 scholarships, tour of NASA Ames Goddard Space Flight Center
facilities and participate in an Ecological Society of America-organized urban
watershed field trip of the surrounding area.

Research exposure, mentoring, technology and capacity building activities are
key aspects of the MS PHD'S Professional Development Program. Ongoing
assessments result in additional professional society presentations, journal
articles and the database for two doctoral dissertations.