* 0827200
* Role of Arabidopsis SFD1 in Systemic Acquired Resistance
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2007,08/31/2010
* Jyoti Shah, University of North Texas
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2010
* USD 293,192.00

Systemic acquired resistance is an inducible defense mechanism in plants that
confers enhanced resistance against a broad-spectrum of pathogens. The
activation of SAR requires the translocation of an unknown factor through the
phloem. The Arabidopsis thaliana SFD1 gene, which encodes a dihydroxyacetone
phosphate (DHAP) reductase, is required for SAR. DHAP reductases catalyze the
interconversion of DHAP and glycerol-3-phosphate, which provides the glycerol
backbone for glycerolipid biosynthesis. Lipid metabolism is altered in the sfd1
mutant, suggesting that a lipid(s) has an important role in SAR. The long-term
objectives of this proposal are to study the role of SFD1 in SAR, thereby
testing the above hypothesis. To achieve these objectives, a combination of
genetic, molecular and biochemical approaches will be pursued to characterize
the biochemical function of SFD1. In addition, the role of a SFD1-derived factor
in the phloem during the activation of SAR will be addressed with a novel
bioassay in combination with highly sensitive mass-spectrometric approaches. The
proposed research will contribute greatly to the understanding of long-distance
signaling in SAR. The project will provide an excellent opportunity to integrate
state-of-the-art research and education by bringing current knowledge of lipid
metabolism and the genetic, molecular and biochemical basis of plant stress
responses into the classroom. In addition to providing training to graduate
students and post doctoral fellows, this project will engage undergraduates in
research in the biological sciences and broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups. In particular, an undergraduate student from a non-
Ph.D.-granting institution will be recruited to work on the project each summer.
Results from this project will have potential benefits to society at large. The
lipid(s) identified by the proposed study could provide new targets for
enhancing disease resistance in plants, thus limiting the utilization of toxic
chemicals to protect plants, thereby improving the quality of our environment
and health.