* 0827283
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Landscaping Discontent: Parks and Protest Movements in Paris
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2009
* Andrew Newman, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 07/31/2009
* USD 14,480.00

Under the supervision of Dr.Ida Susser, Andrew Newman, a doctoral candidate in
cultural anthropology at the City University of New York, is pursuing
comparative research on the relation between urban land-use disputes and ethnic,
racial, and class politics. The project compares urban land use disputes in
Paris, France, with similar disputes in New York City. In New York City, where
research is complete, Newman found that a social movement to improve a section
of the city gained momentum and influence only when the neighborhood gentrified
and the movement became more white and middle-class. Thus increasing
democraticization of city planning was associated with marginalization of the
poor and powerless. This award is to support the comparative French phase of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a case study of a social movement
that arose in the multi-ethnic northern outskirts of Paris. The movement
demanded that the city build a park over an abandoned industrial site. The
movement was successful, but, as in New York City, the success was concurrent
with the gentrification of the surrounding area. Historically, the district has
been home to working class residents, many of them residents of Maghrebi and of
West African descent. The researcher will do participant observation and
ethnographic interviews with activists and residents to investigate social,
political, and economic transformation in the neighborhood. In addition, he will
interview local experts, including municipal authorities, architects, and those
who chose the park design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will compare how
urban redevelopment occurs and is contested in these two post-industrial,
globalized societies with differing urban and social policy, differing histories
of immigration and racial politics, but similar experience with recent
rebuilding and reinvestment in low-income urban areas. It will contribute to
research on the intertwined social, economic, and political transformations of
contemporary cities. Through collaborations with researchers in France, the
project also aims to build a bridge between French and American anthropology and
urban research. In addition to its academic contribution, the results of this
project are intended to be informative for urban planners, urban policymakers,
and community leaders in both France and the United States.