* 0827800
* GOALI - Microwave Reactor Applications for Biomass and Green Technologies
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2014
* Steven Suib, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 06/30/2014
* USD 509,191.00

Steven L. Suib and Anne M. Gaffney&lt;br/&gt;0827800&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
GOALI project between the University of Connecticut and Lummus Technologies (LT)
focuses on the preparation various nano-size zeolites (Y, â), Mesoporous TUD-1,
and mixtures, which are used in many catalytic processes. Novel in situ mixing
(I) ultrasonic nozzle (N) microwave (M) methods (IN, IM, INM) will be used.
These methods have advantages of use of non-traditional reactors, highly reduced
synthesis times, production of very small (nano-sized) zeolites with more
uniform crystal size than conventional methods, and being continuous processes
at atmospheric pressure. Synthesis, characterization, and catalytic studies
[alkylation with (Y), biomass conversion of glycerol to acrolein (â)] will be
done at UCONN and samples will be sent to LT for Alkylation of isobutane with
C3-C5 olefins to form high octane alkylate gasoline. These environmentally
sound, commercially viable catalytic applications will benefit from a reduced
zeolite size and improved heat and mass-transfer.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Fundamental knowledge of synthesis,
growth, nucleation, and characterization (Raman, NMR, FTIR, acidity, X-ray
powder diffraction, BET, pore size distributions, others) of synthetic
intermediates and nano-size zeolites is important in petroleum catalysis,
adsorption, and sensors. Suib (UCONN) and Gaffney (LT) have collaborated in the
past on oxidation catalysts, co-developed the INM method, and both have
considerable experience with zeolite and molecular sieves. This work advances
fundamental studies of growth of zeolites and Mesoporous materials using various
M methods to understand factors that control size and shapes of nano-materials
in general. Students will visit LT to help with catalytic experiments and LT
researchers will visit UCONN to help with synthesis experiments. Resources are
available at both facilities to carry out this work, and other experiments such
as small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) will be done in collaboration with Dr. P.
Thiyagajaran at Argonne National Laboratories. Specific aspects of the
hypotheses should lead to an improved understanding of INM, zeolite and mesopore
synthesis, nucleation, particle size and mass transfer effects,
characterization, catalytic activity, selectivity, and stability. LT's AlkyClean
reactors with a focus on longterm (14 d) runs will be used to study activity,
selectivity, breakthrough time, RON, and recyclability of catalysts provided by
UCONN researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Research skills and
education of academic and industrial collaborators will be integrated in this
program. Microwave engineering and science is presented for one week by the PI
and outreach personnel at UCONN in our Kids are Scientists Too (KAST) K-12
summer program, co-sponsored by CEM and Milestone Corporations. KAST and other
outreach programs target diverse and underrepresented groups in major CT cities
(Hartford, Bridgeport) and offer a special laboratory for students with
disabilities. Undergraduate (majors and REU) and graduate students at UCONN will
be involved in this research and actively participate in quarterly joint
meetings. Joint chem. eng./chemistry courses in catalysis and nano-science will
continue to be offered. Undergraduate lab experiments in zeolite synthesis and
in microwave syntheses of zeolites are part of the undergraduate curriculum and
are done each year. Recruiting of graduate students with diverse and
underrepresented backgrounds is an ongoing activity financially supplemented by
UCONN. LT is two hours away by car from UCONN. Results of this work will be
published, patented, and presented at national and international meetings. Added
value in this collaboration comes from the diverse experience of all of the
researchers and work will be done that is not possible by either sole
organization alone. The current solid acid catalyst (SAC) market growth rate is
50,000 barrels per stream day (BPSD) or 2.5% of current worldwide installed
capacity; a 3 million pound per year catalyst volume; and an SAC average market
value for the first 10 years of commercialization of 36 million/year. An
international symposium on microwaves in catalysis will be organized by the PIs
in 2009.