* 0827537
* Collaborative: Analysis of Mechanical Properties and Thermal Effects of Cornea Following Femtosecond Laser Intrastromal Refractive Surgery
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2010
* Ronald Waynant, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 07/31/2010
* USD 51,000.00

CBET-0827537&lt;br/&gt;Mitra&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Laser surgery to correct
refractive error was approved by the FDA in 1996 and has been performed millions
of times. When the procedure began it was known as photo-refractive keratectomy
(PRK) where the outer cornea epithelium is scraped off mechanically prior to
excimer laser ablation to correct the corneal shape. Mechanically removing the
epithelium resulted in painful eye surfaces for a day or so until the surface
healed. PRK was soon supplanted by laser assisted in-situ keratomilusis (LASIK)
in which a device known as a keratome was used to create a flap that is 150-200
micrometers below the surface of the cornea. This flap is folded out of the way
while the excimer laser ablates the corneal surface to form the correct surface
and is then put back in place. The thin flap has all of its epithelium intact,
conforms to the new surface and is less painful to the patient. However, the
flap brings new complications such as a free corneal flap, epithelial down-
growth, flap slippage or inadvertent intraocular perforation. Although LASIK has
been successful for a large number of people, newer techniques with fewer
complications are still desirable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
Femtosecond intrastromal ablation will drastically improve corneal refractive
surgery by eliminating the "flap" necessary in LASIK surgery.The goal of this
project is focused on fundamental thermal and mechanical analysis of corneal
ablation using femtosecond lasers which is critical for safety and efficacy
evaluation. What are the ablative products that are created inside the corneal
cavity? How about the temperature and pressure that builds up during ablation?
How does the ablation process affect the corneal tissue that remains? Can the
pressure or temperature weaken the cornea? Can it have long term effects that
could cause deterioration of the cornea or prevent further correction of the
refractive error? What is the mechanism of laser induced breakdown? The major
research tasks are (a) experimental test of optimal laser parameters, (b)
analysis of optical and mechanical properties of the lenticles, (c)
understanding the ablation characteristics and determination of heat affected
zone during corneal ablation, and (d) determination of the long term risks of
femtosecond intrastromal ablation of cornea. Experiments will be performed on
animal eyes obtained from slaughter houses and human (cadaver) eyes obtained
from eye banks and will be mounted into a fixture complete with pressurized
aqueous fluid. In vivo experiments using rabbit eyes are also
considered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: In addition to meeting the
scientific goals, this collaborative project will contribute significantly to
integrate the education and research activities of the investigators and enhance
extramural collaborations. The educational objective is to involve graduate
students in meaningful, hands-on scientific experimental work at an earlier
stage of their respective learning curve. The results of this research will be
documented, as available, on the World Wide Web to promote active collaborations
with other scientists and doctors. The results of this research will be
disseminated through conference presentations by students as well as publication
of journal articles. This research will thus result in production of high
quality dissertations for graduate students, as well as senior year design
projects for undergraduate students. The results obtained through this research
will help to prepare materials for developing a new course and to conduct
workshops for educating students, FDA employees, ophthalmologists, and
researchers interested in learning about concerns of femtosecond intrastromal
corneal ablation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potentially Transformative Nature of the
Work: Intrastromal optical surgery using femtosecond lasers potentially offers
the most accurate refractive correction that laser surgery has to offer. When
pulses are very short compared to the thermal diffusion time, there is little
heating of nearby tissue that needs to be preserved. Also, it takes less time to
ablate away tissue that needs to be removed. This reduces gas bubble formation
during ablation and lessens damage from heat diffusion. Thus it allows the
ablation to be done by focusing through the epithelium to carve a correction
lens (or lenticle) in the stromal material beneath the corneal surface. This
method eliminates the flap and may eliminate any incision that will require
potentially distorting sutures. However, before this femtosecond laser procedure
is approved, its safety should be established. So far the complications of
femtosecond intrastromal refractive surgery have not been explored very much and
will be addressed through this research.