* 0827817
* SGER for US-Japan Shinkai 6500 and Hyperdolphin ROV studies of the Mariana Arc
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2008,11/30/2009
* Robert Stern, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Brian Midson
* 11/30/2009
* USD 46,176.00

Stern 0827817 Abstract 2008&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;This project will utilize two scheduled JAMSTEC cruises, to
study the forearc SE of Guam and submarine volcanoes NW of Guam. The main
objective of the first cruise is to build upon previous studies of the
structure, composition, age, and mode of formation of the exposed Mariana
forearc crust and upper mantle. Earlier studies provided information about the
lower crust and upper mantle as well as samples of the arc and forearc crust.
These data indicate that the crust may be only 3 km thick beneath the outer
forearc, and therefore accessible for drilling complete crustal sections. On
this cruise, the PIs and students will sample remaining pieces of the arc crust
in the region, to gain a better understanding of the geometric and geologic
relationships between rock types that make up the Mariana forearc crust and
upper mantle.&lt;br/&gt;The cruise will involve 6 US scientists and 2 graduate
students who aim to identify candidate sites for future ALVIN dives and IODP
drilling in the southern IBM forearc. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective
of the second cruise is to examine three submarine volcanoes in the Southern
Mariana Arc, including NW-Rota-1, which is an active submarine eruption.
Additionally, the PIs will study and sample hydrothermal alteration and
stockwork sulfide mineralization exposed in the caldera wall of one of the three
volcanoes, and perform an exploratory dive to the largely unexamined Tracey
Seamount west of Guam. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This project represents a collaborative effort among nine US
universities and two federal agencies as well as an international collaboration
between scientists from the US and Japan. The project will also help support and
train three Geoscience graduate students, each from different academic
institutions. Results from the two cruises will be used to determine future
Ocean Drilling projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;