* 0827508
* Mathematical Frameworks for Biological Modular Networks
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Hernan Makse, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/2012
* USD 523,333.00

The objective of this project is to understand evolutionary principles by which
biological networks have acquired their modular architecture, robustness and
preservation of diverse functions to sustain life. While much is known about the
general rules of natural selection, an analysis of the large-scale properties of
networks is necessary to reveal other relevant patterns that emerge through
evolution. The difficulty in describing systems in biology, from protein-protein
interaction networks to metabolic pathways, on a theoretical level has hampered
the development of our understanding of biological networks. The goal of this
project is to tackle the theme of emergent phenomena in biological complex
networks with novel concepts from non-equilibrium systems and complexity, and to
systematically transform these theoretical concepts into practically applicable
models of functional modules. In order to achieve this goal, the PI will study
functional modules (clusters of proteins cooperating towards achieving a given
function) by clustering and renormalization methods. The intellectual merit of
this project rests on the unique quantitative methodology, based on the self-
similarity measure, developed to elucidate the evolutionary principles embodied
at the level of networks of constituent molecules. This novel mathematical
scheme will find wide applicability in the newly rising interdisciplinary fields
at the interfaces of biology, sociology, and computer sciences.

The broader impacts of this project include curriculum development, involvement
of underrepresented minority students, and international and interdisciplinary
collaborations. Promoting the involvement of minority undergraduate and graduate
students in research environments will be a priority of this program. The
project will also bring together international leading groups in Complexity and
Statistical Physics, Bioinformatics, and Biology.