* 0827490
* Pathways to Self-Efficacy and Retention of Women in Undergraduate Engineering
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2013
* David Whitman, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 09/30/2013
* USD 512,119.00

Intellectual Merit: Northeastern University, Rochester Institute of Technology,
Virginia Polytechnic Institute &amp; State University, and the University of
Wyoming will partner in a research study designed to investigate the hypothesis
that women's participation in formal undergraduate engineering programs that
provide work experiences while enrolled (e.g., cooperative education or
internships), leads to enhanced self-efficacy and an increased likelihood of
retention through graduation. Although all four schools offer cooperative
education or internship programs, Northeastern University and Rochester
Institute of Technology require them. Using a variety of survey research tools,
this project seeks to isolate those factors and experiences that contribute most
to the development of positive self-efficacy beliefs and, ultimately, to the
retention of women in undergraduate engineering programs. The role of self-
efficacy will be examined and compared to other factors in order to develop a
model that demonstrates how demographic variables, work experiences, contextual
supports, and three dimensions of self-efficacy (work, academic, and career)
interact to predict retention. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Self-efficacy theory has
been used to explain the career development of women, especially in male-
dominated careers such as engineering. Self-efficacy beliefs are considered the
primary cognitive determinants of behavior, including whether a behavior will be
initiated, how much effort will be expended, and how long behavior will be
sustained in the face of obstacles. This research will expand the existing
knowledge base about the role of work experiences and self-efficacy for women in
undergraduate engineering programs by addressing the following hypotheses:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Self-efficacy is the principal predictor of retention of
women in undergraduate engineering programs.&lt;br/&gt;- Cooperative education
and internships, as formal work experience features of undergraduate programs,
constitute a critical predictor of women?s retention directly and indirectly
through their impact on self-efficacy. &lt;br/&gt;- Contextual support variables
affect work, career, and academic self-efficacy as well as retention both
directly and indirectly through self-efficacy. &lt;br/&gt;- Demographic
variables have an independent effect on retention but also interact with
contextual variables and with self-efficacy to indirectly affect retention.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data will be collected using a survey instrument featuring
a work self-efficacy inventory. Each school will gather accurate retention
figures by tracking individual student files instead of institutional methods
that tend to use a "black box" approach of comparing the number of students
entering in with the number of students graduating. The data will be analyzed
using regression and path analyses to determine how the variables interact to
predict retention. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This study will have
wide-ranging implications for undergraduate engineering programs. The resulting
model will enable university administrators to discriminate among a variety of
program supports, such as work experience and advising programs, and their
relationship to retention. Many engineering colleges already offer cooperative
education and internship programs but have little data about the impact of these
programs or how to leverage them. This research provides a unique way to connect
gender and self-efficacy theory to undergraduate engineering programs while
addressing the critical student outcomes of efficacy (especially work self-
efficacy) and degree attainment.