* 0827436
* Collaborative Research: Genetic Bases for the Evolution of Human Diet
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2013
* Sarah Tishkoff, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2013
* USD 875,000.00

One of the most exciting challenges in contemporary science is uncovering the
genetic basis for the origin of uniquely human traits. Humans and other great
apes are genetically very similar, yet diverse aspects of human anatomy,
physiology, and behavior are markedly distinct. Recent technological
developments provide the ability to begin identifying the specific genes that
underlie these important trait differences. This project will focus on the
evolution of human diet. Dietary traits are particularly interesting because the
diet of early human ancestors and modern humans differ so markedly from those of
the other great apes and because diet affects so many aspects of human health
and disease. An interdisciplinary team of anthropologists and human geneticists
will integrate genetic, organismal, and ecological information to better
understand the genetic basis for the evolution of dietary traits in humans.

The primary intellectual goals of this project are to: (1) screen the human
genome for relevant genes using two approaches, measuring gene expression across
the entire genome from humans and chimpanzees in several tissues of dietary
significance using ultra high-throughput sequencing and testing for adaptation
in DNA sequences across the entire genome based on patterns of mutation; (2)
conduct integrative case studies of diet-related genes implicated in trait
changes during human origins through extensive DNA sequence comparisons among
great ape species, detailed characterization of gene expression, experimental
tests of functional differences, and associations between gene expression and
specific dietary traits; and (3) conduct integrative case studies of diet-
related genes among modern African human populations that are diverse with
respect to diet and local climate, through detailed analyses of genetic
variation, tests for natural selection, and genetic associations with specific
dietary traits.

The broader impacts of this research include: collaborations and resource
building with African scientists, recruitment and training of women and minority
trainees, education outreach to grade school students, building two novel and
informative databases that will be easily accessible through the web, and
developing software for comparative analysis of primate genome sequences and
gene expression.