* 0827806
* Preparation of Nanoparticles from Microemulsions Using Supercritical Antisolvent Precipitation
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Richard Zare, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
*  Ashok S. Sangani
* 09/30/2011
* USD 260,479.00

CBET-0827806&lt;br/&gt;Zare&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The need
exists to prepare biologically active nanoparticles with controlled shape, size
distribution, and even to control what surrounds them. Moreover, to be
practical, such a procedure must scale to large quantities (on the kilogram
level which precludes atom-byatom approaches) and be environmentally friendly
(green chemistry). We propose to accomplish this task using a new technique in
which a microemulsion of two immiscible liquids (such as oil and water) is
sprayed as tiny droplets into a third phase (supercritical carbon dioxide) that
dissolves one phase and not the other, causing the insoluble phase to be
precipitated. Actually, the situation may be yet more complex in which the
biologically active compound of interest is what is insoluble whereas the other
two phases dissolve in the supercritical CO2. By the addition of suitable
biocompatible polymers, we can encapsulate our nanoparticles for time-delayed
release or for targeting to specific cells for uptake. The use of supercritical
carbon dioxide as an antisolvent for the precipitation of desired biologically
active compounds from microemulsions is a subject requiring deep fundamental
study before its possible advantages can be realized. We have already obtained
preliminary data that encourages us to believe that this approach can be
developed into a new drug delivery methodology. The research proposal is for
work to be done in collaboration with Professor Krister Holmberg at Chalmers
University of Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden. His group has expertise in
formation of inorganic nanoparticles in microemulsions allowing 5-10 nm
particles to be formed at controlled reaction conditions. We bring to this
collaboration the expertise in the formation and control of nanoparticles in
supercritical fluids. An important new aspect will be the added encapsulation
process as well as physical evaluation of the particles. The work will range
from fundamental studies of how nanoparticles are formed to how they behave in
biological systems by studying their use in drug-controlled release experiments
and distribution in living animals. The efforts of these two groups complement
one another in a way that increases the likelihood for success of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The goal of the project is to
develop a new process which allows for nanoparticle formation and encapsulation
of a wide selection of target compounds. The process will yield particles in the
1-5 nm range with a narrow size distribution as well as allow for insitu
encapsulation with high yield. The process will require low temperatures (35-45
C) as well as minimal processing steps, making it compatible with bioactive
compounds and rapid enough for labeling studies. Other advantages of the
proposed process are reduction in toxic waste and direct scale up of the process
parameters to realize the potential of achieving high-volume manufacturing.
Clearly, the success of such a procedure will have profound impacts on other
fields that span pharmaceuticals, microelectronics, foodstuffs, paints, and
cosmetics. In addition, this research project will provide training of one
graduate student in a truly interdisciplinary area at the cross section of
chemistry, biology, and engineering