* 0827725
* Collaborative Research: DNA directed deterministic positioning of nanophotonic elements
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Shengli Zou, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
*  Ashok S. Sangani
* 07/31/2012
* USD 106,722.00

CBET-0827725&lt;br/&gt;Zou&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Systematical study of photonic
elements interactions with deterministic positioning at nanometer scale is very
important for: 1) fundamental understanding of the underlying distance dependent
interactions and energy transfer between various photonic elements; 2) providing
useful models to understand photonic antenna systems existing in nature; 3)
providing crucial information for constructing artificial biophotonic systems
for applications ranging from light harvesting to biosensing. Structural DNA
nanotechnology has developed to the stage that self-assembled fully addressable
DNA nanoarrays can be constructed with rational control. It is now possible to
position metallic particles and various biomolecules (proteins or peptides or
RNA/DNA sequences) or functional molecules (ligands or fluorophores) on DNA
nanoscaffolds in a programmable fashion. Our goal here is to utilize the
exquisite power of the deterministic addressability developed in the structural
DNA nanotechnology in connection with theoretical simulations to have a better
understanding of the interactions between nanophotonic elements linked on the
self-assembled DNA nanostructures by systematically varying the position,
distance and geometry of these elements. Specifically, we aim to use DNA
directed self-assembly to: (1) study distance dependent effects between metallic
nanoparticles and organic fluorophores; (2) construct a molecular antenna system
for efficient light harvesting; (3) construct and understand geometry dependent
energy transfers between fluorophores. A strong collaborative team has been
established that aligns theoretical modeling and experimental expertise together
to address these questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: This
proposal is both technology and problem driven. The use of selfassembling DNA
nanostructures provides unprecedented opportunities to have a true control over
spatial arrangements of particles and molecules in two and three dimensions. The
complexity achieved at molecular level mimics what exist in nature and far
exceeds the current capabilities of top-down lithographic approach. This
approach will open up the possibility of incorporating a remarkable degree of
complexity and functionality into an artificial supra-molecular system that is
entirely self-assembled. As a result, systematic experiments can be designed to
test theoretical hypothesis and modeling. New models will be developed by taking
into account of many experimental parameters resulting from the deterministic
positioning of photonic elements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Our
proposed research will answer many fundamental questions of how photonic
elements interact with each other in a controlled fashion with a high degree of
complexity. It will offer useful information for energy related applications,
such as energy transfer between nanoparticles and dye molecules, which will help
and guide the development of nanotechnology in the applications of light energy
harvesting. It also provides a novel platform to develope biosensing elements
for sensitive detection. With these broader societal implications, this research
naturally leads to opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students
training and outreach programs currently existing at both ASU and UCF. For
example, Dr. Liu plans to offer summer internships to high school teachers to
help them to develop new biotechnology curricula and summer research
opportunities for high school students to expose them to the cutting edge
research happening in a University lab to attract excellent high school students
into science research. These efforts are in align with the RET and SIP program
of Biodesign Institute at ASU. Dr. Zou is currently accommodating three
undergraduate students in his research group. Dr. Zou's group also offers
internship positions for high school students so that they may be well prepared
for their higher degree educations.