* 0827825
* Accomplishment Based Renewal to OCE-0526905: The Geology and Tectonics of Ultraslow Spreading Ridges
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Henry Dick, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 07/31/2011
* USD 474,114.00

Abstract (Dick 0827825)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: For over a
quarter century the ocean crust has been though to be a simple layered structure
comprised of lavas overlying "sheeted dikes", the frozen remains of magma
transported along the cracks that form beneath the lavas as the earth tears
apart, and finally a thick layer of coarse gabbro rock crystallized in magma
chambers beneath the seafloor volcanoes. The goals of this research are to
integrate data from detailed rock descriptions of rocks from a new class of mid-
ocean ridge spreading center with available local bathymetry from side scan
sonar and seafloor video as well as with sea surface magnetics and gravity for
three densely sampled regions of the Gakkel and Southwest Indian Ridges (SWIR).
The resulting synthesis will draw together, for the first time, a picture of the
geology and crustal architecture of representative tectonic end-members for
ultraslow spreading centers ridges. The work is important because this
relatively recently discovered class of mid-ocean ridge spreading centers, whose
geology is presently poorly known, comprise about 30% of the global ridge
system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The broader impacts of this work
will increase the infrastructure for seafloor science by generating a well-
documented readily accessible database for samples from ultraslow spreading
ridges that will enable additional investigators to identify and obtain key
material for new research. It will also train undergraduate geology majors in
the identification of seafloor rocks and data from these will form the basis of
their senior theses. An innovative laboratory for graduate students in rock
identification, description, and integration of seafloor samples into marine
geophysical studies will also be developed. The research also forms the basis
for public talks on the ocean crust at local schools and at the Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution's public lecture series "Science Made Public" at its
exhibit center.