* 0827570
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Factors Influencing Steroid Hormone Variation in Male Baboons
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2010
* Clifford Jolly, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 07/31/2010
* USD 14,490.00

Explaining consistent differences in social behavior between related taxa is a
major goal of comparative socioecology, in which both ultimate (evolutionary,
generally selective) and proximate (physiological) causal factors must be
addressed. It is generally, and reasonably, assumed that species-specific
behavioral traits, like other diagnostic aspects of phenotype, have distinctive
genetic underpinnings that have evolved, mainly under the influence of natural
selection. Observable interactions among individuals and the social structures
that emerge from those interactions are, however, widely removed from the
genetic level, and the physiological mechanisms linking genes to behavior are
inadequately documented. Broadly speaking, in tracing back from the observable
to the inherited, two sets of links are involved: first, between behavior and
physiology and second, between physiology and heritage. The first has attracted
considerable attention and effort, but the second has until recently been much
less accessible, especially in primates and other socially complex animals. As
long as this is so, the hypothesis that behavioral diversity has evolved by
natural selection, rather than by "tradition" or other non-genetic transmission,
though plausible, remains unproven. This project aims to differentiate factors
that influence individual variation in reproductive and stress hormones and
clarify the connection between heritage, endocrine physiology and social
behavior. As a first step in this direction, this study will determine whether a
significant proportion of variation in concentration of testosterone and
glucocorticoids can be attributed to heritage in a large, genetically diverse,
and fully pedigreed population of captive baboons (Papio hamadryas) derived from
several subspecies. Study subjects are housed at the Southwest Foundation for
Biomedical Research in San Antonio, TX. While captive conditions minimize
variance in nutrition and other external factors, alternative caging
arrangements (single-male, multi-female; all-male) partially simulate variation
in social experience among male baboons in the wild. Fecal samples from 250
pedigreed, adult males will be collected and behavioral observations will be
recorded to determine dominance rank. Testosterone and glucocorticoids will be
extracted from the samples and measured for hormone concentration by
radioimmunoassay. Hormone levels will be applied to the pedigree database to
estimate the relative impact of heritage against a background of various social
and environmental factors.

Recent major advances in socioendocrinology have concentrated on interactions
between environmental factors, hormones, and behavior. This project will
complement this work by focusing on the possible role of genetic factors in the
interaction. This study will be the first to simultaneously investigate the
genetic and non-genetic sources of individual differences in the concentration
of steroid hormones (testosterone and glucocorticoids) under controlled
environmental conditions. The research will integrate genetic, endocrine, and
behavioral data in an interdisciplinary approach to the study of physiology and
behavior fostering collaboration of academic and biomedical institutions by
merging fields of quantitative genetics, socioendocrinology, and behavioral
biology. Since baboons have provided analogies for human development, ecology,
and evolution, this study has implications for the effects of genetic factors on
physiological variability, and hence the potential for behavioral evolution, in
humans and other primates. This project may also contribute to current research
investigating the role of testosterone and glucocorticoids in human male
development, health, and disease, perhaps directing future public health
research toward factors underlying individual differences in reproductive and
stress hormone concentration.