* 0827236
* Planning Visit:   U.S.- Irish R&amp;D Partnership
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2010
* Laurie Connell, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Tran
* 06/30/2010
* USD 7,384.00

OISE 08-27236&lt;br/&gt;Laurie Connell&lt;br/&gt;University of
Maine&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides support for a
planning visit to Queen?s University in Belfast, UK and Dublin City University
in Dublin, Ireland. The US principal investigator is Laurie Connell from the
University of Maine. The foreign collaborators are Chris Elliott in Belfast and
Richard O?Kennedy in Dublin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary purpose of this
planning visit is to develop a full proposal that will be submitted to NSF?s
Biotechnology, Biochemical, and Biomass Engineering Program (BBBE). The proposal
will address BBBE?s research priority area of food safety through implementation
of nano-biotechnology and biosensor development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research goal is to develop new technologies to deliver rapid and portable
analysis. Over the past several years, there has been substantial progress in a
number of areas of sensor technology, biotechnology and nanotechnology. The
combination of these approaches could lead to the development of portable
technologies capable of producing rapid and reliable analyses for food
contaminants of major concern. The researchers involved in this effort have
considerable expertise in the areas of toxin analysis, biosensor technology, and
protein engineering. By combining this expertise, they expect to deliver working
prototypes for the sensor based measurement of selected toxins in the food
supply chain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;