* 0827023
* Unlocking the Mysteries of Plastid Origin Through Comparative Genomic Analysis of Two Paulinella Species
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Hwan Su Yoon, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 08/31/2011
* USD 993,911.00

&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of photosynthesis by eukaryotes was a pivotal event
in evolution because algae and plants form the base of the food chain for life
on Earth. Plastids (e.g., chloroplasts), the machines of photosynthesis in algae
and plants, have a cyanobacterial origin through primary endosymbiosis, the
acquisition of a formerly free-living photosynthetic bacterium. Knowledge of
plastid evolution in algae and plants is limited because the primary
endosymbiotic event occurred more then a billion years ago. Paulinella
chromatophora is a green amoeba that is remarkable because it very recently
acquired a plastid via an independent primary endosymbiosis involving a
Prochlorococcus or Synechococcus-like cyanobacterium. The closely related
Paulinella ovalis lacks a plastid but feeds actively on cyanobacteria. Using
these model organisms, this project will 1) sequence genomic DNA and generate a
transcriptome database from the photosynthetic amoeba Paulinella chromatophora
and sequence genomic DNA from the plastid-lacking Paulinella ovalis using the
most modern high-throughput pyrosequencing methods, 2) compare the gene
inventories between P. chromatophora and the P. ovalis, and 3) make freely
available to the public the Paulinella genome sequences.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Genome comparisons between the photoautotrophic P. chromatophora and
the heterotrophic P. ovalis will allow the researchers to generate a gene/genome
catalogue in two closely related organisms, one with and one without a primary
endosymbiotic plastid. This should enable the identification of initial genomic
innovations that allowed primary plastid establishment, that is, the critical
process that allowed a transition from heterotrophy (animal) to autotrophy
(plant). These genomic data could potentially be applied to the field of genetic
engineering. This project will support training of undergraduates and post-
doctoral research associates from underrepresented groups. The project results
will be published in scientific papers and they will be discussed in a genomics
workshop. The workshop will draw upon expertise from genome specialists from the
US and worldwide and it will include active student participation. The goal of
this workshop will be to advance understanding of endosymbiosis and protist
genomics.&lt;br/&gt;