* 0827606
* GSE/RES: The missing piece of the STEM puzzle: The role of communion in women's STEM career decisions
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Amanda Diekman, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 12/31/2012
* USD 338,510.00

INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The proposed research will examine the hypothesis that
women?s choices to pursue STEM careers are inhibited by the perception that STEM
careers do not fulfill communal goals. If STEM careers are perceived as blocking
the pursuit of communal goals, then the gender gap in STEM careers will remain,
despite changes in self-efficacy or increased experience in math and science.
The proposed research program seeks to advance knowledge about motivational
processes in two ways. First, these studies apply a role congruity theoretical
perspective to examine how diffuse roles (i.e., gender roles) influence goal
pursuit, as well as how individuals select specific roles (i.e., occupations) to
facilitate their goal pursuit. Second, these studies seek to examine social role
selection (i.e., career pursuit) as affected by both conscious and non-conscious
processes and unfolding over time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three levels of studies
are proposed; the first two experimental and the last longitudinal. Part 1
focuses on whether endorsement of communal goals predicts attitudes and
behaviors related to STEM career choices: Four studies experimentally activate
or fulfill communal goals to examine the causal impact of communal goals on STEM
career attitudes and behavior. Part 2 examines how beliefs about STEM careers'
attributes influence attitudes and behavior toward STEM careers. Three studies
experimentally manipulate the attributes of STEM careers and measure career
attitudes and behavior, and another study examines change to explicit beliefs as
well as implicit associations. Finally, a longitudinal study examines the
intersection of beliefs and goals by investigating how explicit beliefs,
implicit associations, and goal fulfillment opportunities intersect to influence
STEM career decisions throughout the college years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research focuses on students during their undergraduate years (13-16), which
involve two critical choice points. In the first year of college, students
decide what majors to pursue, and in the final year of college, students decide
what post-graduate options they will pursue; at each point they eliminate many
potential career tracks. Moreover, the focus on the undergraduate years is
critical to the hypothesis that career choice has a great deal to do with
current goals or with anticipated future goals, rather than solely with previous
preparation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACT: These studies offer the
potential to add a critically important but understudied perspective on how and
why women choose or do not choose to pursue STEM careers. Moreover, both intra-
individual psychology and beliefs about the social structure are conceptualized
as critical points for change. The accumulation of descriptive and experimental
evidence about the relationship between STEM careers and communal goals can help
to illuminate this persistent social problem. Especially important is that the
focus on communal goal processes highlights a new opportunity for change. Quite
simply, if early math and science experience are not the whole story with regard
to women's STEM career choices, then the college years offer potential to
improve gender equality in these careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will meet
with college advisors to communicate the findings, and a website will
communicate findings to researchers as well as the broader public. The PI as
well as undergraduate and graduate lab members will present findings at
scientific conferences and submit results to peer-reviewed journals (including
social, gender, occupational psychology). Moreover, the very process of
conducting the research will provide opportunities for underrepresented group
members to engage in collaborative science by participation in the PI's research
group.