* 0827333
* Collaborative Research:   AOC:   Monitoring, Modeling and Memory: Dynamics of Data and Knowledge in Scientific Cyberinfrastructures
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Susan Star, Santa Clara University
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 09/30/2011
* USD 193,905.00

Scientists and supporters of science have long worked to improve the sharing,
reuse, storage, and retrieval of scientific data. Today, efforts focus on
advanced "cyberinfrastructure": using networked computers, databases, and
organizations to bridge divides among diverse scientific disciplines.
Cyberinfrastructure divides into three main activities. First, large numbers of
automatic sensors monitor subjects of interest, such as ecosystems and Earth's
climate, producing massive volumes of digitized data. Second, in many fields
computer models have replaced laboratory experiments as the principal means of
data collection, prediction, and decision-making. Third, increasingly vast data
resources (scientific memory) are now available, but are often distributed
across thousands of research sites and institutions, in numerous incompatible
formats. For cyberinfrastructure-enabled science to deliver on its
transformative potential, cyberinfrastructure designers need better ways of
understanding how scientists actually create and share data in practice, and how
they use it to create new knowledge. To investigate data practices empirically,
this project examines four large cyberinfrastructure efforts: the Long Term
Ecological Research Network, the Center for Embedded Network Sensing, the WATer
and Environmental Research Systems Network, and the Earth System Modeling
Framework. In each case, the investigators will study how cyberinfrastructure is
used in monitoring, modeling, and memory. These projects spread across many
disciplines addressing three important domains, all related to climate change
concerns: ecology and environment; hydrology and water management; and earth
system science. In conducting the project, the investigators will develop
innovative methods of distributed ethnography, collaborative history, and
multimodal network analysis. In addition to published findings, the project will
produce a 'best practices' handbook meant to guide data practices and
coordination in cyberinfrastructure. The project will partner with organizations
working to enhance the role of women in computing; to build database systems for
American Indian communities; and to engage other groups often ignored in
information infrastructure development. The project will thus lay groundwork for
an inclusive, theoretically rich, and practically engaged social science of
cyberinfrastructure.