* 0827826
* Research Starter Grant for Postdoctoral Fellow in Biological Informatics: Understanding Multimodality in Animal Size Distributions
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Ethan White, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 08/31/2010
* USD 50,000.00

Body size is an important organismal trait for a wide variety of ecological
reasons. In this study, the researcher proposes that studying the distribution
of individual body sizes may provide information on the ecological processes
that structure natural communities. Analysis of large databases will be combined
with mechanistic models to determine the relationship between individual body
size distributions and species body size distributions. This relationship - or
relationships - may then suggest the particular processes that structure
ecological communities. For example, similarities between individual and species
body size distributions will be used to distinguish between competition for
limited resources versus the assembly of functionally-similar species from a
regional species pool as the major mechanism structuring a community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will generate both analytical tools
and databases that can be broadly used to address diverse questions in community
ecology. The researcher will also develop Web 2.0 tools to facilitate remote
collaboration, on-line meetings, and the storage and manipulation of data on
remotely accessible servers. These are tools that will also be of general use in
the scientific community. One postdoctoral researcher and two graduate students
will be trained through their participation in this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;