* 0827153
* Technology Based Evaluation of Classroom Learning
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* John Lach, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Donna Riley
* 08/31/2013
* USD 517,847.00

This research will address the feasibility of enabling teachers at the high
school and college levels to evaluate how well their students are learning via
an automated analysis of data collected through technology-based instrumentation
of their classrooms. The data will include audio/video collections on
interactive class room behaviors, which are related to established performance
markers. Results of data collections will be integrated into a DVD presentation
that will produce feedback for the teacher for self-evaluation with the
opportunity for self-improvement, or incorporation into guided coaching systems.
The effort will build upon prior efforts from three different research
communities: education, military intelligence, and Internet technology. This
research will advance video processing that focuses on automated behavior
pattern analysis related to a class room. It will also increase understanding of
the relationship between previously developed manual class room observation
metrics for helping teachers to improve and corresponding metrics gathered from
an array of class room sensors. The conduct of this work will lead to
identification of yet to be considered advances in the application of
audio/video technology to classroom monitoring and teacher self improvement as
well as the opening of innovative lines of research on classroom
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed effort initiates a new and important
research collaboration at the University of Virginia integrating the work of
researchers who have been engaged in improving education at the Center for
Advanced Study of Teaching and Learning and researchers who have been engaged in
future applications of advanced wireless sensor technology at the Wireless
Internet Center for Advanced Technology, an NSF sponsored Industry/University
Cooperative Research Center. This collaboration is considered to be an important
element in advancing the concept of technology-based class room evaluation. If
successful, this effort will undoubtedly spawn a variety of opportunities for
improvement of the initial concept and the corresponding development of new
production systems.&lt;br/&gt;