* 0827540
* SGER-III-CXT:   A Computational Appraoch to Zoning Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2008,12/31/2009
* Sheldon Jacobson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Frank Olken
* 12/31/2009
* USD 99,999.00

Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Redistricting occurs every 10 years following
the decennial census. Ideally, the resulting districts are created to provide
fair representation for each citizen. In the current system, however, the
redistricting process has been open to manipulation. Although the process will
always involve partisan and interested parties, a free and widely accessible
computational tool that provides access to all relevant data and enables users
to explore the universe of possible redistricting plans would make the process
more transparent and would engage a broader array of citizens. Such a tool could
also provide a forum for state representatives and decision-makers to use when
discussing and negotiating redistricting plans. The long-term goal is to allow
for the consideration of multiple objectives and parameter weights when
evaluating redistricting plans; plans can be compared based on all these
criteria. As a small exploratory grant with a one year life, the work will be
limited to the formulation of the redistricting problem as a discrete
optimization problem, which is essential to further progress on the broader
project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
results of this research will provide a quantitative tool for comparing,
evaluating, and creating redistricting plans intended to optimize
speci&amp;#64257;ed criteria. In this mathematical formulation, powerful tools
from computational complexity theory and discrete optimization can be adapted to
identify previously unseen or ignored insights into the redistricting process
and to identify gerrymanders; these goals would be infeasible otherwise. A
cross-disciplinary team will be brought to bear, including a political
scientist, a computer scientist, and a mathematician.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the long term, a
cyberenvironment developed for redistricting will have a signi&amp;#64257;cant
impact on public policy, research, and education. In public policy, there is the
potential to fundamentally transform the redistricting process by providing a
widely accessible objective tool to open the redistricting process to
participation by a broader and more diverse group of interested stakeholders.
Such a cyberenvironment will have a clear educational impact, as K?12 students
will be able to visualize the redistricting process, providing them with a
richer understanding of democracy and allowing them to approach social science
in the context of computation.