* 0827022
* HSD: Collaborative Research: Understanding Socio-Ecological Impacts and Responses to Large-Scale Environmental Disturbance in the Western Solomon Islands
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2014
* Matthew Lauer, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/28/2014
* USD 177,966.00

Understanding the human and natural responses to rapid environmental change is
crucial to managing and conserving marine ecosystems and associated services.
The long-term well-being of coastal populations is dependent on coastal
ecosystems and the critical economic and ecological services that they provide,
including buffering of storms and production of fisheries. Destructive natural
events can compromise this well-being, raising the critical question of which
social and ecological parameters lead communities to be resilient or not when
faced with rapid change. A recent natural disaster in the Western Solomon
Islands presents a case in which there is an urgent need to assess impacts of a
destructive natural event on marine ecological and socioeconomic systems. An
earthquake measuring 8.1 struck 345 km northwest of the Solomon Islands' capital
Honiara in April 2007, creating a tsunami that caused significant damage in the
Western Solomon Islands. A multidisciplinary team composed of a marine
anthropologist, two marine scientists, a remote sensing geospatial expert, and a
health scientist will (1) use an array of ecological, socioeconomic,
heath/nutrition, and geospatial research methods to measure the social and
ecological effects of rapid and large-scale environmental disruption across a
gradient of tsunami impact, (2) assess the responses of coupled human and
natural systems by comparing the research results with existing sets of
retrospective (baseline) data, and (3) evaluate potential drivers of system
resilience. Because extensive pre-tsunami data are available, the body of data
collected during this research affords a unique opportunity to fully test ideas
of what gives resilience to social and ecological systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It has been difficult to demonstrate or test ecosystem
resilience at the large scales that are most relevant to resource management,
because large-scale disturbances are difficult to predict (when naturally
caused) and it is not generally permissible to engineer them experimentally.
Thus, "before-disturbance" data are rare, but are critical for assessing
resilience, which is recognized as an important component of effective resource
management. This research program presents a unique ?before-and-after?
experimental situation in which to measure the social and ecological
vulnerability and resilience of coastal communities to large environmental
disturbances. Additionally, the project involves participating students in a
significant research experience that includes field work and integration of
methods and theoretical approaches of the natural and social sciences are
integrated. Students will be trained in quantitative and qualitative methods
from the natural and social sciences and will be encouraged to develop their own
research projects within the framework of the overall research design.
International and interuniversity collaborations are fostered.