* 0827148
* US-Egypt Workshop:   Broadening the Role of Cyberinfrastructure in Water Resources Management:   Coping with the Challenges of Large River Basins, Cairo, December,  2008
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2009
* Marian Muste, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/2009
* USD 28,500.00

0827148&lt;br/&gt;Muste&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is for a workshop
titled ?US-Egypt Workshop on Broadening the Role of Cydberinfrastructure in
Water Resources Management Coping with the Challenges of Large river Basins? to
be held in Cairo, Egypt, December 29, 2008 to January 2, 2009. The U.S organizer
is Dr. Marian Muste, Iowa Institute of Hydraulic Research, University of Iowa,
Iowa City, Iowa. The Egyptian co-organizers are Dr. Tarek Salaheldin, Cairo
University, and Dr. Rasha El-Kholy, National Water Research Center, Shoubra El-
Kheima, Egypt. For several decades, water resources decision-makers have
indicated the need for a new management paradigm based on sound science
seamlessly integrating cross-disciplinary data and simulation models for complex
watershed processes and their interaction. Recent fast-paced scientific and
engineering advancements in concert with those in information and communication
technologies promise to bring the needed paradigm to reality. The proposed
workshop is an excellent and timely opportunity to bring together researchers
from IIHR-Hydroscience &amp; Engineering (IIHR), The University of Iowa and the
National Water Research Center (NWRC) in Egypt for sharing, brainstorming, and
planning joint work on a common challenge: building cyberinfrastructure-based
platforms and networks for providing the scientific basis for decision-making
about water resources in large river basins transcending jurisdiction
boundaries. The project would support 7 researchers, 2 young investigators and 4
PhD students from IIHR, engaging them in a week-long interaction through
scientific discussions and collaborative planning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The proposed capacity building and
collaboration workshop will enable a direct, first-hand interaction between U.S.
and Egyptian researchers and educators pioneering the development and
implementation of cyberinfrastructure-based environmental observatories and
networks for large river basins. The workshop will be transformative, addressing
watershed problems at their largest possible scale, allowing inferences and
advances in understanding the water-human dynamics at any of the smaller-scale
enclosed processes. Among the direct benefits of the proposed workshop are to:
a) provide a unique first-hand experience and direct interactions between 30
researchers and students from U.S. and Egypt interested in developing
cyberinfrastructure for watershed-scale environmental observatories; b) prepare
specific collaborative items for future submission of joint proposals and
establish the foundation for the first international collaboration in
cyberinfrastructure for water science and engineering in large river basins; c)
synthesize and disseminate the current status and future developmental needs for
the implementation of cyberinfrastructure-based platforms in large river basins
transcending state and national boundaries through a Workshop publication and a
dedicated website. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The scientific and
educational exchange facilitated by the workshop will contribute to U.S. efforts
by the Consortium of Universities for the Advancement of Hydrologic Sciences
Inc, (CUAHSI) and the Water and Environmental Research Systems (WATERS) Network
for the development and implementation of environmental and hydrologic
cyberinfrastructure in large-scale basins transcending administrative and
political boundaries. Through direct dialogue between U.S. scientists and
students and their foreign counterparts, practicable information will be
obtained that will support the goals of these efforts, especially in the areas
of increasing the stakeholder participation (particularly women) in the decision
making process. Exposure to the extensive experience of the leading groups
conducting cyberinfrastructure will advance the participants? knowledge and
expertise, and will engender a global perspective of their area of study, as
well as provide opportunities for professional growth and networking through
international collaboration. &lt;br/&gt;