* 0827799
* VL/HCC'08 Doctoral Consortium
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2009
* Susan Wiedenbeck, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 04/30/2009
* USD 27,490.00

This is funding to support a doctoral consortium (workshop) for about 10
promising graduate students, along with a panel of distinguished research
faculty, which will take place in conjunction with the 2008 IEEE Symposium on
Visual Languages and Human-Centric Computing (VL/HCC 08), to be held September
16-20 in Herrsching am Ammersee, Germany, and sponsored by the IEEE Computer
Society. Over the past decade, the diversity and ubiquity of people?s goals,
interactions, and concerns with information systems have increased dramatically.
Interactive computer software now permeates many individuals? working lives, and
people are increasingly relying on computing and information systems for leisure
and home activities as well. As a result, end users now expect considerable
flexibility and control in their interactions with computer software. For many,
it is no longer sufficient to consume the packaged software and scripted tasks
developed by the professional software industry; they now must produce their own
computational solutions to a wide variety of problems, including spreadsheet
models, web sites, educational media and simulations, automated business
procedures, and scientific visualizations. To produce such software, even for
domain-specific problems, end users must look beyond surface-level interaction
with computers and acquire the conceptual models and skills of computational
thinking. But current advances toward computational thinking by end users are
not evenly distributed across all segments of the population. Thus, this year?s
VL/HCC doctoral consortium, the sixth to be funded by NSF in this series, will
focus on expanding the benefits of computational thinking to diverse
populations. Participants will explore how varying communication media,
representations, and problem-solving support affect end users? willingness and
ability to access, manipulate, and program solutions to their work or everyday
problems. What are the special needs of disadvantaged populations? How can
computational problem-solving tools and devices be designed to meet these needs?
The workshop will bring together and build community among young researchers
working on different aspects of these problems from the perspectives of diverse
fields including computer science, the social sciences, and education. It will
guide the work of these new researchers by providing an opportunity for experts
in the research field (as well as their peers) to give them advice, in that
student participants will make formal presentations of their work during the
workshop and will receive feedback from the faculty panel. The feedback is
geared to helping students understand and articulate how their work is
positioned relative to other human-computer interaction research, whether their
topics are adequately focused for thesis research projects, whether their
methods are correctly chosen and applied, and whether their results are
appropriately analyzed and presented. A 2-page extended abstract of each
participant's work will be published in the conference proceedings. The PI
expects that most of the students supported by this award will come from U.S.
universities, but as in past years, due to the highly international make-up of
the research community, a few non-U.S. students may be invited to participate as
well. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The workshop will help shape
ongoing and future research projects aimed at alleviating a pressing problem of
relevance to a great many people within our society. This event will promote
discovery and learning, by encouraging the student researchers to explore a
difficult and challenging open problem, through involvement of a panel of well-
known researchers whose task is to provide constructive feedback, and through
inclusion of other conference participants who will also learn from and provide
additional feedback to the students and to each other. Members of the organizing
committee will engage in a personal recruitment process through academic
connections, in an effort to encourage participation by students in non-
technology departments as well as from minority institutions.