* 0827863
* US-Qatar Workshop:   Recent Research and Educational Activities in Power Electronics and Drives, Qatar, December 2008
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2008,12/31/2012
* Ned Mohan, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 12/31/2012
* USD 49,370.00

This award supports a joint workshop organized by Dr. Issa Batarseh, Department
of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University of Central Florida, Dr.
Ned Mohan, Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Minnesota and
their collaborator, Dr. Prasad Enjeti, Power Electronics &amp; Power Quality
Laboratory at the Texas A&amp;M University at Qatar (TAMUQ). The workshop
participants will discuss effective classroom and laboratory instruction in
power electronics and motor drive systems. The workshop will also adress how
recent advances in power electronics research can be integrated into the
electrical engineering curriculum. Finally, the participants will explore
possible advanced joint research projects in power electronics and motor drives
between academics in the US and Qatar in collaboration with industry in Qatar.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the TAMUQ workshop centers on
the need to engage dialogue on power electronics education and research
activities between experts in the Gulf region and the Middle East countries and
the US experts, and to explore possible joint research collaboration between the
two sides. This is timely in light of the increasing pressures of globalization
in the engineering profession. The three co-organizers of this workshop are
well-recognized leaders in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts
of the workshop include developing new internationalized course materials and
laboratory experiments that will be distributed to universities in the Middle
East and North America. Given the ever-increasing need for engineers who work on
energy conversion and efficiency, the workshop will address ideas for
recruiting, retaining, and mentoring undergraduate students, graduate students
and young faculty in these areas. US participants will include at least three
junior scientists and four graduate students. The workshop will serve to
strengthen collaborations between US engineers and their research and education
counterparts in the Middle East.