* 0827352
* SGER:  The 2007 - 2008 Explosive Eruption of the World's Only Active Carbonatite Volcano: Gas Emissions From Oldoinyo Lengai, Tanzania
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2008,11/30/2009
* Tobias Fischer, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 11/30/2009
* USD 38,609.00

This Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) is co-sponsored by the Office
of International Science and Engineering, and the Petrology and Geochemistry
program of the Division of Earth Sciences. The study will address the recent
geochemical variations of magmas and volcanic gases in Oldoinyo Lengai, the only
currently active carbonatite volcano in the world. Its eruptive activity is
dominated by effusive eruptions that emit very low viscosity and low temperature
(~540Â°C) lava flows. Since September 2007, Oldoinyo Lengai has entered a new
episode of volcanic activity that is characterized by violent explosions. Such
explosive episodes occur only about every 50 years. The project is a full
collaboration with Tanzanian scientists that have been able to obtain samples
from these eruptions. The composition of these samples is quite different from
the lavas usually discharged during the effusive periods of the volcano: it
contains approximately 20% SiO2. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results from this
SGER will be compared to those of a prior eruption episode that took place
between July 2005 and May 2006, when the team collected volcanic gases emanating
from Oldoinyo Lengai that were not severely air contaminated. Gases are
chemically and isotopically indistinguishable from upper mantle, mid-ocean-ridge
gases, despite the fact that lavas are very different from mid-ocean-ridge
basalts (MORB) and occur in a setting far removed from oceanic ridges. The
current activity of the volcano will provide the first opportunity to test a
number of hypotheses about this particular system. For instance, it is proposed
to test if the world's only active carbonatite volcano is now transitioning to
erupting higher-silica magmas, and if this transition is accompanied by an
increase in SO2 flux from mantle-derived melts and characterized by highly
explosive eruptions, and if such transition is caused by gas emissions that are
characteristic of upper mantle chemical and isotopic compositions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oldoinyo Lengai is a major tourist attraction in Tanzania
as it is located close to Ngorongoro Crater, the Serengeti wildlife reserve and
lake Natron. Several Massai villages are located on the base of the volcano.
Hundreds of tourists climb the crater each year many of them camp in the crater
of the active volcano. By characterizing and better understanding the explosive
activity of the volcano, hazards to tourists and the local population can be
better assessed and pre-cursor activity may be better understood as is currently
the case. The proposal will also support a graduate student and further
strengthen collaboration of the P.I. with Tanzanian scientists based at the
University of Dar Es Salaam.