* 0827233
* Modeling the Vibrations and Energy Flows in Complex Dynamic Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/31/2007,08/31/2009
* Wenlong Li, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2009
* USD 131,022.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed research aims to develop a general
method for the modeling of complex dynamic systems, especially in the critical
mid-frequency range. The research builds on the PI's recent work on the
vibration and energy flow analyses of elastically restrained beams and plates.
The general approach of the research is to divide a complex dynamic system into
a number of subsystems or components, based on two innovative ideas: 1) the
displacements on each component are expressed as a generalized fast-converging
Fourier series expansion; 2) the interactions of various components at junctions
are accurately described in the form of force balance or displacement continuity
equations. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research will potentially lead to major
advances in numerical methods for the dynamic analysis of complex systems in a
broad frequency range. These advances will allow the creation of a unified tool
for determining the dynamic properties such as the wave transmission
coefficients and modal parameters for various structures or junctions,
regardless of boundary conditions, coupling conditions, joint configurations, or
the number of components involved. The current model will represent the
interactions of the individual components faithfully as under the actual system
condition and will overcome the problem of having to calculate or specify, a
priori, the joint or component properties. The research will also advance the
fundamental understanding and design of complex dynamic systems by focusing on
the important uncertainty and sensitivity issues related to the manufacturing
and modeling processes. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research will be focused on
the critical mid-frequencies and will lead to solutions of the noise and
vibration problems that impact the design of a wide range of dynamic systems
from consumer products to aircrafts. The research will develop modeling tools
that will free the designers from the often enormous effort in creating models,
extracting component modal properties and other model variables, or customizing
the formulations and solution procedures to accommodate minor changes or
variations in boundary conditions, coupling configurations, or other system or
component conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate students will be directly
involved with this project. Undergraduate students, especially minority
students, will be involved via senior design projects, internship with the
industrial partner, and through undergraduate research projects. Through this
project, future professionals will be trained with broad backgrounds and strong
skills to solve practical engineering problems and to perform advanced
researches. &lt;br/&gt;