* 0827858
* Research Starter Grant: Functional Characterization of MEL-28 in the Animal Model Caenorhabditis Elegans
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2010
* Anita Fernandez, Fairfield University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 07/31/2010
* USD 50,000.00

Cell division is arguably the most dynamic event to occur during development.
Multiple subcellular processes must be coordinated in order to ensure the
correct segregation of cellular materials and the successful completion of
cytokinesis. For instance, the nuclear envelope, which is intact during S-phase
ensuring the proper completion of DNA replication, breaks down completely by the
time the chromosomes are aligned at the metaphase plate. This breakdown is
essential in order that the spindle microtubules may contact the condensed
chromosomes and pull these to their appropriate poles. Very little is understood
about how the formation and breakdown of the nuclear envelope is coordinated
with DNA replication and chromosome segregation. Understanding the relationship
between chromatin maintenance and nuclear envelope dynamics will reveal general
principles whereby the multiple concurrent events that occur during cell
division are managed. Dr. Fernandez has identified a novel AT-hook domain
protein called MEL-28 (ELYS in vertebrates) that is required for both nuclear
envelope function and the proper regulation of chromatin morphology and
movement. This project will perform functional studies of MEL-28 in order to
better understand how this protein coordinates two distinct
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The coordination of
simultaneous subcellular processes is key to the successful completion of cell
division, thus understanding better how this is accomplished is essential to
understanding how cells divide. Dr. Fernandez has shown that MEL-28 is required
for the structural and functional integrity of the nuclear envelope and for the
proper morphology, condensation state, and positioning of the chromatin.
However, as MEL-28 is a large protein with few conserved domains, it is still
largely unknown how the MEL-28 protein functions to accomplish these tasks. Thus
this work will lead to understanding how an essential yet novel protein
functions in its fundamental role in cell division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: Fundamental to understanding our natural world is not just to learn
facts about it, but to understand where these facts come from. The best way for
students to understand the scientific method is to spend time in a research
setting as an active participant. Fairfield University undergraduate students
will perform the experiments described in this proposal, gather empirical data
from these experiments, and interpret these data to determine whether they
support or refute our hypotheses. For many students, this will provide their
first exposure to original research. Training students to engage research in
this manner will make them better scientists. More importantly, these activities
will help students develop into better thinkers and thus citizens more capable
of making thoughtful decisions about how to run our society.