* 0827256
* BioMathletic Training: Creating the Next Generation of BioMath Stars at Ohio State University
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2015
* Elizabeth Marschall, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2015
* USD 800,428.00

UBM-Institutional: BioMathletic Training&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An
interdisciplinary undergraduate research program in mathematical and statistical
biology is planned at Ohio State University through a collaborative effort
between the Departments of Mathematics, Statistics, and Evolution, Ecology and
Organismal Biology. Research opportunities are also available in Computational
Neuroscience &amp; Cell Biology. The program will: (1) expose a broad group of
students to research problems in the mathematical biosciences; (2) develop
curricula to prepare students to pursue advanced study in interdisciplinary
fields; and (3) facilitate participation of a cohort of undergraduates in an
intensive and integrated research experience involving teams of students and
faculty mentors. Beginning students will participate in a seminar course held
during every academic quarter that exposes them to the broad area of
mathematical biology; while more advanced students will participate in the
program as Undergraduate Research Fellows (URFs). The URFs will participate in a
mentored research experience during two or three academic years and the summer
before their senior year. Each of the co-Principal Investigators associated with
the individual research projects have active research programs. Many of the
proposed activities will impact a broad group, ranging from students who
participate only in the newly-developed interdisciplinary courses to those
selected as URFs. The most profound impact of the proposal will be the
production of a group of students who are aware of the opportunities available
in research in the mathematical and statistical biosciences, who are prepared to
enter into graduate study and careers in these areas, and who are motivated to
continue working in interdisciplinary fields, in other words- the next
generation of BioMath stars. Interested persons may contact the PI Dr. Ian
Hamilton: hamilton.598@osu.edu and/or visit http://excelsior.biosci.ohio-
state.edu/~eeob/drupal//?q=userpages/85