* 0827953
* Collaborative Research: Centers for Ocean Sciences Education Excellence - The National Central Coordinating Office
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2015
* Gail Scowcroft, University of Rhode Island
* Cooperative Agreement
* Elizabeth Rom
* 09/30/2015
* USD 1,540,960.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This award provides funding for management and support of
national networking activities for the Centers for Ocean Science Education
Excellence (COSEE). There are eleven separate Centers within the U.S. that are
coordinated via the Central Coordinating Office (CCO). The CCO will be organized
by three PI?s; Gail Scowcroft, Associate Director, Office of Marine Programs,
University of Rhode Island Graduate School of Oceanography will act as the
National Network Coordinator (NNC); Annette deCharon, University of Maine, will
organize the development of a national website and support more centralized web
development at all Centers; and Dr. Billy Spitzer, New England Aquarium, will
help with long-term strategy development and organization of the National
Advisory Committee (NAC). This project builds on their prior work as the
National Interim Leadership Team, a group that was formed to serve the COSEE
Network during a one-year funding hiatus for the existing CCO.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed CCO team will work closely with the National
COSEE Council, the NAC, and the NSF Program Officers to address a national gap
in the coordination of ocean science education, facilitate communication between
the Centers, and improve overall network functioning. The CCO will move the
Network forward on a number of key initiatives that strengthen it, reduce
duplication, and enhance the overall impact of COSEE. One important role of the
CCO is the facilitation of the transfer of best practices between Centers. Site
visits will allow the CCO team to investigate activities and products from
Centers that might further other Centers? goals. By facilitating such transfers,
the CCO provides a unique and useful addition to the current network. Perhaps
one of the most significant tasks of the CCO in achieving intellectual merit is
to increase the number of ocean scientists who participate in ocean science
education and outreach. The CCO plans to annually expand the number of ocean
scientist/educator partnerships formed through COSEE activities. Documentation
is key to sharing ?lessons learned?; thus CCO deliverables include ?user
friendly,? accessible national evaluation database and a national website. The
Broader Impacts of this proposal include developing materials and providing
support for ocean science educational outreach to the public and to K-12
teachers and students. The CCO will also strive to broaden the participation of
under-represented and under-served (U/U) students in the various activities
supported by the COSEE network by developing partnerships with U/U groups and
professional societies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;