* 0827310
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  A Diachronic Investigation of Climate Change and Cultural Transmission Models for Variation in Paleoindian Lithic Technology
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2010
* John Taylor-Montoya, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2010
* USD 11,376.00

John Taylor-Montoya, under the supervision of Dr. David J. Meltzer, will
investigate the evolution of Paleoindian stone tool manufacture and technology
on the southern Plains of North America during the period of ~11,500-8500
radiocarbon years before present. The goal of the study is to explore variations
in stone tool technology across space and through time to better understand the
changing adaptations of the groups who made them. It is a particularly
interesting period for study, since this was a time when the environment was
undergoing significant changes (the Ice Age was coming to an end), and these
descendants of the first Americans were beginning to settle in to their new
land. The artifact sample that will be used for this study comes from
Paleoindian sites that have been excavated over many years, the collections of
which are housed in various museums and facilities in the southern Plains
region. These existing collections provide valuable data, but are often an
underutilized resource.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Variation in Paleoindian stone tool
technology over time comprises one of the more intriguing records of material
culture change in North America. As archaeological methods of analysis have
themselves evolved, there are now new tools to explore the relationships between
Paleoindian stone tool technology, the social dynamics of the people who made
and used those stone tools, and their interactions with the environment. The
implications are far reaching and can inform our ideas about the origins and
cultural evolution of the earliest Americans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mr. Taylor-
Montoyas research is aimed at testing two specific hypotheses to explain
technological change during this time: 1) Climate change altered the
availability of certain species of game animals, causing adaptive responses in
hunting technology 2) Changes in technology were part of the final process of
the initial peopling of North America, where the settling in of groups into
specific geographical areas and their increased population led to reduced social
interaction the end result being regionally and locally distinct stone tool
traditions reflected in different styles of artifacts across the landscape.
Because spear points are stylistically diagnostic and were also used to harvest
and process game, they represent an ideal artifact class for testing whether
variation in material culture was the result of climate change or settling in.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent research into the evolution of cultural traits is
used as the framework for this study. If the climate forcing model is accurate,
it is expected that variation in stone tool technology will follow changes in
ecological conditions across space and time. If the settling in hypothesis is
correct, stylistic patterns should take place independent of changes in climate
and environment. There is likely more complexity to the problem than indicated
in these models. However, beginning with simplified models will allow Mr.
Taylor-Montoya to test clear hypotheses and identify weaknesses in those models
which will guide future work. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This study can provide the
foundation for resolving questions regarding the relative influence of ecology
and social dynamics on long-term changes in material culture on a regional
scale. The results will be of interest to a broad audience of social scientists.
In addition to the dissertation, the results will be disseminated through
publications in peer-reviewed journals and professional conference
presentations. The study will also produce the most comprehensive regional
Paleoindian artifact database for the study area. Pending permission from the
institutions housing these artifacts, the database will be published on the
internet. In addition to being a research tool for specialists, the digital
archive would also be an excellent source for educators and the interested
public.