* 0827217
* UBM-Group: Integrated Undergraduate Research Experiences in Aquatic Biology and Mathematical Sciences
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Gabriella Pinter, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 09/30/2012
* USD 239,983.00

This project provides two cohorts of six undergraduate students with cross-
disciplinary education in Biology and Mathematics with emphasis on collaborative
learning through original research projects connected to aquatic ecosystems.
Research activities begin with a targeted intensive course sequence in
Mathematical Modeling in Biology that introduces mathematical concepts and
methods through biological examples and demonstrates relevant laboratory and
computational techniques. While taking this course, students participate in a
Research Seminar where research problems in aquatic biology are introduced. In
year two the cohorts design and implement their own research plan to investigate
a current problem concerning aquatic life in the Great Lakes. The students are
extensively mentored by biology and mathematics faculty and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The research area is
exciting, modern, relevant, and reflects the interests and expertise of
participating faculty. The problems follow two main threads: (a) the composition
and dynamics of aquatic microbial communities including the evaluation of
critical elements, the identification of controlling variables, and the
exploration of chaotic systems; and (b) the evaluation and integration of new
molecular datasets into traditional frameworks. These problems naturally benefit
from and necessitate a combined mathematical and biological approach. The
interdisciplinary approach together with the intensive collaborative work
advances the understanding of these problems and contributes to better policy
decisions and implementations concerning the nation's aquatic
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The program serves as a model
to extend and encourage undergraduate research as well as interdisciplinary
collaborations. The program identifies, motivates, and trains future
professionals with a skill set that is highly relevant to problems of management
of natural resources. It combines significant scientific problems with
integrated teaching and learning approaches which engage and motivate students.
The activities foster interdisciplinary collaborations between the faculty of
the Department of Biological Sciences, the Department of Mathematical Sciences,
and the Great Lakes Water Institute. These collaborations lead to more enhanced
research opportunities as well as more team-teaching and the development of an
integrated Mathematical Modeling in Biology course that is expected to be one of
the core courses in an interdisciplinary Biology and Mathematics major. Because
the research projects are highly relevant to national interests in restoring and
maintaining the health of the Great Lakes, the results of the program are being
made available for use by the scientific community as well as by non-scientists
and public-policy decision makers.