* 0827398
* Kinetics of Free Radical Reactions of Combustion Importance at Elevated Pressures
* NONE,NONE
* 12/01/2008,01/31/2013
* Lev Krasnoperov, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 01/31/2013
* USD 294,997.00

CBET-0827398 Krasnoperov

The research seeks to establish the important high-pressure combustion chemistry
need for practically important combustion processes, including internal
combustion engines. Combustion efficiency and stability, internal engine knock,
emission of environmentally noxious substances are the problems which require
detailed chemical kinetics mechanisms with well-characterized elementary
reactions over extended temperature and pressure ranges. However, the kinetic
data necessary for advancement of combustion models at elevated pressures are
still insufficient. Laboratory measurements usually provide rate constants at
"convenient" pressures (0.001 - 1 bar). They are necessarily extrapolated to
higher pressures based on theoretical foundations, but such predictions may
introduce significant additional uncertainties into the model predictions. The
specific research objective is a systematic fundamental study on the kinetics
and mechanisms of unimolecular and bimolecular reactions of free radicals of
combustion importance such as HCO, CH3, OH, and HO2 over extended temperature
and elevated pressure ranges. Pulsed laser photolysis combined with high-
pressure flow system and transient absorption-spectroscopy techniques will be
used in the experimental studies. Buffer gas density affects the rates and
branching ratios of dissociation and isomerization reaction, bimolecular
reactions that proceed via an intermediate complex, as well as the corresponding
reverse reactions. The comparison of the measurements of the pressure fall-off
in this reaction with theoretical calculations will lead to the further
advancement of the theory of unimolecular dissociation and the RRKM theory with
isolated resonances. Overall, the proposed research program will contribute to
extending the knowledge and understanding the buffer gas density effects.
Broader impacts of the proposed work arise through publications and
presentations in the technical and scientific community, by the education and
training of students and new scientists, and through advancement of synergetic
collaborations between disciplines and institutions, both domestic and
international. The research will rely upon training and participation of
graduate as well as undergraduate students.