* 0827868
* Microfluidic Immunophenotyping for the Diagnosis of Uveitis and Ocular Cancer
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Shashi Murthy, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Ted A. Conway
* 07/31/2012
* USD 259,883.00

PI: Murthy, Shashi Proposal Number: 0827868

The objective of this project is to create a microfluidic platform capable of
characterizing the cellular and cytokine content of vitreous humor. This
platform will be of direct benefit to patients suffering from uveitis or primary
intraocular lymphoma (PIOL) who need to undergo surgical removal of the vitreous
humor (vitreous biopsy) in order to obtain a detailed diagnosis of these
diseases. Microfluidic immunophenotyping of vitreous humor is an attractive
alternative to the current approaches of cytology and flow cytometry because it
requires considerably fewer cells and allows rapid analysis of cells that are
typically very fragile.

Both uveitis and PIOL are diseases associated with the invasion of lymphocytes
into various regions of the eye. Approximately 2.3 million Americans suffer from
uveitis, and vision-loss due to uveitis accounts for 10-15% of blindness in the
U.S. PIOL is manifested by the presence of malignant B-lymphocytes which may
indicate tumor formation in the brain, retina, or other areas of the central
nervous system. Although PIOL is an uncommon disease, patients of PIOL have a
low likelihood of recovery because of the lack of early detection techniques.

The vitreous biopsy is performed to distinguish PIOL from uveitis and identify a
targeted therapeutic path. For PIOL, early detection allows patients to begin
chemo- and radio-therapy. For uveitis, identification of its underlying cause
allows treatement with specific drugs instead of broad-target immunosuppressive
agents that typically cause severe side effects. The current approach to analyze
the vitreous biopsy product provides a conclusive diagnosis in only 15% of
patients because it is constrained by the small number of cells available for
analysis and their fragility.

The following tasks will be carried out to accomplish the project objective:

- Design and fabricate microfluidic devices for cell and cytokine capture based
on antibody-antigen interactions. - Create a microfluidic immunophenotyping
technique based on the chemotactic deflection of cells using gradients of
dissolved antibodies. - Characterize the performance of the microfluidic devices
using a model that mimics the cellular and cytokine content of vitreous humor
extracted from patients of uveitis or PIOL. - Determine lower bounds of target
cell and cytokine concentration for the multiple markers of each disease type. -
Immunophenotype cells and cytokines in vitreous fluid obtained from patient
vitreous biopsy samples.

Intellectual Merit: If successful, the proposed research will provide a new and
transformative method to rapidly identify cells and cytokines associated with
uveitis and PIOL, overcoming the shortcomings of current analysis techniques.
Part of the proposed microfluidic approach is technologically transformative
gradient-based design to identify multiple cell surface markers on individual
cells without requiring any labeling. The ability to determine cell- and
cytokine-type from very small sample sizes will allow for early diagnosis of
PIOL, which cannot be performed using current techniques. The PI has worked in
the area of microfluidic cell analysis for over 5 years and this project is a
collaborative effort between with Dr. Kameran Laskhari, an ophthalmic surgeon at
the Schepens Eye Research Institute in Boston.

Broader Impact: (a) If successful, the proposed research will provide an
accurate and rapid diagnosis technique for patients with uveitis or PIOL. (b)
The proposed research will involve high school students and science teachers in
experimental research via existing Young Scholar and RET programs at
Northeastern University, and (c) involve undergraduates in experimental
research. (d) High school students participating in the proposed research will
be encouraged to develop science fair projects and pursue careers in biomedical
science and engineering. (e) Disseminate research results and describe
implications for uveitis and PIOL therapeutics through a website.