* 0827280
* Collaborative Research:  Oceanic Response to Atmospheric Forcing in the Kuroshio Extension
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Jae Hun Park, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2013
* USD 202,572.00

It is important to understand the generation and propagation of near-inertial
internal waves, which are thought to contribute to deep-ocean mixing and
maintenance of the abyssal stratification. Mesoscale eddies and currents affect
the subsurface pathways of near-inertial waves from the mixed layer to the sea
floor, and may deflect, trap, and focus them. Recent numerical models support
these predictions, but much work remains to understand and verify how near
inertial waves propagate to redistribute their energy in and under strong
current systems. Due to the intense air-sea interactions in the Kuroshio
Extension, ocean variability can potentially affect the winds and climate in
remote regions. In particular, the subtropical mode water (STMW) has been
considered as a large upper-ocean heat reservoir closely linked to the climate
system. The non-uniform cooling and deepening of the surface mixed layer forms
the STMW during winter with high variability in space and time.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the upper and deep ocean
response to atmospheric forcing in the Kuroshio region using oceanic and
atmospheric observations collected as part of the Kuroshio Extension System
Study (KESS) and the Kuroshio Extension Observatory (KEO) programs. The project
will focus on the generation of near-inertial motions from the wind, how and
where they propagate and dissipate, and how they directly affect the mass and
heat budget of the mixed layer and STMW. The KESS array, deployed during May
2004?June 2006, comprised subsurface moorings with moored profilers and current
meters, and inverted echo sounders equipped with near-bottom pressure and
current sensors. KEO, a moored surface buoy, was first deployed in 2004 as part
of KESS and is now part of the sustained ocean climate observing system. The
KESS array is uniquely suited to conduct these studies due to its combination of
vertical, horizontal, and temporal resolution and extent of spatial coverage.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding gained from this project has broad
applicability in testing parameterizations of mixing in climate models and
theoretical concepts of how near-inertial waves can be carried, trapped, and
concentrated by strong current systems. The processes and feedbacks related to
mode water formation by air-sea interaction are likely to be important in
regions where strong winds blow over an ocean full of fronts and mesoscale
eddies such as around the Southern Ocean. These processes are of great
importance for climate variability, the focus of the Climate Variability and
Prediction (CLIVAR) program. KESS has been included in CLIVAR from its planning
phase and its findings complement other U.S. CLIVAR studies (e.g., CLIMODE,
SAMFLOC, and DIMES). As global ocean models and wind fields achieve increasingly
high resolution, allowing direct simulation of near-inertial waves, it will be
important to have documented examples of the oceanic response in particular of
the near-inertial waves in a strong mesoscale flow field to episodic atmospheric
forcing.