* 0827211
* US-Tanzania Planning Grant:   Collaborative Research and Education at Olduvai Gorge and the Ngorongoro Volcanic Highlands, Tanzania
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Tanya Furman, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* DeAndra Beck
* 06/30/2009
* USD 10,000.00

This planning grant will allow the PI and colleagues to develop an
interdisciplinary, collaborative international program that promotes integrated
research in the fields of geology and anthropology. It is anticipated that the
proposal will be submitted to the Office of International Science and
Engineering for the International Research Experiences for Students
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study area is the world-renowned Olduvai
Gorge, which preserves a remarkably rich fossil record including hominid and
stone artifacts, and the adjacent Ngorongoro Volcanic Highlands that produced
lavas and volcaniclastics ranging in composition from basalt through rhyolite to
silica undersaturated materials including foidites and carbonatites. The
geological focus is on the genesis of volcanic landforms and products, and the
anthropological emphasis is on the relationship between man and the environment,
including structural geology, modern cultures and paleoenvironmental
reconstruction. In this planning visit the team will (1) Meet on site with
Tanzanian colleagues and (2) Evaluate specific research and training activities.
Activities include mapping volcaniclastic deposits within Olduvai, exploring
differences among products of regional volcanoes, and visiting modern
geomorphological and tectonic environments and human communities that provide
close analogues to those of our earliest ancestors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One
important feature of this program is the interaction between scientists
representing structural geology, volcanology and geochemistry, and human
anthropology. Professionals in these fields must interact and rely upon one
another, but cross-disciplinary training is typically lacking in the respective
curricula. This project represents a collaboration between scientists in the US,
Kenya and Tanzania. The US team is led by Tanya Furman, Godwin Mollel (Penn
State University) and Carl Swisher (Rutgers), who have expertise in volcanology,
geochemistry, geodynamics and geochronology. Makenya Maboko, Deputy Vice
Chancellor and Isaac Marobhe, Geology Department Chair (University of Dar es
Salaam) will help select qualified students, and senior lecturer Crispin Kinabo
will collaborate on volcanic geochemistry. Evelyn Mbede, Director for the
Tanzania Ministry of Higher Education Science and Technology has expertise in
rift tectonics and will be in the field throughout the project.&lt;br/&gt;