* 0827845
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Nanostructured Titania for Orthopedic Biomaterials
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Craig Grimes, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 08/31/2011
* USD 120,000.00

CBET-0827845&lt;br/&gt;Grimes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A goal of current orthopedic
biomaterials research is to design implants that induce controlled and guided
growth of tissue, and rapid healing. To achieve these goals a better
understanding of events at the bone-material interface is needed, as well as the
development of new materials and approaches that promote osseointegration.
Profs. Popat and Grimes propose the use of well controlled nanostructured
titania interfaces to enhance implant osseointegration. The integration of
controlled nanoscale titania architectures into existing implant materials can
promote osteoblast differentiation and matrix production, and enhance short- and
long-term osseointegration. Moreover, the ability to create model
nanodimensional constructs that mimic physiological systems can aid in studying
complex tissue interactions in terms of cell communication, response to matrix
geometry, and effect of external chemical stimuli. The fabrication routes
developed by the group of Prof. Grimes in collaboration with Prof. Popat are
flexible and cost-effective, enabling realization of desired topologies and
chemistries on existing bulk implant materials with sufficient stability and
strength. Such control over the nanoscale interface can prove advantageous for a
broad range of biomaterial applications. Since the reality of creating a new
biomaterial technology is predicated upon achieving affordable, biocompatible
and durable materials that are able to withstand complex physiological
environments, the intellectual merit of this project is to integrate
nanotechnology with biology by: (a) Developing technologies that can be easily
adopted to exiting technologies in market; and (b) Understanding what influences
and controls bone-material interfaces. A further Broader Impact of the work is
the training of next generation of scientists and engineers, and providing
outreach-oriented laboratory internships for undergraduates and underrepresented
students in science/engineering to work in this vitally important
interdisciplinary field.