* 0827239
* Symposium: PharmEcology Symposium: A Pharmacological Approach to Understanding Plant-Herbivore Interactions, to be held January 2-6, 2009 in Boston, MA.
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2010
* Jennifer Forbey, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 08/31/2010
* USD 27,365.00

This award will fund US and international participation in The PharmEcology
Symposium: A pharmacological approach to understanding plant-herbivore
interactions, held at the Society of Integrative and Comparative Biology Meeting
from January 3-6, 2009 in Boston, MA, USA. The symposium will bring together
leaders interested in multi-disciplinary research at the interface of
pharmacology and the physiological ecology of plant-herbivore interactions,
termed PharmEcology. Scheduled talks and breakout sessions will identify current
and novel approaches for collaborative research in three general areas: 1) The
biochemical mechanisms herbivores utilize to tolerate plant chemical defenses;
2) The biological activity of plant chemical defenses; and 3) The genetic
diversity associated with these two components. Understanding the biochemical
and genetic mechanisms by which plants defend themselves and herbivores tolerate
plant chemical defenses, will provide insight into the co-evolutionary arms race
between plants and herbivores, explain foraging constraints and distribution of
herbivores and reveal the mechanism of action of plant compounds. Discussions
will result in submission of publication(s) in the Integrative and Comparative
Biology Journal and grant proposals for future collaborative research. The
symposium will provide undergraduate, graduate and post-doctoral students
opportunities to establish networks with national and international leaders in
ecology and pharmacology. While students will be recruited from speaker's labs
and a pre-symposium course on PharmEcology offered at Boise State University
(Fall 2008), participation is open to all students and will be widely
advertised. Finally, the symposium will promote diversity by including
participants of equal gender (50% female speakers), from a wide range of career
stages (undergraduate, graduate, post-docs, junior and established faculty) and
from a variety of countries (Australia, Austria, Great Britain, Japan, New
Zealand, Uganda and USA) and disciplines (ecology, chemistry, physiology,
evolutionary and behavioral biology and pharmacology).