* 0827688
* Collaborative Research: Neural and mechanical bases of motor primitives in voluntary frog behavior
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Kiisa Nishikawa, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 09/30/2012
* USD 372,742.00

Last Modified Date: 08/01/08 Last Modified By: Kenneth C. Whang &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Abstract &lt;br/&gt;The organization of movement is a complex and
difficult problem, in part because of a "degrees of freedom problem" in motor
control. The richness of an animal's movement possibilities makes its choice of
movement controls complex. However, unlike current robots, animals cope
efficiently with their degrees of freedom. A newborn wildebeest calf walks with
the herd within a few hours of birth. A frog or a turtle, using just its spinal
cord, can control complex goal-directed trajectories. The spinal cord can also
rapidly correct such movements if they are perturbed. It has been argued that
these remarkable capacities are modular, constructed with small sets of
primitives or motor building blocks. How such primitives arise and are used is
the focus of this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The concepts of modularity and
motor primitives have provided useful descriptions of the organization of spinal
motor systems. Modular organization has been shown to support spinal behaviors,
and may help to "bootstrap" motor learning. Nonetheless, modularity is
controversial at many levels. Spinal primitives might need to be supplanted or
augmented in order to perform complex, voluntary behaviors. This project attacks
this problem in frog prey strike behaviors, a voluntary and adapted behavior in
a system that is fundamentally important to the animal, and has also been well
characterized in previous studies of modularity. The neuromechanics of prey
strike is examined from a multi-disciplinary perspective. The importance of
modular organization in neuroscience and behavior extends well beyond biological
motor control, with ramifications in evolutionary and cognitive psychology.
Biological strategies and solutions are also highly relevant to future
technologies and robotics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A computer model of prey strike
will be developed using a novel approach based on Cosserat strand-elements. The
model will be developed by a team of four investigators: Simon Giszter
(neurophysiology) and Jonathan Nissanov (anatomy, imaging) at Drexel University,
Dinesh Pai (computer science, biomechanical modeling) at the University of
British Columbia, and Kiisa Nishikawa (neuromechanics) at Northern Arizona
University. Cryoplane microscopy will be used to reconstruct bullfrog
sensorimotor anatomy in detail. These structures will be modeled using a strand-
based approach to incorporate this detail. Experimental and model analyses of
prey strike using these data will inform one another to establish the benefits
and limits of fixed or adaptive modular mechanisms, and the biological
implementation used in frogs. &lt;br/&gt;