* 0827193
* UBM-Group: Studying Cell Response to Input Signals as the Basis for Interdisciplinary Training for Undergraduates in Biological and Mathematical Sciences
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Kathy Hoke, University of Richmond
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2012
* USD 134,028.00

The main objective of this project is to increase the number of students who
will pursue scientific careers that effectively integrate the mathematical and
biological sciences. The integration of these two areas will be based on the
stress response system in mammalian cells and on iron uptake system in E. coli.
The stress response system is central in biology, since it protects the cell
against dramatic changes in the environment. This project will add a new
dimension towards understanding stress phenomena at a molecular level by using a
theory of stochastic nonlinear gene regulatory networks.&lt;br/&gt; The project
also includes mathematical and experimental aspects of biological processes that
are regulated by iron in the E. coli bacterium. Organisms generally respond to
iron deficiency by increasing their capacity to take up iron and by consuming
intracellular iron stores. While the iron-regulated system in bacteria is
different from that of the stress response in mammalian cells, students will
recognize that mathematical questions unify the projects.&lt;br/&gt; The
mathematical theory used by students in this project offers a promising way to
create algorithms for genetic circuitry design, a critical area for our next
generation of scientists. &lt;br/&gt; The project builds upon the idea that to
fully contribute to a joint research project at the intersection of mathematics
and biology, undergraduates in mathematics must overcome apprehensions they may
have about working in a "wet" lab and biology students must overcome
apprehensions they may have about mathematical studies.&lt;br/&gt;In spite of
the uneasiness among certain students of working in a wet lab, we have found
that mathematically inclined students perform well when they are challenged to
follow a very precise sequence of steps that constitutes the core of any
molecular biology assay.&lt;br/&gt; We thus believe that the route for a
mathematically-oriented person to get involved into biology is to be immersed in
a wet lab environment as soon as possible at undergraduate level. The approach
taken for the mathematics-apprehensive biology students is to teach them that
mathematics is useful as a rich source of hypothesis. In the hands of
biologists, this hypothesis can lead to new valuable experimental designs. The
goal for the biology students should be to become capable of reading the
symbolic mathematical information and correlating it with the underlying
biological model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;