* 0827844
* Fabrication and Bioseparation Studies of Adsorptive Nanofelts Made from Electrospun Cellulose and/or Carbon Nanofibers
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Hao Fong, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 08/31/2013
* USD 349,085.00

CBET-0827844 Menkhaus

This NSF award by the Chemical and Biological Separations program supports work
by Professors Todd J. Menkhaus and Hao Fong at South Dakota School of Mines and
Technology to fabricate, characterize, and evaluate an innovative adsorptive
nanofelt made from electrospun cellulose and/or carbon nanofibers for the
purification of large biomolecules such as proteins, viruses and DNA. Adsorptive
membranes (also referred to here as adsorptive felts), have shown great promise
for the downstream separation of biopharmaceutical products. Unfortunately, the
binding capacity of large biomolecules on current commercial adsorptive felts is
often low and can be limited by available surface area. In this project,
innovative nanofelts made from cellulose and/or carbon nanofibers (with
diameters in the range from 10 to 1000 nm) will be fabricated and evaluated for
isolation of large biomolecules. These nanofiber nanofelts will provide a
significantly elevated surface area to bed volume ratio (one to two orders of
magnitude higher than conventional felts), which will offer much improved
binding capacity, without compromising the desired hydrodynamic properties of
high flow rates with low pressures. Nanofibers will be produced by the technique
of electrospinning. Initially, preparation conditions of cellulose and carbon
nanofibers will be defined, and the morphological and physical properties will
be characterized. The nanofibers will then be functionalized with ionized
chemical ligands, including state-of-the art three-dimensional grafting
technologies, for adsorption of target molecules by ion exchange, and
manufactured into nanofelts. Finally, static and dynamic adsorption capacity of
a target molecule, system dispersion, and pressure profiles will be assessed for
varying flow rates. Adsorption of both relatively large and small proteins, as
pure solutions and as a mixture, will be evaluated to model the process and
determine limiting factors of adsorption. This will provide insight into
predicting optimum properties (i.e. pore size, felt thickness, and charge
density) and operating conditions (i.e. flow rates) for the innovative nanofelt.
From an applied perspective, results obtained in this project will provide
improved technologies to reduce costs in the production of biopharmaceutical
products, and will also be directly applicable to other separation fields such
as environmental wastewater treatment. The multidisciplinary nature of the
project will expose undergraduate and graduate students to cutting-edge
technologies in both fabrications/evaluations and bioseparation applications of
the electrospun adsorptive nanofelt, and prepare them for careers in the rapidly
expanding nano and biotechnology industries. In addition, new problem-based
learning modules in nano separation technologies will be incorporated into
existing lectures/labs taught by the investigators (e.g., Design of Separation
Processes, and Chemistry of Nanomaterials) to introduce important nano materials
fabrication techniques and separations applications to a wide array of graduate
and undergraduate students.