* 0827186
* Beggiatoa alba B18LD, A Ubiquitous Sulfide-detoxifying Gamma-proteobacterium
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2008,10/31/2010
* Jochen Mueller, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 10/31/2010
* USD 271,688.00

Beggiatoa alba is a microorganism with a number of unusual features. It lives
poised at the oxic/anoxic interface of aquatic habitats where sulfide
concentrations are at commonly toxic levels, it has gliding motility and
filaments of some Beggiatoa are large enough to be visible to the naked eye.
Gliding motility is still poorly understood, even though the ability to move on
solid surfaces and within biofilms would be of tremendous environmental,
industrial and medical importance. Beggiatoa are distributed worldwide. Because
of its distribution and its ability to detoxify sulfide, this microbe is
important in the sulfur cycle of many coastal environments. The Joint Genome
Institute/DOE is supporting a shotgun (draft) genome sequencing of B. alba
strain B18LD. With this project, Mueller at Morgan State University will be
carrying out a detailed genomic characterization of B. alba B18LD. This
characterization will involve identifying as many of the gene functions as
possible in the genome. The goals for this investigator will be to evaluate the
role of this microbe in the cycling of sulfur, carbon and nitrogen in sulfide-
rich habitats such as wetlands, rice paddy fields, methane-seeps, and wastewater
treatment plants; to analyze global gene expression patterns involved in sulfide
oxidation and carbon metabolism, and to examine the molecular components of
behavioral responses to sulfide and oxygen and of gliding motility.
&lt;br/&gt;Not only is Beggiatoa important because of its ecophysiology and
behavior but Beggiatoa spp. have been used in teaching ever since Winogradsky
formulated the concept of chemolithotrophy (growth on inorganic substrates) in
1888. Mueller will be using the genome sequence of B. alba as a teaching tool in
his bioinformatics courses as well as in his environmental microbiology courses
at Morgan State University, which is a Historically Black University in
Baltimore, MD. Most of the students in these courses are from populations
traditionally underrepresented in science. His goal is to draw interest to the
fields of genomic science and bioinformatics as career choices. In addition, the
investigator will be establishing a B. alba B18LD genome web page for open-
access usage and input by the scientific community. The results of expression
profiling will be made available on the web page on a regular basis.