* 0827278
* UBM-Group: Interdisciplinary Training for Undergraduates in Mathematics and Biology at SDSU
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Peter Salamon, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2012
* USD 239,625.00

The San Diego State University (SDSU) Undergraduates in Mathematics and Biology
(UMB) program will increase the number of undergraduates who pursue a graduate
degree in interdisciplinary mathematical biology, health related fields,
environment or global change, nanomaterials, and civil infrastructure (e.g.,
ultrasensitive sensors), and using high-performance computing, modeling, and
state-of-the-art quantitative analytical tools. The project will have five major
components designed to prepare undergraduates in mathematics or biological
sciences (biology, microbiology) majors for interdisciplinary math-science
graduate school acceptance: (1) mentoring by a team of faculty members from
biology and mathematics, including monitoring and advising on academic
performance and career options, (2) immersion in an interdisciplinary research
project, (3) training in critical thinking skills and problem solving, (4)
academic enrichment for core courses, and (5) skill set building. Each year, the
UMB will identify a pool of eight qualified applicants who are talented
sophomores or community college transfer students with a strong interest in
interdisciplinary math and biology. Students will be recruited from the existing
SDSU science pipeline - the pool of pre-biology, biology, pre-mathematics and
mathematics majors, and transfer students from the surrounding community
colleges, particularly those trained through our "Bridges to the Baccalaureate"
program. This composite pool of students will be tutored in core mathematics and
biology courses, will participate in various workshops, including effective
research problem design, research ethics, and technical writing and scientific
literature reading skills. All of these activities will engage the eight
students who are the core of the UMB program, and who will receive a stipend for
their participation. Other (unfunded) mathematics and biology undergraduate
students interested in the content of specific modules will be welcome to
attend, as space permits.

UMB will serve as a model for development of an undergraduate interdisciplinary
program to feed our existing graduate programs in Computational Science. A
Discovery Team model will integrate collaborative research efforts between
faculty members from Mathematics/Computer Science and the Biology Departments
for both undergraduate and predoctoral interdisciplinary training in its New
Interdisciplinary Workforce program. This Mathematics-Biology Partnership model
can be disseminated effectively to institutions nationwide. The project
represents a departure from previous efforts to involve undergraduates in
research. Biology faculty will benefit from the quantitative analyses of their
research projects , while faculty in math, statistics and computer sciences will
have wider-ranging applications for their existing mathematical/computer
toolkits, as well as the challenge of new problems for new toolkits. Motivation
for mathematics majors will come from the expanded range of problem and project
options they can address as they decide their career paths in applied
mathematics; biology majors will master new skill sets as they pursue
bioinformatics and mathematical modeling applications in fast-growing career
areas of federal strategic interest in the biotechnology, pharmaceutical,
biofuels, environmental, and other human health-related industries. Research
projects will use quantitative and computational tools to investigate mechanisms
underlying processes in physiology, microbiology, genetics, ecology,
bioinformatics, and cell and molecular biology. The SDSU UMB program will also
address the national disparity of minorities in science and mathematics by
recruiting, retaining, training and graduating its students to ensure
competitiveness for graduate program acceptance in the emerging areas of
mathematical biology. Diverse Issues in Higher Education ranks SDSU as No. 10
for the number of bachelor's degrees awarded to ethnic minorities (28.4% of the
undergraduates at SDSU are from underrepresented groups, including African
American, Hispanic, Native American, Pacific Islanders, or students with
disabilities). The modest number of students involved will allow the SDSU UMB
program to employ one-on-one mentoring and year-round monitoring of each
student's success from program entry to graduation.