* 0827293
* Integrated Bioengineering Approach to Recovering Antimicrobial Function in Cystic Fibrosis Mucus
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2008,04/30/2010
* Gerard Wong, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 04/30/2010
* USD 240,000.00

CBET-0827293 Wong

This project investigates how antimicrobial molecules and inhaled antibiotics
are inactivated by anionic polyelectrolytes in mucus, and thereby contribute to
persistent airway infections. In cystic fibrosis (CF), such infections take an
extreme form and are the primary cause of death. Using recent fundamental
advances in bioengineering and biophysics, this multi-disciplinary work aims to
design and test new antimicrobials and therapeutic strategies to enhance human
airway defense.

Using a combination of state-of-the-art synchrotron x-ray diffraction and
computer simulations, this research will isolate and characterize the structure
and stability of electrostatic complexes of endogenous antibacterial proteins
and anionic polyelectrolyte components in infected mucus. This is an application
of recent ideas developed in soft matter physics on electrostatic interactions
in aqueous media. These structural tendencies will be examined in model systems
and in sputum collected from cystic fibrosis (CF) patients. Using this combined
knowledge, prototypical charge-reduced "non-stick" versions of antimicrobial
proteins will be designed for the electrostatic environment of the CF airway. In
a complementary approach, biocompatible unbinding agents designed to dissolve
electrostatic complexes between antimicrobials and anionic polymers in the
airway will be rationally designed and tested.

Broader impacts of the project are: - An understanding of the new rules
governing these combinations of fundamental interactions will have a
transformative impact in soft matter physics and colloid science. - Water
purification will be an emerging crisis both in the U.S. and internationally in
the next 30 years. By adding multivalent salts to contaminated water,
macromolecular impurities are condensed into aggregates that are removed through
sedimentation. Despite widespread use, these processes are not well understood.
The methods developed in this proposal for engineering electrostatic
interactions will be directly relevant for rational design of condensing agents
for water purification. - In the previous NSF support, members of the present
research team has helped coach a Science Olympiad team from Campus Middle School
for Girls in Urbana, as well as mentored a high school student who went on to
represent the US in the International Science Fair, by involving her in
research. These efforts will be continued. - The multi-disciplinary nature of
the proposed work will provide ample educational opportunities for the new kind
of hybrid scientists necessary in this emerging field. Moreover, when
appropriate, results from this work have been incorporated into the PI's
advanced undergraduate/graduate classes.