* 0827493
* The Spider and the Web: Inference in Ecological Networks
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* Mercedes Pascual, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 08/31/2014
* USD 636,096.00

Most living systems are comprised of complex networks of interactions;
describing the structure of these networks and their dynamic properties is a
major challenge for theoretical and empirical biologists. Food webs are
paradigmatic of complex natural networks. Formed by species and their feeding
relationships, they underlie the flow of energy through ecosystems and their
responses to human-induced and environmental perturbations, including species'
extinctions. Several simple models of food web structure exist, but these do not
accurately represent the complexities present in real networks. The goals of
this project are to develop new theory to extend simple models of food web
structure, investigate biological mechanisms underlying this structure, examine
the modularity of food webs, and consider networks quantitatively by
incorporating interaction strengths among components. In particular, the
researchers will address the effects of species extinctions on food web
robustness and examine how stability at the level of an entire network results
from instability of individual components. The resulting theory will provide a
general framework to advance our understanding of food webs and diverse other
complex biological networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will
contribute directly to education and outreach programs for grade school
students, undergraduate and graduate students, and postdoctoral researchers.
These activities will be coordinated through ongoing programs at the National
Center for Ecological Analysis and Synthesis' 'Kids Do Ecology' program and
through the University of Michigan. Web-based teaching modules and classroom
presentations will introduce grade school students to ecology, complex systems,
and mathematics by teaching them about many different types of biological
networks. Seminars presented at Historically Minority Institutions and Minority
Serving Institutions will introduce undergraduate students to careers in ecology
and mathematics. Results from the project will be incorporated into graduate and
undergraduate courses at University of Michigan.&lt;br/&gt;