* 0827644
* Labor Supply, Saving, and Marital Decisions
* SBE,SES
* 09/04/2007,07/31/2009
* Maurizio Mazzocco, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2009
* USD 84,216.00

Intellectual Merit. Evidence collected using the Panel Study of Income Dynamics
(PSID) indicates that labor supply, saving, and marital decisions are strictly
linked. The most striking findings are related to couples in the year before
divorce. Household saving drops significantly. Labor supply of married men
decreases slightly and the labor supply of married women rises by more than 200
hours a year relative to the average couple. Evidence gathered from the Irish
section of the European Community Household Panel Survey (ECHP) suggests that
household decisions are affected by changes in the outside options available to
individual members. Specically, Mazzocco and Chiappori (2004) find that the
introduction of divorce in Ireland had two main effects. First, it significantly
raised the probability of supplying labor for married women. Second, it
increased the amount of hours supplied on the labor market by married men. In
both cases, the effect is stronger for spouses married to individuals with more
education. This research project has three main goals. The first goal is to
develop a realistic model of household behavior that can capture the empirical
features of labor supply, saving, and marital choices. To that end a model with
the following two properties is developed. First, couples make efficient
decisions with the constraint that individual members cannot commit to future
allocations of resources. Second, married and single agents can transfer
resources over time by investing in financial assets and human capital. The
second aim is to estimate the model using the PSID and the Simulated Method of
Moments (SMM). The third goal is to employ the estimated framework to evaluate
the effect of the introduction of divorce in Ireland on individual welfare. This
project is one of the first attempts to estimate a unified model of labor
supply, wealth, and marital decisions. Broader Impacts. In the past twenty
years, policy makers have implemented policies to modify household decisions on
saving, human capital, and labor supply. Changes in tax rates on pension assets,
asset-based means-tested welfare programs, marriage penalty relief programs are
only a few examples of such policies. The empirical evidence indicates that the
evaluation of these policies requires a framework with two features: (i) the
relations between marital, labor supply, and financial choices should be
modeled; (ii) the dynamics of the individual outside options should affect
household decisions. This research project develops a model with these
properties and proposes to estimate its parameters. The preliminary results
suggest that, once estimated, the model will be a useful framework to think
about and evaluate public policies designed to affect household intertemporal
decisions.

Since this project analyzes the relations between marital, labor supply, and
financial decisions, the results will have an impact on the branches of
sociology and demography which focus on family decisions. Finally, the model
developed in this research project enables one to determine the effect of
changes in individual outside options on the relative decision power of the wife
and husband,and hence on their welfare. As a consequence, this research project
will also influence the areas of sociology and demography which are interested
in women's decisions and welfare.