* 0827011
* Collaborative Research: The Structure and Dynamics of Social Networks within the Southwest
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2013
* Jeffery Clark, Archaeology Southwest
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 09/30/2013
* USD 449,160.00

This project examines the structure and dynamics of social networks in the
prehispanic U.S. Southwest. It examines the period of time between A.D. 1200 to
1550, when there were massive displacements of population that coincided with
the formation of large, aggregated villages throughout the area. Using
information culled from unpublished and published reports, museum collections,
and limited archaeological fieldwork it supplements an existing database of
known Native American settlements in the region that was developed with prior
NSF funding.

The project has five major goals. First is to add material culture information
(especially ceramics and obsidian) to an existing GIS that contains only spatial
data developed by the Center for Desert Archaeology. This GIS database includes
roughly 2000 late prehispanic sites across the Southwest. Second is to
characterize the structure and dynamics of social networks in the area during a
period of great population flux and pan-regional interconnectivity. The third is
to apply new methods and theories of social network analysis from sociology,
Geographic Information System (GIS), physics, and mathematics to archaeology.
Fourth, researchers are to test current theories about network structure and
change using high-resolution archaeological data. And fifth, the researchers are
to integrate social network theory with powerful tools of spatial analyses such
as GIS.

Southwest archaeology has the potential to provide a "deep time" perspective on
the rise and fall of social networks within a relatively controlled and
circumscribed environment. Social network analysis has largely concentrated on
contemporary examples and this is the first application of social network theory
and methods to a regional archaeological database that measures change over
centuries and that is more analogous to the kinds of interactions that take
place in many non-urban settings throughout the world. Project results are
presented in a manner accessible to the public in variety of media, including
the Center for Desert Archaeology?s website, public lectures, and widely
distributed publications.