* 0827411
* The Evolution of Gene and Genome Architecture
* BIO,EF
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2013
* Michael Lynch, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/2013
* USD 829,965.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;Because all aspects of biodiversity ultimately
derive from DNA-level resources, a mechanistic theory of evolution must start at
the genomic level. This work focuses on the hypothesis that many aspects of
genome evolution are driven by nonadaptive forces (random genetic drift,
mutation, and recombination) rather than natural selection responding to
external ecological forces. Using mathematical/computational analysis, the
research will exploit the enormous set of resources available from whole-genome
sequencing projects, from viruses to organelles to bacteria and multicellular
species. Because evolution is a population-level process, priority will be on
developing a general theory for genomic evolution consistent with well-
established principles of population genetics, while spanning the fields of
computational biology and informatics, molecular and cellular biology, and
systems biology.&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal is to help transform the descriptive
field of comparative genomics into a more explanatory field of evolutionary
genomics. Under the proposed hypothesis, many of the complex genomic features
that are the hallmark of multicellular species emerged largely as a consequence
of a substantial reduction in the efficiency of selection, whereas the
streamlined genomes of microbial species result from highly efficient selection
opposing the accumulation of mutationally hazardous excess DNA. At the very
least, the theory to be developed provides a null (nonadaptive) hypothesis for
interpreting the evolution of genome complexity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: &lt;br/&gt;Through the integration of these various subprojects, the
overall goal of the proposed research is to help transform the descriptive field
of comparative genomics into a more explanatory field of evolutionary genomics,
as well as to help develop the intellectual infrastructure that will ultimately
be necessary for the emergence of a field of evolutionary cell biology. In
addition, the research project will be intertwined with a set of educational
goals, including: 1) the establishment of an annual set of projects associated
with a genome evolution class that services students from both the life sciences
and informatics; 2) the recruitment of mathematically inclined biology
undergraduates into a two- to three-year research program; and 3) the
development of an integrative ?training-grant?-like environment among the grant
participants.&lt;br/&gt;