* 0827332
* Understanding Complex Systems 2008 - Control Versus Self-Adjustment and Self-Organization in Living Organisms, Open Physical Systems, Machines and Organizations
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Alfred Hubler, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 06/30/2009
* USD 10,000.00

The proposal requests partial support for physics graduate students, young and
minority faculty to attend an interdisciplinary workshop and conference on
complex systems to be held in 2008 at the University of Illinois. Some of the
topics to be covered emergence and control of solitary waves on fractal
networks, including the dynamics shock waves, pulse creation and propagation on
neurons, the emergence and control of traffic congestions, and epidemics. Other
topics are the origin of cascading power and their suppression and the spread of
infections in form of epidemics, including the spread of ideas and new
technologies. Modeling the transition from peace to war, the emergence of
terrorism, and the rise and fall of social organizations will be covered as
well. The broader impact is that the conference is one of the primary networking
conferences for people working in cross-disciplinary areas. Women and minorities
are encouraged to attend by being provided with support. Also more than 50% of
the attendees will be graduate students and the students will be exposed to the
latest methods in dynamical systems and learn how they can be applied in very
diverse situations. The funds will be used for travel and lodging expenses for
the scientists, primarily graduate students, un-tenured assistant professors and
minority faculty.