* 0827246
* Gellation in Nanoparticle/Clay Suspensions: Mechanisms and Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2013
* John Walz, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 07/31/2013
* USD 316,250.00

CBET-0827246&lt;br/&gt;Walz&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;A
collaborative effort is proposed to investigate the behavior of binary mixtures
of disk-shaped clay particles and charged nanoparticles in aqueous solutions.
The study is motivated by a unique sol-to-gel transition that was recently
discovered by one of the PI's in mixtures of kaolinite clay particles and silica
nanoparticles. The gels display a very open, porous structure in which the clay
particles are arranged in edge-to-edge contact, while at the same time
possessing significant yield stress. In addition, the gels show a remarkable
ability to rejuvenate repeatedly and reproducibly after breakage by shear. These
properties suggest a variety of beneficial applications. &lt;br/&gt;The project
has two primary objectives. First, a comprehensive experimental investigation
will be performed to determine the fundamental mechanism driving the gel
transition. Specific issues that will be addressed include possible micro-scale
phase separation between the nanoparticles and platelets, importance of
deposition of the nanoparticles onto the faces and/or edges of the platelets,
and the cause of the observed edge-to-edge arrangement of the clay particles in
the gel. We will also explore the relationship between the measured rheological
properties of the gel and the development of the microstructure. Major
experimental tools to be used include field emission and environmental scanning
electron microscopy, atomic force microscopy, and rheometry. &lt;br/&gt;Second,
a variety of experimental tests will be conducted to measure the rheological,
mechanical, and material properties of both the gels and the silica/clay
composites obtained after drying and sintering. Knowledge of these properties is
critical for the eventual development of applications for these unique
materials. For the gels, their response to shear and normal stress, including
their ability to repeatedly reform after breakage, will be probed. Drying and
sintering these gels will produce silica/kaolinite composites with a very open,
porous structure made of relatively inert materials. In addition to studying the
actual drying and sintering process, measurements will be performed to determine
the composite's microstructure, compression strength, surface area, and thermal
properties. &lt;br/&gt;Completion of the proposed work will provide a thorough
understanding of the gellation mechanism, as well as knowledge of the key
microstructural and mechanical/functional properties of both the gel and the
resulting silica/clay composite. This knowledge will also be valuable in
understanding the behavior of other binary colloidal systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts of Proposed Work &lt;br/&gt;The project
will be a collaborative effort involving one senior and one junior faculty from
the Departments of Chemical Engineering, and Materials Science and Engineering.
Each of the PI's has expertise in their specific tasks to be performed. There
are a wide range of potential applications for the proposed materials, including
catalyst supports, filters, membranes, and heat insulating materials. While the
work will focus primarily on the silica/kaolinite system, the results would be
applicable to any system displaying a similar type of gel transition or
structure. &lt;br/&gt;The project will provide training to two graduate
students, and undergraduate participation will be actively pursued. In addition,
the PI's are heavily involved in increasing the enrollment of females and
minorities in engineering, especially in "forefront" areas like nanotechnology.
One example is our work with C-Tech2, a program focused on science and
engineering that brings 30 to 40 high school female and minority students to the
Virginia Tech campus for a two-week period each summer. The visiting students
are provided with demonstrations and information on the importance of
nanotechnology to society. The results of the proposed project will provide
significant additional resources for this important program.