* 0827057
* Producing mimosine-free Leucaena leucocephala through metabolic pathway engineering
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2008,12/31/2013
* Qing Li, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 12/31/2013
* USD 272,132.00

CBET-0827057&lt;br/&gt;Borthakur&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Principal
Investigators (PIs) seek to develop, through metabolic pathway engineering, a
mimosine-free leucaena that can be used as a fodder without any harmful side
effects to animals. Leucaena leucocephala (leucaena) is an important leguminous
tree for agro-forestry in many tropical and subtropical countries. Leucaena is
known as "the alfalfa of the tropics" since the high protein content of its
foliage is comparable to that of alfalfa. However, leucaena plants contain a
toxin, mimosine, which is harmful to animals. Producing mimosine-free leucaena
is a challenging task because the biosynthetic pathway for mimosine is unknown
and leucaena is recalcitrant to transformation. A novel metabolic engineering
strategy will be used for removing mimosine from leucaena by introducing genes
from its bacterial symbiont. This project will use two Rhizobium genes that are
required for degradation of 3-hydroxy-4-pyridone (HP), which is a precursor for
mimosine biosynthesis in leucaena. By expressing these genes in transgenic
leucaena, the metabolic pathway for mimosine will be redirected to produce
ammonia, pyruvate and formate, which should serve as additional nitrogen and
carbon sources for the plant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will lead the way
for neutralization of toxins in other legumes and non-legumes using metabolic
engineering approaches. Hawaii is a prime location for testing bioengineered
crops throughout the year, for which many scientists and trained technicians are
needed. This project will help to create a group of scientists for the near
future by training two graduate and six or more undergraduate students in
biotechnology. Special efforts will be made to recruit the native Hawaiian and
other Pacific Island students for training through this project. This project
will also enhance biotechnology education in Hawaii by training 24 science
teachers. Teachers will learn the latest developments in biotechnology, which
will be then transmitted to the students. Biotechnology education is essential
to stimulate interest of high school students to this rapidly growing
technology. Without proper biotechnology education there is always a danger that
the public may absorb negative publicity against biotechnology, transgenic
crops, and their testing in Hawaii.