* 0827119
* Travel Support for Students, Post-Docs, and Young Faculty to Attend Symposium AA at 2008 Spring MRS meeting to be held on March 24-28, 2008 in San Francisco, CA
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2008,03/31/2009
* Wei You, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 03/31/2009
* USD 3,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: ECS-0827119 &lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Wei
You &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective:&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proposal is
to request funds for the support of travel awards for graduate students, post-
docs, and young faculty to attend the Symposium AA " Conjugated Organic
Materials ?? Synthesis, Structure, Device, and Applications " to be held at the
2008 Spring Materials Research Society Meeting (Mar 24-28, 2008, San Francisco,
CA). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Given the current status
of the field of organic electronics and photonics, this symposium is timely, and
will be of great interest to the general materials community. Specifically, we
envision a high-impact, cross-disciplinary, and comprehensive symposium on
organic conjugated materials -- the electrically-active component of organic
electronics and photonics -- with emphasis on the chemistry, physics, the
processing-structure-property relationships, as well as device fabrication and
characterization of organic molecular materials and polymers.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;There will be ten half-day oral sessions and
three evening poster sessions and we expect many invited and contributed
speakers with a large number were planned This symposium will provide an
excellent opportunity for the attendees (especially graduate students) to stay
current with the state-of-the-art researches and to promote fruitful discussions
among researchers.&lt;br/&gt;