* 0827396
* Research Starter Grant: The Role of Competition Among Parasites in Driving Patterns of Disease
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2010
* Meghan Duffy, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 06/30/2010
* USD 59,625.00

Parasites are increasingly recognized as an important component of many
ecological systems and can have a variety of effects on human health. Despite
the recognized importance of parasites, little attention has been placed on the
interactions, including competition, that may occur among parasites within a
host. Such interactions may influence both population dynamics and community
composition. This project will take two approaches to address the potential for
competition between parasites. First, it will use a long-term dataset of
parasites of Daphnia dentifera, a common species of zooplankton, collected from
18 lakes in Michigan, to explore the possibilities for competition among
parasites. Second, it will take an experimental approach to examine how these
competitive interactions may occur. This combination of approaches will provide
a comprehensive answer to an intriguing ecological question.

Parasites are important in population dynamics of many organisms and frequently
have serious effects on human health. Thus, a better understanding of how
parasites interact may provide clues for how best to alleviate problems
associated with parasitism. At the same time, this work will help advance basic
ecological knowledge of parasites and the influence they may have on natural
populations. In addition, the proposed work will provide training and education
opportunities for a female post-doctoral fellow and for undergraduate students.