* 0827941
* Research Starter Grant: Exploring the nutrient dynamics of herbaceous taxa from temperate and tropical regions
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2010
* Catherine Cardelus, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 06/30/2010
* USD 50,000.00

Human-caused pollution is increasing nutrient loads to forest communities
worldwide. How these nutrient loads affect individual plants and their
communities is the focus of this work, which will be undertaken in two distinct
habitats, fern patches of northeastern forests and the canopy of tropical wet
forests. The understories of northeastern forests are often dominated by fern
patches that prevent seed germination of hardwood tree species such as oaks and
maples. In this study, fern patches will be fertilized to determine if increased
nutrients will affect their growth rates, reducing the presence of hardwood
seedlings and potentially reducing forest diversity. The rainforest canopy is
well known for its high diversity of plants, but it also is poor in nutrients.
In the laboratory, many species of epiphytes, plants that live on other plants,
will be fertilized to determine how individual species respond to additional
nutrients. Both of these studies approach a unified goal: to better understand,
and thus predict, how human-caused changes in nutrient regimes impact forest
plant communities and diversity.&lt;br/&gt; This work will support the early
professional career of a newly hired female faculty member at a primarily
undergraduate institution. The study will serve as a foundation for involving
undergraduate students in hands-on research at Colgate University, and includes
the establishment of permanent field study plots that will serve as long-term
research sites for faculty and students.&lt;br/&gt;