* 0827546
* Collaborative Research: Evolutionary Origins of the Brain Energetics and Adaptive Plasticity of Humans
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2014
* Morris Goodman, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,771,119.00

The human brain is distinguished by costly energetic demands and enhanced
plasticity. This combination of factors underlies some of the most unique
cognitive capacities of our species. The brain's capacity for learning is
greatest during childhood and involves the formation and refinement of new
neuronal connections. This process is driven by high rates of energy
consumption. This research project will identify the genetic changes during
evolution that brought about the human brain and explore the causal link between
the development of brain plasticity and metabolism. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
major aim of this project involves charting the changes in the brain's energy
utilization during the different maturational stages of humans. To accomplish
this goal, the interdisciplinary team is using positron emission tomography
scans of brain glucose consumption over the course of development from birth to
adult stages. These results will be integrated with the patterns presented by
RNA and protein data on the thousands of genes that are expressed at changing
levels in different brain regions across the same developmental stages.
Comparative data on the developmental expression of proteins and neuron
morphology in great apes and macaque monkeys are also being obtained to
determine whether the progression of molecular and cellular changes in human
brain development are distinctively different from our close relatives. The
investigators expect to find coordinated expression patterns in brain energetic
and brain plasticity genes showing evidence that adaptive evolution occurred in
their regulatory machinery during the origin of humans. The results should
provide important clues about the organization and function of the molecular
machinery that underpins the type of human brain plasticity that gives our
species its exceptional capacity to incorporate experience and learning into the
production of culture. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By focusing attention on brain
energetic and brain plasticity genes that show adaptive evolution during recent
human ancestry but are currently fixed across human populations, this project's
focus on shared genes that define human cognitive abilities reinforces the
conclusion of a common humanity. Thus the results of this project should be of
interest to the general public and to scientists across a wide variety of
disciplines, including anthropology, neuroscience, molecular evolution,
bioenergetics, endocrinology and pediatrics. Experimental determination of total
brain energetics during growth will enhance our ability to understand the age-
specific tradeoffs that the acquisition of larger brains would have required
during human evolutionary history, while also providing a new context in which
to understand metabolic diseases such as diabetes. Furthermore, this project
will advance research and education by providing training opportunities for
individuals at the undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral levels.