* 0827188
* SGER:  Research to Improve Communication by Pedagogical Agents
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2008,11/30/2010
* Jie Yan, Bowie State University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 11/30/2010
* USD 84,129.00

There is great need for accessible and effective intelligent tutoring systems
that can improve learning by children and adults. In this project, the PI will
investigate the role of facial expressions and head movements produced by a
lifelike animated character with the goal of indicating important information in
a story or the emotions of the characters. The PI's hypothesis is that stories
in which the virtual storyteller emulates natural head movements and emotions
will lead to increased engagement by subjects, more positive ratings of the
storyteller, and better comprehension of the stories. To validate the
hypothesis, the PI will conduct experiments in which she manipulates the head
movements and facial emotions of a virtual storyteller, so as to emphasize
specific speech intervals or to provide emotional expression through the
storyteller?s voice. She will analyze videotapes of subjects listening to and
looking at the storyteller to assess how attentive they are, and she will also
employ questionnaires to measure the subjects? impressions of how believable,
credible and human-like the virtual storyteller appears to be. She will further
ask subjects to summarize the stories they heard, and will then analyze the
summaries both for comprehension and for recollection of emotional content. By
these means the PI expects to lay the foundation for a powerful new experimental
approach for investigating engaging and effective communication by lifelike
animated characters through speech, head movements and facial expression of
emotions, and to derive important new insights about how voice and facial
expressions can be combined in optimal ways to enable pedagogical agents to
provide more believable and effective communication
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This exploratory research
will provide new insights and knowledge about the role of face and head
gestures, and facial displays of emotion, on engagement and learning in
intelligent tutoring programs that use lifelike pedagogical agents. Project
outcomes will inform the design of pedagogical agents that can produce more
engaging and natural dialogs and narrations, which in turn will ultimately lead
to more effective technology that benefits diverse learner groups across a wide
range of application domains.