* 0827201
* Development of a Borehole Optical Fiber Strainmeter
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Mark Zumberge, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2011
* USD 285,547.00

0827201&lt;br/&gt;Zumberge&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks
funding to develop a down-hole vertical strain sensor using an optical fiber
approach. The proposed sensor will increase robustness by deploying only optical
components down-bore ? keeping electronic components at the sediment-water or
above-ground level. Additionally, the fiber will be deployed outside the
borehole casing. The strainmeter will be deployed at the Piñon Flat Observatory
(PFO) to compare data with existing strain-measuring instrument packages. A goal
of this development is to extend the useful measurement frequency range. Strain
is an integral part of understanding fundamental tectonic processes in the
surface crust. An existing borehole at PFO will be used and data will be
compared and validated against horizontal strain volume from existing sensors.
The interferometric processing system has already been developed. Two main
intellectual goals are sought: 1) to improve and evaluate the prototype
instrument design and performance, and 2) to thoroughly test the assumption
vertical strain can be related to horizontal strain through existing models. The
management plan has the PIs and two other PI-level personnel receiving 0.5 month
per year salary support. Two development techs and a graduate student will
receive 3 month per year salary and tuition/fee support. A research project
assistant will receive one month per year salary support. The remaining funds
support supply and instrumentation acquisition and general logistical costs. The
project will support a graduate student and results will directly impact the
field of geodesy and has societal relevance in natural hazard
monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;