* 0827021
* DHB Collaborative Research:  Developing Non-Stationary and Network-based Methods for Modeling the Perception and Physiology of Emotion
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Fushing Hsieh, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 08/31/2012
* USD 139,800.00

DHB Collaborative Research: Developing Non-Stationary and Network-based Methods
for Modeling the Perception and Physiology of Emotion

PI: Sy-Miin Chow, University of North Carolina (lead) Collaborating institution:
UC Davis

Recent developments in dynamic systems modeling have led to new
conceptualizations of emotions as dynamic processes. This new paradigm has
created exciting research venues to extend our understanding of the perception
and physiology of emotions. It is clear that, given the complexity of both the
experiential and measurement aspects of emotions, such venues can only be
pursued through interdisciplinary collaborations. This project brings together
researchers in the fields of psychometrics, emotion/psychophysiology,
statistics, bioinformatics/biostatistics and financial econometrics to develop
techniques for studying the dynamics of emotions and affective processes.
Multiple measures of emotions will be collected over different time scales, with
the aims of using these data to (1) develop methods for estimating and
diagnosing differential equation models with time-varying parameters and random
effects, (2) develop methods for analyzing the dynamics of emotions as indicated
by facial electromyography (EMG) data, (3) use network-based methods to
represent within-individual transitions among discrete affective states and (4)
develop and organize tools for studying complex, non-stationary processes and
disseminate these tools to audiences across a variety of disciplines. In
addition to introducing novel methodologies for testing existing theories of
emotions, this project also provides new opportunities for methodologists to
refine and develop new techniques for studying dynamic systems. Beyond emotions,
the tools developed in this project can be used to examine other dynamic
processes such as lifespan development, disease propagation, and the emergence
and disaggregation of social networks.

