* 0827603
* Student Travel Support for 2008 ASME Student Mechanism Design Compeitition; New York City, New York; August 3-6, 2008
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2008,10/31/2009
* Hai-Jun Su, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Cerry M. Klein
* 10/31/2009
* USD 10,000.00

The goal of this proposal is to obtain travel funding for students
(undergraduate and graduate) participating as finalists in the 2008 ASME Student
Mechanism Design Competition. The competition is featured at the 33th Mechanisms
and Robotics Conference, which is part of the 2008 ASME International Design
Engineering Technical Conferences (IDETC) &amp; Computers and Information in
Engineering Conference (CIE) in New York City, New York. ASME IDETC/CIE is the
premier international meeting in the fields of Design Engineering and Computers
and Information in Engineering. This event is designed to showcase cutting edge
research and accomplishments, and to enrich the educational experience in these
fields. The purpose of the Mechanisms and Robotics conference is to advance the
understanding of the base of knowledge in mechanism design and robotics that all
researchers and educators will collectively draw upon in the years ahead to meet
the challenges and realize the opportunities of a globally competitive economy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A ?mechanism? is defined as, ?any device that transmits a
force or a motion in a deterministic way in order to perform a mechanical task.?
Mechanisms are the skeleton of more complex machine systems. Mechanism design
has been and will continue be one of the fundamental techniques that are widely
used and needed in industry. The objective of the ASME Student Mechanism Design
Competition is (i) to stimulate students? interests in mechanism design and
research and (ii) to promote advances in research and education in the theory,
design and application of mechanisms. Finalists are invited to present their
work at IDETC 2008. Finalists are judged on the basis of creativity,
practicality, integrity of analysis and design methodology, quality of the
fabricated prototype, quality of the final report and the conference
presentation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The competition is highly related to the NSF
Division of Civil, Mechanical and&lt;br/&gt;Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI),
more specifically the Engineering Design (ED) program which sponsors ?basic
research in engineering design? to ?advance our understanding of the
fundamentals of the product realization process.? The research of the mechanism
community covers a wide range of stages of product realization process, from
conceptual design (topological and dimensional synthesis) to optimal design and
prototype fabrication. Furthermore, the ED program is one of the major funding
sources for mechanism science research. &lt;br/&gt;