* 0827862
* Integrated optical nanosensors in a microbubble array cell culture system
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Michael King, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Revzin
* 08/31/2012
* USD 529,525.00

CBET-0827862&lt;br/&gt;Lisa A DeLouise, University of
Rochester&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is to develop a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS)
microfluidic device that will address the goals of cell sorting, microcell
culture and diagnostics in a single integrated device. To succeed in this
project, the Principal Investigators (PIs) have designed a stepwise research
plan focused on fabrication, theoretical and experimental characterization, and
demonstration of a proof of concept device. The proposal is focused in four
distinct areas; a parametric study of microbubble fabrication and fluidic
performance; cancer cell culture and cell density pharmacokinetic response;
demonstration of a nitric oxide biosensor integrated in PDMS; and outreach and
course development in microfluidics and
nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
primary outcome of this work will be to provide education and mentoring to
graduate, undergraduate and high school students in a highly interdisciplinary
research environment spanning aspects of material science, surface chemistry,
nanophotonics, microfluidics, and biomedical engineering. The mathematical
models developed to simulate fluid flows and gas diffusion through PDMS will
lead to new design principles. The concepts of optical sensors, nanotechnology
and microfluidic lab-on-a-chip devices will be integrated into a new 2 credit
bioengineering elective course. Algorithms will be made available on personal
websites. Lecture materials will be made available on a Blackboard Learning
System. Subject matter resulting from this research will be disseminated to
underrepresented students and teachers within the PIs' urban community at the
junior and high school levels through lectures and development of educational
materials in collaboration with faculty and staff in the University of Rochester
Center for Science Education and Outreach and the Life Sciences Learning Center.