* 0827872
* Oceanographic Instrumentation 2008
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* David Goldberg, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 08/31/2011
* USD 684,306.00

Proposal to acquire 14 items of shared-use scientific instrumentation for use on
R/V Marcus Langseth, operated by Columbia University as part of the University-
National Oceanographic Laboratory System (UNOLS) research fleet. The 14 items
requested, as prioritized by the PI, are: &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;1) Mammal
Mitigation PAM System &lt;br/&gt;2) Knudsen 3260 Sub Bottom Profiler
&lt;br/&gt;3) MCS Streamer Boot Repair System &lt;br/&gt;4) Seismic Sound Source
String Depth and Pressure Sensors &lt;br/&gt;5) MCS Streamer Recovery Devices
&lt;br/&gt;6) MCS Streamer Level Device Upgrade &lt;br/&gt;7) Near Field Seismic
Sound Source Hydrophones &lt;br/&gt;8) 2D MCS Acquisition Control and Processing
&lt;br/&gt;9) Dual Conversion UPSs &lt;br/&gt;10) Visualization Screens
&lt;br/&gt;11) MCS Digital Air Management Manifolds &lt;br/&gt;12) 75kHz ADCP
&lt;br/&gt;13) Test Equipment &lt;br/&gt;14) Large Format Plotter
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Between the time that the proposal was reviewed and the
award was granted, LDEO has needed to procure various instrumentation that in
discussions with program, were unanticipated and were clearly needed to complete
the first year of operations. As this is a very complicated and demanding
operation without operational precedent in the fleet, program has worked with
LDEO to provide the necessary flexibility to begin operations and to establish a
baseline of operational costs. Permission was granted to procure the following
instrumentation: &lt;br/&gt;1) Acoustic Floats &lt;br/&gt;2) Streamer Head
Sections &lt;br/&gt;3) Two 1500LL Sound Sources &lt;br/&gt;4) Four Gun Control
Modules &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:&lt;br/&gt; In the present
proposal, the items recommended for support provide an important shared-use
infrastructure capability for basic instrumentation that is cost-effective, and
will significantly improve capabilities for users of the Lamont-Doherty Earth
Observatory (LDEO) of Columbia University, who are a diverse group of
investigators from around the U.S. The LDEO technical support group has the
expertise to operate and support the recommended systems on the
vessels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;