* 0827347
* Immigration and the Dynamics of Labor Market Adjustment
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Ted Mouw, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2011
* USD 140,000.00

PI: Ted Mouw&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;?Immigration and the Dynamics of Labor Market
Adjustment in the United
States?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project
examines the effect of immigration on the employment and wages of native
workers. There is a contentious debate in the academic literature between those
who see the see the effect of immigration on wages and employment as small, if
not zero, and those who argue that there is a substantial negative effect for
less-educated native workers. This debate has spilled over into the media and
mirrors the polarization of the immigration debate in society as a whole. The
key to resolving this debate hinges on our understanding of how the labor market
adjusts to an influx of immigrants. As the local labor market quickly adjusts
through the out-migration of native workers away from high-immigration areas or
the in-migration of jobs in industries that absorb immigrant labor, it is
possible that the negative impact at the local level is quickly diffused
throughout the country, and that the length of time between observations in most
existing studies?typically the 10 years between censuses?is too long to model
the process of adjustment. With quarterly individual and firm-level
administrative data on the earnings and geographic location of workers from the
newly available Longitudinal Employer Household Dynamics (LEHD) data, the
investigators will model the process of labor market adjustment by following
individual workers over time. The LEHD combines the benefits of the detailed
geographic information and large sample size of the decennial census with the
strengths of individual longitudinal data sets. This unique data will allow the
investigators to model the short-term effects that are missed by other studies
that use census data, as well as document the longer-term effects on workers who
are displaced by immigration in specific industries. The investigators will also
analyze the impact of skill complementarities between native and immigrant
workers by occupation within detailed industries and at the firm level. The
proposed research has the potential to provide a definitive answer to the
question of the effect of immigration on the labor market. The findings will be
used to inform the important public policy debate over immigration by providing
clear empirical evidence on labor market impacts.&lt;br/&gt;