* 0827155
* Exploring Factors in the Social Ecology of the Home that Affect First-Grade Girls' Spatial Skills and Early Math Strategies
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Beth Casey, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 08/31/2012
* USD 499,681.00

Intellectual Merit: In the present study, researchers from the Applied
Developmental and Educational Psychology program at Boston College plan to
investigate the role of the home environment in the formation of girls' spatial
reasoning skills, and their ability to apply effective strategies for solving
math problems. This primary context for early development provides the initial
building blocks for the acquisition of spatial skills important to later math
and science. Yet, despite a long history of empirical and theoretical work on
the home as a major context of learning and development, there have been few
studies exploring the importance of this environment for girls' early spatial
and math development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is an extensive body of
research showing that males have an advantage over females on spatial reasoning
skills relating to the ability to use mental imagery and manipulation of images
as a way of solving problems. This gender difference has been documented as
early as ages 4-6, and thus, is present prior to formal schooling. Furthermore,
for girls in particular, these types of spatial reasoning skills are linked to
math performance. Yet, little is known about elements of the home environment
that might support the growth of girls' spatial reasoning skills. This present
study is designed to contribute to the understanding of how variations in early
home environments link to young girls' spatial and math performance in school.
This research has the potential to shift the perspective regarding later
challenges that girls experience in math and science; intervening early to
develop girls' spatial reasoning skills has potential to impact both their later
math skills and their math self-confidence.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;School spatial
and math assessments, parent interviews, and home observations will be conducted
with first-grade girls in the Boston area. The central goal of the study is to
identify the developmental consequences of both general learning supports and
math- and spatial-specific experiences available to young girls in their homes.
As an important component of this, girls living in families representing a range
of income levels, from poor to affluent, will be studied. Both the range and
developmental impact of girls' experiences in their homes will likely vary as a
function of economic constraints on families. The questions addressed in the
study include: (1) What elements of young girls' home environments predict their
spatial skills, as well as the strategies they use for math problem solving? (2)
Do girls' spatial skills mediate links between home environments and math
strategies? (3) Do these direct and indirect (i.e., mediated) relationships
differ for girls as a function of family economic status?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact : The major emphasis in gender and
mathematics has been on attitudinal factors and on ways of increasing girls' and
women's participation in math and science, with relatively less focus on girls'
cognitive and academic skills. Yet, if girls on average start out in school with
an early disadvantage in developing specific cognitive skills and strategies,
this may contribute to later difficulties in mathematics and science, as well as
engendering a lack of self-confidence and interest in approaching STEM content.
This research has the potential to reveal critical early experiences that enable
some young girls to form effective spatial reasoning skills and apply these
skills to mathematics problem solving. Understanding these influences will help
target future efforts to promote school readiness in mathematics, so that girls
may take full advantage of spatial thinking as a tool for solving math problems.