* 0827418
* CRCNS data sharing: Comparative Neuromics of Gastropod Molluscs
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Paul Katz, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2011
* USD 222,504.00

This award supports the preparation and sharing of computational neuroscience
data as part of a new component of the CRCNS program aimed at catalyzing rapid
and innovative advances in computational neuroscience and related fields.
Through a collaborative effort of many laboratories, this project combines
knowledge about the nervous systems of several important gastropod model
systems, including Aplysia, Clione, Helisoma, Helix (Cantareus), Hermissenda,
Limax, Lymnaea, Melibe, Pleurobranchaea, and Tritonia, in an effort to lay the
foundation for future comparative neuromics in
gastropods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Just as comparative genomics has enabled
researchers to understand the evolution and development of organisms in terms of
similarities and differences in their genomes, comparative neuromics, the
comparison of neurons and their connections across species, offers unprecedented
opportunities to increase our understanding of nervous system structure and
function. Gastropod molluscs are uniquely suited for neuromic analysis because
they have large individually identifiable neurons and work has proceeded for
over four decades on species ranging from terrestrial and aquatic pulmonates to
marine opisthobranchs, which inhabit diverse ecological niches. This project
will consolidate the published knowledge about gastropod neurons and neural
circuits into a searchable, extensible knowledge base, to be rendered in a
format that can be federated with other knowledge repositories and primary data
sources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will build on currently available
web-based tools and coordinate with other related efforts, such as NeuronBank,
Open Biomedical Ontologies, and neuroscience-specific ontologies being developed
for the Biomedical Informatics Research Network and the Neuroscience Information
Framework. The gastropod user community is involved in providing sources of
information and testing the outcome of the project to assure the accuracy of the
representation and the usability of the format. Consolidating the vast amount of
accumulated knowledge about gastropod nervous systems is essential for the
expanded use of these model organisms as genomic tools become available through
the Aplysia genome project and other initiatives. This project will serve as a
basis for federating other databases including neuronal morphology, neuronal and
neural circuit computational simulations, and signal transduction pathways. It
will also serve as a proof of concept for larger research communities with more
disparate nervous systems.&lt;br/&gt;