* 0827059
* IRES:    International Research Experiences for Students:   Coastal Oceanography in East Africa
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2014
* Jurgen Theiss, Theiss Research
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 07/31/2014
* USD 149,805.00

This IRES project offers U. S. students the opportunity to conduct research on
the virtually unknown dynamics of the Zanzibar Channel, a 40km-wide and 100km-
long area of ocean bounded by the Tanzanian mainland and the island of Zanzibar,
in collaboration with local researchers at the Institute of Marine Sciences
(IMS) in Zanzibar, Tanzania. This research experience, which will be open to
three undergraduate and graduate students from the US each year from 2009 to
2011, will allow students to produce new research results while experiencing
Tanzania, a country that is strikingly different from the US. The overall
research goal will be to develop a model of the dynamics of the Zanzibar Channel
that produces an annual cycle that resembles as closely as possible the real
annual cycle and thus can eventually be used to address natural resource
management issues. The students will spend two months at IMS in Zanzibar,
working on two different types of projects, one focusing on the model
development and the other on making oceanographic measurements in the Zanzibar
Channel to provide observational data for the model. The students will be
mentored by senior Tanzanian scientists, by Dr. Javier Zavala-Garay of Rutgers
University, who will be with the students in Zanzibar for 1.5 months each year,
and by a network of experts who have agreed to act as an Advisory Board to the
project. The development of a model for the Zanzibar Channel complements efforts
by the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission and the World Bank as both
have a mandate to promote capacity development in the marine sciences in the
developing world and both are supporting related projects in Zanzibar or in East
Africa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because relatively little physical oceanographic
research has been conducted on the Zanzibar Channel, this project will provide a
first understanding of the dynamics of that channel. Beyond local relevance,
coastal oceanographers are interested in new cases that might reveal unique
coastal processes or could be used for comparison with other coastal regions.
Because this project addresses one of IMS' top priorities, IMS will provide
oceanographic instrumentation and use of a research boat. Additional instruments
and computer support will be provided at no cost by the Scripps Institution of
Oceanography and the Georgia Institute of Technology,
respectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide U.S. strudents with
a rich and exciting international research opportunitiy and will also strengthen
research collaboration between U.S. and African scientists. Students will be
recruited from across the U.S., enabling many new partnerships between the U.S.
and networks already existing in East Africa. Results of the research and the
experiences of the students conducting research in Zanzibar will be documented
in publications, at conferences, and via a website. The research also has
potential to provide information of value to those managing natural resources in
coastal zones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported in part
by NSF's Division of Ocean Sciences, Geosciences Directorate.