* 0827514
* Heterogeneous Emulsion Catalysis: Transesterification using Amphiphilic Catalysts in Nanoemulsion Environments
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2008,12/31/2012
* Sandun Fernando, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Continuing Grant
* George J. Antos
* 12/31/2012
* USD 335,000.00

CBET-0827514 &lt;br/&gt;Fernando&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transesterification (or
esterification) is a widely used chemical reaction in the chemical industry.
Presently used homogeneous (liquid) catalysis is plagued with downstream product
separation difficulties which has led the quest for heterogeneous (solid)
catalysts. However, using heterogeneous catalysis is still a challenge due to
mass transfer limitations in liquid/liquid/solid (L/L/S) interface corresponding
to immiscible triglyceride/alcohol/catalyst phases, respectively. This proposal
intends to use a novel phenomenon, heterogeneous emulsion catalysis, to remove
the mass transfer bottleneck of L/L/S heterogeneous catalytic reactions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Our approach is to address mass
transfer limitations exhibited by immiscible L/L systems while ameliorating
downstream catalysts separation issues by developing a heterogeneous catalyst
that acts as an emulsifier (amphiphile) which essentially will be positioned at
the interface between the two immiscible liquids. According to our concept, the
amphiphilic catalyst first brings the two hydrophilic and hydrophobic liquid
molecules together and due to the emulsification properties of the catalyst,
stabilizes the emulsion. In the mean time, the catalyst will lend its active
sites for the reaction (in this case transesterification) to occur. When the
catalyst is separated after reaction, the emulsion loses its stability and will
coalesce to, now the products, fatty acid methyl esters and glycerol which are
hydrophilic and hydrophobic liquids, respectively. This process that has eluded
our attention may open up a new line of catalysts and catalytic processes that
may be propagated to many applications including biorenewable energy production.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We have proven that this concept is feasible via a series
of preliminary studies that have already resulted in a couple of peer reviewed
publications. During these studies, we observed that titanium isopropoxide in
its monomeric, dimeric, trimeric and tetrameric forms helped formation of stable
nanoemulsions when subjected to ultrasonication. Further reaction of these
systems resulted in fatty acid ethyl esters with some exhibiting above 133%
yield increase as compared to conventionally mixed systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This concept of heterogeneous amphiphilic-catalytic hybrid
inorganic polymers is novel and there is a knowledge gap in just about every
aspect of such a catalytic system. The beauty of this concept is the ability to
control the size of the heterogeneous catalyst particles by controlling the
amount of water in the solution which immensely helps testing our central
hypothesis, i.e., partially polymerized metal alkoxides acts as heterogeneous
amphiphilic catalysts in transesterification reactions. The rationale behind
this hypothesis is that the large surface area of the nanoemulsions will provide
for high reaction rates. The fundamental scientific question we plan investigate
is how an amphiphilic heterogeneous catalyst will function in such a
nanoemulsion environment. &lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this application are to:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Evaluate the effect of particle size (metal
isopropoxide oligomerization), component concentration and ultrasonic parameters
on formation and stability of nanoemulsions and &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2.
Determine the effect of oligomerization of metal isopropoxides on fatty acid
methyl esters yield. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This innovative and
creative work will generate enormous economical and environmental benefits in
addition to advancing our present understanding of science related to emulsion
catalysis. A major educational objective is to integrate research into education
via an innovative technique named "Application Centered Training" (ACT) which
engages students early in their undergraduate career with real world engineering
problems. This program is expected to introduce the nexus between science, math
and engineering and address several issues engineering education faces today.
Research Experience for Under Achieving Students (REUAS) is a concept the PI
would like to experiment where minority and under represented students who are
academically at risk (&lt;2.5 GPA and &lt; 26 standard ACT scores) will be
provided with research opportunities early in their undergraduate program. The
progress of these students will be tracked during the course of their
undergraduate career to evaluate whether exposing them into practical research
helps them resuscitate their excitement towards engineering education and the
degree program.