* 0827259
* Collaborative Research Proposal to Support US Participation in ICMMES
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2009
* Anthony Ladd, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Marc S. Ingber
* 05/31/2009
* USD 13,000.00

CBET-0827259&lt;br/&gt;Luo&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose to support students,
post-doctoral researchers, and junior faculty from US institutions to actively
participate in the International Conference for Mesoscopic Methods in
Engineering and Science (ICMMES). We will give special consideration to under-
represented minorities, women, persons with disabilities, and those in
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCU). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
creation of the ICMMES international Conference series is a direct response to
the growing interest in multi-scale and multi-physics phenomena observed in
nano- or micro-systems and biological systems, and the increasing importance of
computational science to research in all disciplines, especially to the
aforementioned areas. The focus of the ICMMES conference series is
mesoscopic/kinetic methods (e.g., lattice Boltzmann equation (LBE), lattice gas
cellular automata (LGCA), discrete velocity models (DVM), gas-kinetic schemes
(GKS), dissipative particle dynamics (DPD), smoothed particle hydrodynamics
(SPH) and various hybrid methods) for computational mechanics in its broadest
sense. Specific areas of interest include, but are not limited to,
mesoscopic/kinetic methods applied to: computational fluid dynamics (CFD),
rheology of complex fluids and soft-condensed matter, multi-scale/physics
phenomena in macro-, nano- or micro-systems, thermo-chemically nonequilibrium
systems, new algorithms and special computer hardware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objectives of the ICMMES Conferences are: (1) To bring together researchers and
practitioners from academia, research institutions, and industry to exchange and
disseminate up-to-date information, and explore new opportunities in the field;
(2) To expose young or new researchers to the state-of-the-art in the field by
means of short courses, in addition to the Conferences and the internet media;
and (3) To actively encourage underrepresented minorities, women, persons with
disabilities, and students in HBCUs to explore frontier of research by attending
the ICMMES Conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the United States played a
key role in the early development of mesoscopic methods, its strength has been
weakening throughout the past decade due to lack of funding, while European and
Asian countries have significantly increased their funding level in the field.
The relative weakness of the US is indicated by the fact that a small and
decreasing percentage of papers published in peer reviewed journals are by US
authors. Given the scientific importance of mesoscopic methods, it is urgent and
imperative for the US to increase funding support for research in the field. The
objective of this proposal is to seek NSF support to increase US participation
in ICMMES Conferences and to strengthen the US position in this fast-growing
research field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main intellectual merit of this
proposal is that it seeks to expose new or young US scientists to research
frontiers in a new, important, and rapidly growing field through active
participation in ICMMES Conferences, which constitute an ideal environment for
encouraging dialog and inquiry. Broader impact of this proposal includes
improving networking between US and international researchers; disseminating up-
to-date research information to the scientific community at large; helping
create a more inclusive and diverse community for young scientists; fostering a
synergy among researchers from different disciplines and institutions; and
strengthening the US position in a fast-growing field of research.