* 0827277
* HSD: Collaborative Research: Development and Resilience of Complex Socioeconomic Systems: A Theoretical Model and Case Study from the Maya Lowlands
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2008,02/28/2013
* Bruce Winterhalder, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Thomas J. Baerwald
* 02/28/2013
* USD 161,209.00

Societies marked by administrative hierarchies, rulers, and high degrees of
integration developed in multiple locations around the world beginning 8,000
years ago. The process was episodic and marked by frequent economic failure and
political disintegration, in some instances in the context of abrupt climate
change. This interdisciplinary research project will develop a human-landscape-
climate model for the emergence and resilience of complex socioeconomic systems
and will apply and test the predictions of the model with extant data and
findings from new research in the tropical Maya lowlands of southern Belize. The
project's primary goal is to model human behavioral responses to environmental
transformation, whether abrupt or gradual, by linking together processes of
settlement, resource exploitation, agricultural intensification, competition,
and polity stability. The project aims to develop a general theoretical model
that integrates population density and distribution, environmental suitability
as a function of economic intensification and endogenous environmental change,
and political exploitation. A secondary goal is to test this model at Uxbenka, a
Maya polity that formed in southern Belize between from 4,000 to 1,500 years
before the present (BP). Archaeological work in the region suggests that
integrated, spatially extensive societies formed in the context of demographic
expansion, agricultural intensification, environmental degradation, and eventual
fragmentation. The available paleoclimatic data indicate that an abrupt decrease
in rainfall played a role in the disintegration of certain polities from 2,100
BP to 1,800 BP. This episode was followed by the reintegration and proliferation
of yet more complex societies after 1800 BP. Many of these collapsed completely
at 1000 BP, again within the context of abrupt climate change. Extant data from
a century of research in this region, complemented by new paleoenvironmental,
archaeological, and ethnographic investigation in southern Belize will guide the
construction and appraisal of models meant to capture the causes of these
events.

Climate change in the context of human-induced environmental degradation is an
acute problem facing the increasingly interdependent global community of nearly
six billion people. It presents difficult policy issues of great importance for
contemporary societies. Climatic variability on multiple timescales can elicit a
range of human responses that depend on the distribution and density of human
populations, their modes of production, effects on environment, forms of
political integration, and control via coercion or ideological manipulation by
administrative hierarchies. General models capable of incorporating these
complex interactions are essential for exploring the stability and vulnerability
of complex socioeconomic systems. Southern Belize provides a well-researched
environmental and cultural context for the interdisciplinary, empirical studies
necessary to build and test such models and to appraise effective and
ineffective responses. Along with academic and popular publications, the
research team will develop education modules for primary and secondary schools
in the U.S and Belize, provide teacher workshops and community outreach for
sustainable development, and offer project-based interdisciplinary experiences
for university students in the U.S. and Belize. Project data, analyses and
models will be made available through an on-line archive. An award resulting
from the FY 2008 NSF-wide competition on Human and Social Dynamics (HSD)
supports this project. All NSF directorates and offices are involved in the
coordinated management of the HSD competition and the portfolio of HSD awards.

