* 0827791
*  International Year of Astronomy 2009 in the United States - A National Program
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Susana Deustua, American Astronomical Society
* Standard Grant
* Robert Scott Fisher
* 08/31/2011
* USD 599,967.00

Four hundred years ago, Galileo Galilei pointed a small telescope at the sky and
made startling discoveries, which he communicated in his book Siderius Nuncius.
To celebrate this 400th anniversary and to renew the connection between
astronomy and the public, the International Astronomical Union (IAU) declared
2009 as the International Year of Astronomy (IYA) and received official
international designation from the United Nations. Nearly 100 countries are
already planning country-specific activities connected with the overarching
goals of the IAU. The American Astronomical Society and its partner
organizations have developed a comprehensive program of activities that (1) are
consistent with the overall IAU goals for the IYA, (2) are tailored for the U.S.
public and its astronomy communities, (3) are structured to be scalable,
allowing an ongoing fundraising effort to substantially support the major
activities, (4) are structured to have maximal impact at the least possible
cost, and (5) are potentially sustainable into the future. With funding from the
National Science Foundation the project will be well placed to carry out core
programs and garner additional external support to fully implement the planned
projects and programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U.S. national IYA programs will
allow for the distribution of current, accurate astronomical research results to
the public at large and the education, through a variety of methods, of the
public at large about the science of astronomy. Some IYA projects will achieve
this through hands-on workshops or involvement where participants learn the
inner workings of a telescope or measure the brightness of the night sky and
understand the implications of this observation. Some programs will achieve
broader impact through the dissemination of knowledge using channels the general
public find comfortable such as newspaper inserts, public service announcements,
and world wide web pages.