* 0827294
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Subsistence Change in the Middle to Upper Paleolithic in Southern Greece:  Klissoura Cave 1 and its Context within the Mediterranean Basin
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2010
* Britt Starkovich, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2010
* USD 14,400.00

In a dissertation research project conducted under the supervision of Dr. Mary
Stiner, Britt Starkovich will study changes in human hunting strategies from the
Middle through Upper Paleolithic (about 80,000 to 15,000 years ago) at Klissoura
Cave 1 in Peloponnese, Greece. Klissoura Cave 1 contains the longest, most
complete Pleistocene archaeological sequence that has been excavated to date in
Greece. The Greek Paleolithic has thus far been understood from a small handful
of sites, with much variation in the quality of archaeological deposits and
subsequent excavations and publications. Klissoura Cave 1 is well-excavated and
contains many intact cultural features and strata. Starkovichs in-depth analysis
of the animal remains from the site would greatly enhance our knowledge about
Paleolithic subsistence strategies in this part of the Mediterranean.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research on long-scale change in human diets is important
in understanding adaptations that allowed our species to survive and flourish in
a world of unpredictable climates and nutritional uncertainty. Much can be
learned about the behaviors of past foragers based on their hunting decisions.
Changes in subsistence over a long temporal sequence such as that at Klissoura
can shed light on larger demographic, social or environmental changes. These
shifts can be detected from trends in prey species representation and the body
parts of large prey animals that were transported from a kill site to a home
base, and the ages of the animals hunted. In considering changes in species
representation, it is important to look at both small and large game. Shifts in
small game use are often a more sensitive indicator of human dietary change, and
possible related changes in human population densities. This project examines
these indicators of changing human subsistence behavior, with special attention
to small game, as well as potential non-human factors, such as carnivore damage
or weathering, that may have degraded some of the archaeological materials and
biased the assemblage. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond research questions of
interest to social scientists, this project will have broader impacts in both
the public and scientific realms. The Greek people have a long tradition of
being interested in their past, but they have very little exposure to time
periods before the temples and shrines of Classical Greece were built. The
directors of the Klissoura project have reached an agreement with the Nafplio
Museum, eastern Peloponnese, to create a public exhibition on the Paleolithic
occupations of Peloponnese based on the findings from Klissoura Cave.
Starkovich's results on the animal remains will be a significant part of in the
display. The museum exhibition on Klissoura Cave will provide Greek people and
the many international visitors to the museum with a deeper understanding about
past. From a scientific standpoint, the Klissoura project is a large-scale
collaborative effort, involving an international team from Greece, Poland,
Belgium, Spain, and the United States, conducting interdisciplinary research on
all aspects of the site. International collaborations are critical to scientific
endeavors, because they allow researchers from different backgrounds and
paradigms to interact and learn from one another and to have access to sites and
technologies that would otherwise be unavailable without the larger group
effort. NSF funding of this project will facilitate the training of a graduate
student and forward the working relationships formed on the Klissoura project
well into the future.