* 0827911
* Digital Deliberation: Searching and Deciding About How to Vote
* CSE,IIS
* 11/29/2007,08/31/2010
* Scott Robertson, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Xiaoyang Wang
* 08/31/2010
* USD 231,504.00

A considerable amount of political activity is moving onto the Internet. This
includes information dissemination by candidates, parties, issue advocates,
campaigns, governments, news and opinion media, and individuals which is
directed at citizens and potential voters. It also includes active participation
by citizens in interactive digital environments mediated by social software such
as blogs, opinion forums, discussion groups, etc. While there has been
considerable study of the large scale demographics of this movement primarily
using survey methods, there have been few close up studies of individuals
involved in digital democracy using experimental and observational methods.
There has also been a lack of empirical user studies in support of the design of
software interfaces to support digital democracy. In this project, people will
be observed closely as they use digital materials to make voting decisions. A
series of empirical studies using real online materials in mock voting exercises
will examine user behavior in this domain. Study issues include the conceptual
categories that people use to understand political information, browsing and
decision making strategies, and personalization. Another set of studies will
examine more social uses of digital information. Questions include interest in
sharing profile information, annotations, and opinions with
others,&lt;br/&gt;impact of shared information on decision making, and the
interaction of privacy and information sharing. All studies will compare
participants from diverse backgrounds and situations. Information gathered in
the empirical studies will be used to help design a Voter Information Portal
that organizes political information for citizens and helps them make decisions.
The portal would use Internet information found by commonly-used search engines
and allow voters to reorganize it into user-centered categories, annotate it,
and share it. Issues of privacy and ethics in this context will be
examined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of the project involves the development of an understanding of how people
wish to use, and do use, emerging technologies to learn, remember, reason about,
and make decisions in the context of civic and government activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Impact&lt;br/&gt;There is very broad impact of the
proposal in that resulting systems couldinfluence citizens of many backgrounds
and circumstances, and can be utilized by developers and implementation decision
makers in&lt;br/&gt;governments, private organizations, and academic settings.
The educational goals of the project include the production of digital
government systems that encourage learning about civic issues by citizens. The
goal of making digital government work for all citizens, with specific attention
to issues of equity and the digital divide, addresses diversity goals.