* 0827484
* GSE/RES: Women in Science from High School to College: Evidence from New York City Public School Students
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Amy Ellen Schwartz, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 08/31/2011
* USD 354,726.00

Intellectual Merit: This is a study of the sequence of educational choices and
outcomes leading women and men to a college major in a science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) subject: high school STEM courses taken,
learning and performance measured by grades and state examinations, and eventual
college major. Research questions center on factors that, based on sociology of
gender theory, are expected to affect students' decisions to major in a STEM
area in college, and to affect women and men differently, including high school
structure and culture, the gender composition of teachers and peers, curriculum,
school-college connections, and size.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives are to
identify factors that increase women's propensity to major in STEM fields, how
these factors vary by race, language ability, immigrant status, and poverty, and
how the transition from high school to college may serve to ameliorate gender
inequities. The student- and school-level data on several cohorts of the large
and diverse New York City (NYC) public high school student population and the
subset that goes to the City University of New York (CUNY) is unique by its
size, diversity, the wealth of variables available, and its longitudinal nature
that allows for a hierarchical linear model (HLM) analysis using students and
high schools as separate levels. Large sample sizes and access to gender, race,
immigration, and poverty measures at the student level, provide ample power for
substantive subgroup analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methodology moves beyond
single outcome analysis, including test scores on several subject examinations,
high school course taking in several subjects and college majors. The HLM
framework links these together and the various individual- and school-level
influences on these variables are analyzed. The interaction of educational
institutions and student-level heterogeneity are a focus. Rather than assume
that high schools affect participation in STEM in the same way for all students,
the diversity of NYC high schools and students is used to estimate interaction
effects of high school environments on various student subgroups. This method
produces a more nuanced set of results than was previously possible using
methodologies that assumed a single effect for women and men of all subgroups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The broader impacts center on the
contribution to understanding how high school reforms can foster greater female
participation in STEM. Disadvantaged women (who tend to be overrepresented in
large urban school systems) in STEM, especially those who make it into public
colleges, are understudied and would greatly benefit from policy reform. Despite
the geographic focus on NYC, women pursuing STEM in large, diverse school
systems, and working and middle class students in public colleges are exactly
the populations which policy reforms are expected to benefit the most, and they
are understudied because of lack of data. CUNY, with senior and community
colleges, of varying levels and requirements, and programs for students from the
struggling to the gifted, is representative of many college situations that
students encounter elsewhere. This research will also enlighten the nationwide
debate on improving college access and success though community colleges.
Through a partnership with the NYC Department of Education and wide outreach and
communication, the study?s findings will advance the ongoing discussion about
how districts might impact the gender gap in STEM.