* 0827313
* Sacred Values and Biological Antecedents of Political Conflict
* SBE,BCS
* 10/15/2008,03/31/2014
* Gregory Berns, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 03/31/2014
* USD 1,249,941.00

This research investigates the way political conflicts are influenced by sacred
values, which are values that incorporate ethical or religious beliefs and are
associated with human behavior that seems motivated independently of its
prospect of success. Past research has approached the study of political
conflicts as though they were between instrumental actors -- people and groups
aiming to maximize their instrumental gains and minimize losses. Indeed,
rational actor models have long dominated strategic thinking at all levels of
government policy. However, many key components of decision-making vary with
context, across social relations and domains, and as a function of whether or
not a choice has ethical or moral entailments. The guiding hypothesis of this
research is that people in political conflicts make non-instrumental judgments
and decisions when they conceptualize the issues under dispute as sacred values,
such as when groups of people transform land from a simple resource into a "holy
site." Previous research carried out by this interdisciplinary team of
investigators has advanced theoretical understanding of sacred values, developed
novel methods of studying their impact on political decision-making and
negotiations, and demonstrated their role in non-instrumental and often violent
choices in political contexts. However, scientific investigation of sacred
values is still in its infancy and more needs to be done. Specifically, this
research: 1) investigates biological and cultural antecedents of sacred values
and the social identity functions of sacred values across cultures, 2) probes
the role of sacred values in influencing violent and seemingly intractable
political conflict, and 3) uses this knowledge to investigate possibilities of
reducing political and cultural conflict. The methodology integrates basic and
applied research, combining brain imaging studies with laboratory and field
experiments, surveys and interviews in order to provide "real-world" relevance
for policymakers as well.