* 0827249
* SGER:  Microwave Induced Large Angle Magnetic Dynamics and Switching in Confined Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2008,06/30/2011
* John Xiao, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Taleff
* 06/30/2011
* USD 150,000.00

0827249_Xiao&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL: To be able to design and fabricate
magnetic elements with controllable magnetization dynamics and switching
behaviors are an ultimate goal in the field of magnetism. Through decades of
research, progress has been made in dynamics with small angle precession where
the assumption of linear response is valid. Magnetization dynamics with large
angle precession and switching behaviors remain to be poorly understood, mainly
due to the lack of experiment techniques that characterize the damping constant,
a critical parameter in magnetization dynamics and switching, at large angle
precession with selected spin wave mode, let alone its relationship to
structural properties such as shape and composition. To address these properties
are essential to understanding the magnetization dynamics accompanied with
switching behaviors, leading to high payoff and transformative research. In this
SGER, PI will design and implement a sensitive experimental setup to
characterize (1) the damping constant at selectable large angle with stable
precession and with well defined spin wave modes, (2) magnetization switching
behaviors in presence of different microwave frequency and power, and (3) their
relationships with structural properties. The research is high risk in nature
because of the stringent requirements in the set up sensitivity in order to
characterize nanometer thick films of submicron size. The problem may have to be
solved by iterative designing and modeling of microwave transmission line along
with sample position placement. NON-TECHNICAL: In addition to the high pay-off
in scientific understanding of magnetization dynamics accompanied with
switching, the high risk undertaking will significantly impact on the recording
industries, which are searching for solutions to meet ever increasing storage
density demands that have exceeded fundamental physics limits. The research
offers microwave assisted magnetization dynamics, solving the conflicting
requirements of a small switching field and a long term thermal stability of a
magnetic storage bit. The setup can also be expanded to incorporate other
existing techniques that can significantly enhance its capability that do not
exist currently. Finally, the combination of microwave and spin polarized
transport measurements could potentially lead to new phenomena and new types of
devices that was not possible before. Such a premise is extremely enticing
considering the broad applications in both spintronics and microwave fields. In
this regard, training graduate students with expertise in microwave,
magnetization, and theoretical model are highly desirable and will be achieved
in this proposal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key words: Magnetization dynamics,
magnetization switching, microwave, microwave&lt;br/&gt;wave assisted switching,
magnetic domain, ferromagnetic resonance, large
angle&lt;br/&gt;precession&lt;br/&gt;