* 0827993
* SGER: Intensive Collection of Paleocene-Eocene Mammal Fossils and Development of a Stratigraphic Section in the Trans-Saharan Seaway (Mali)
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2008,01/31/2010
* Maureen O'Leary, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Boush
* 01/31/2010
* USD 29,988.00

SGER: Intensive Collection of Paleocene-Eocene Mammal Fossils and Development of
a Stratigraphic Section in the Trans-Saharan Seaway
(Mali)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Maureen O?Leary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by EAR (SGP), Environmental Biology, and the Office of
International Science and Engineering. 40-80 mya shallow seas inundated the
region now occupied by the Sahara Desert, and supported an extraordinary
diversity of marine and nearshore species. This time interval is significant
because it also included some of the hottest recorded climates of the last 100
Ma of Earth history. Few well-understood stratigraphic sections in this
interval, however, are known from the African tropics, and even fewer that also
yield extensive vertebrate fossils. Northern Mali has extensive, relatively
unexplored sedimentary deposits from this time. Our preliminary work there
(1999, 2003) indicates excellent potential for developing terrestrial-near shore
stratigraphic sections spanning the Paleocene-Eocene (P/E) boundary, with
vertebrate, micro-, and macroinvertebrate fossils. Study of the stratigraphy and
systematic paleontology of this area could catalyze regional examination of the
P/E boundary in the African tropics.&lt;br/&gt; Here we propose a Small Grant
for Exploratory Research during which we would take a 5 week expedition (Jan.
'09) to these known fossiliferous rocks of Mali with two major goals: (1) to
target collection of complete and associated mammal and other vertebrate
fossils, and (2) to establish a robust stratigraphic framework for these
vertebrate discoveries using a combination of magnetostratigraphy,
chemostratigraphy, sequence stratigraphy and biostratigraphy. The urgency of our
application stems from our recent award of a National Geographic grant for
$26,664 towards these goals. The budget of that grant does not, however, cover
the cost of an expedition with students as well as the PI and co-PIs. With
combined SGER funding, however, we would be capable of mounting a full-sized
expedition that would train Malian and American graduate students, and bring new
expertise to a region of the world that could yield discoveries transforming our
knowledge of the early evolution of mammals in Africa. &lt;br/&gt;The expedition
will include a non-Malian team: O'Leary (mammal systematics), Roberts (sequence
stratigraphy, sedimentology), Tapanila (biostratigraphy, ichnology), Goodwin
(chemostratigraphy), Muttoni (magnetostratigraphy), and McCartney (Ph.D.
student, paleontology), and a Malian team Sissoko (mammal evolution), Bouare
(sedimentology), Cisse (Ph.D. student, sedimentology). We have a proven ability
to work together having collaborated on two expeditions and published eight
joint papers.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit.- Our pilot research indicates that
Malian deposits of the Trans-Saharan Seaway contain the most continuous record
of Cretaceous-Neogene sedimentation in tropical Africa. Pilot work has resulted
in several well-defined P/E sections that include the P/E boundary constrained
to within several meters. Development of these sections would lay the groundwork
for transformative research by establishing an African comparison for the well-
studied Early Tertiary basins of North America and Asia. P/E mammal-bearing
sections south of the Sahara Desert are also very rare, yet molecular
phylogenetics research on mammals predicts that Africa had a rich mammal fauna
at this time that remains to be discovered. &lt;br/&gt; Multiple stratigraphic
sections will be mapped and measured at the sub-meter scale, and detailed fossil
sampling undertaken. Identification of facies along with key surfaces will help
correlate sections within a sequence stratigraphic framework. Provenance,
geochemical, and chemostratigraphic analysis will aid in correlations. Oriented
hand samples for magnetic polarity stratigraphy will be collected at high-
resolution (m-scale) and tied to measured sections, with emphasis on intervals
of section that display potential for recovery of a continuous polarity
record.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts - This project involves seven diverse
scientists from American, European and African institutions. Two students - one
Malian and one American will participate in the expedition and will publish on
the discoveries.