* 0827822
* Effect of Electrostatic Fields on Self-Assembly at Surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Nicholas Melosh, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 08/31/2011
* USD 199,965.00

CBET-0827822&lt;br/&gt;Melosh&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Self-assembly at interfaces
involves a delicate balance between charge, bonding strength, transport, and
reversibility. External fields or non-uniform charge distributions can alter
assembly behavior in surprising ways by accelerating, inhibiting or changing the
assembly process. In particular, many molecular and biological species are
themselves highly-charged systems which may also undergo significant
conformational and electrostatic reconfiguration during reaction/assembly. This
general problem of self-assembly in external fields and charge-redistribution
during the assembly process has received little attention, yet is vital for the
goals of top-down/bottom-up patterning or more traditional applications such as
DNA microarrays and biosensors. This project will systematically measure how
electric fields modulate self-assembly at interfaces, and develop a fully-vetted
theoretical model. A new optical technique will be applied to monitor the
spatial and temporal build-up of assembling species as well as the ionic double
layer with single nanometer accuracy, providing new, quantitative information on
the dynamics of highly charged species. In these experiments DNA serves as an
ideal model system, as preliminary studies have shown that ionic strength and
electric fields have some effect on assembly, but a complete theoretical model
has not been established. DNA transport to the interface, hybridization, and
melting kinetics will be studied as a function of length, potential field,
mismatch locations, and charge density. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of this project is to elucidate how electric fields and ion distributions
affect self-assembly mechanisms. Fundamentally, this work will fill a void in
our understanding of how highly-charged species interact and react at surfaces
under an external bias. While small ion and colloidal behavior in external
fields are well-established areas, self-assembly under electric fields, the
tendency of monomer reconfiguration during assembly, and the effect of force
distribution on DNA within field gradients have not been explored. Mean-field
and Brownian dynamics theoretical models will be developed that can replicate
the results of these experiments, providing deeper insight into their mechanism.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project include developing
models to predict the hybridization and melting dynamics of DNA on surfaces,
providing straight-forward error correction methods for nanomaterials assembly,
educate graduate and undergraduate students, and to disseminate these findings.
Development of new methods to control interfacial activity is important for
separations, bio-fouling, DNA-array technology and coatings. A full
understanding of the interplay between assembly and fields will allow design of
pulse algorithms and conditions through which to greatly accelerate DNA
hybridization while reducing mis-matches and cross-contamination, a critical
problem for commonly used DNA microarrays, and can be implemented in a number of
applications. These results will be widely shared with other researchers,
foremost through development of a website with free public access to the codes
and protocols used. In addition to scientific and technological impact, this
proposal incorporates an educational outreach component as well. Undergraduate
research, curriculum development, scientific professional development, and
tutoring elementary school students are an integral part of the research
program.