* 0827205
* UBM-Group, RUI: Undergraduate Research Experience in Mathematical Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* George Yates, Youngstown State University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 08/31/2012
* USD 238,940.00

This program will advance interdisciplinary education in mathematics and
biology by mentoring mathematics and biology students in collaborative,
interdisciplinary research projects and developing a series of courses that
incorporate both mathematical modeling and biology. The program?s goals are to
engage undergraduates in interdisciplinary research, enhance knowledge of
mathematical biology, immerse students in the scientific community, develop
effective cross-disciplinary communication, institutionalize courses and degree
options in biomathematics, and recruit members of underrepresented groups to
mathematical biology. Students will participate actively in unique research that
supports their development of proficiency in interdisciplinary communication and
entry into the professional research community. Selected undergraduate students,
Mathematical Biology (MB) scholars will work in teams of equal numbers of
biology and mathematics majors and, with joint mentorship of biology and
mathematics faculty, will develop research projects within the central theme of
mathematical modeling and analysis of cellular processes. Students will initiate
their research during a summer full-time research program, continue their
research during the following semesters, and submit a final written report, in
journal-ready format. They will learn techniques of electrophysiology,
immunochemistry, proteomics, dynamical systems analysis, mathematical modeling,
and statistics and apply these methods to elucidate the underlying mechanisms of
the biochemistry or proteomics of cellular dynamics. &lt;br/&gt; The program
will train and mentor undergraduates for careers in mathematical biology.
Students will disseminate their results through journal publications and
presentations at scientific meetings, and a regional undergraduate student
conference in mathematical biology will be initiated to extend impact of the
research program to other students. Both new courses and existing courses will
be enhanced with interdisciplinary mathematical biology content and
laboratories, also extending the benefits of the program to students beyond the
MB scholars. New degree options and a minor in Biomathematics will form the
institutional structure to make biomathematics an integral part of the
curriculum at YSU. The program will foster minority participation through
collaboration with the Ohio Science and Engineering Alliance / Louis-Stokes
Alliances for Minority Participation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;