* 0827111
* Joint Research Planning Meeting-Comparative Studies of Coastal and Nearshore Environmental Changes in the U.S. and China
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Thomas Bianchi, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Thomas W. Chapman
* 08/31/2009
* USD 19,998.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OISE 0827111 &lt;br/&gt;Chang, Ping, (Texas
A&amp;M U.)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a Joint Research Planning
Meeting on Comparative Studies of Coastal and Nearshore Environmental Changes in
the U.S. and China. The meeting will be held in Qingdao, Shandong Province,
China, in October 2008. The key Chinese partners are Prof. Zousheng YANG, of the
Ocean University of China; and Prof. Dunxin HU, of the Institute of Oceanology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences. Preliminary discussions between the TAMU and
Chinese researchers have identified three priority research areas: 1)
nearshore/coastal processes, 2) biogeochemical processes, and 3) climate/basin
scale processes. The planning meeting will allow the participants to prepare
joint research proposals on these themes. The research proposals will exploit
the parallels between the Yangtze and Mississippi River basins to resolve
uncertainties on the interrelated themes of coastal and ocean environments that
are heavily impacted by human activity and climate variability and change. Such
changes, in turn, have the potential to create widespread societal and
environmental changes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ten participants to be
supported by the NSF award include two senior faculty, two junior faculty, and
six advanced graduate students and postdoctoral researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The joint research proposals expected to result from this
planning meeting will be relevant to societal issues shared by the U.S. and
China and beyond, ranging from local and regional fisheries economies to
permanent changes in global climate. In addition to the research advances, the
proposals will enhance the training of coastal, ocean, and climate scientists
capable of addressing critical environmental concerns at all scales of space and
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; ***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;