* 0827274
* SGER: Superlow Fouling Materials Inspired by Naturally Occurring Zwitterions
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2008,09/30/2009
* Shaoyi Jiang, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 09/30/2009
* USD 100,000.00

CBET-0827274&lt;br/&gt;Jiang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Zwitterionic-based materials
are highly effective at resisting biomolecular attachment from complex media due
to their strong hydration. Thus, they are potentially an excellent alternative
to commonly used, but unstable poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG). Natural zwitterions
in living organisms have unique combinations of positive and negative charges in
such a way that makes them effective and stable in complex media. However, it is
hard to predict the performance of these natural zwitterions based on their
molecular structures alone. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
objective of this work is to establish connections between the structures of
natural zwitterions and their hydration capabilities from both molecular
simulations and experimental measurements. By learning from natural zwitterions,
better zwitterionic materials with unique properties required for specific
applications will be designed. The success of this work will transform the field
of biointerfaces and biomaterials, for which one will enter the new era beyond
PEG. This work will also open up new opportunities to study organic ions and
zwitterions, which have not yet been examined in depth.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: These superlow fouling zwitterionic
materials will enable the development of many critical technologies, such as
drug carriers with long circulation time, protein arrays for reliable
diagnostics, and low-fouling membranes for wastewater treatment. One graduate
student and two underrepresented undergraduate students will participate in this
project. The PI is developing a new course on ?biomolecular Interfaces.? Results
from the proposed work will contribute significantly to the new course.