* 0827242
* SGER: FABRICATION AND EXPERIMENTAL TESTING OF MICROFLUIDIC DEVICES WITH INTEGRATED ELECTRODES FOR THE MANIPULATION OF BIOLOGICAL AND NON-BIOLOGICAL ANALYTES
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2008,09/30/2009
* Dawn Bennett, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 09/30/2009
* USD 66,590.00

CBET-0827242&lt;br/&gt;Bennett&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will involve
the fabrication of microfluidic systems as well as the experimental testing of
analytes in suspension. Microscopic organisms, carbon nanotubes, stem cells, and
bacteria such as bacillus subtilis (anthrax) will be manipulated using
microfluidic devices with integrated
electrodes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research presented here will involve developing a microfluidic system that will
be able to analyze biological particles on the cellular level using
electrohydrodynamic techniques. This includes (1) The ability to rapidly
isolate, detect, and analyze single cells will provide breakthroughs on the
frontiers of analytical chemistry; (2) The ability to rapidly detect and
identify biowarfare agents such as anthrax will provide significant benefits to
national security and defense; and (3) The ability to separate and analyze stem
cells can lead to significant advances towards cures for cancer and Alzheimer's
disease. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
development of such separation techniques will open the door for the discovery
of new organisms and provide significant breakthroughs in the area of biological
warfare agent detection. The quality of air and water resources will be improved
by removing pollutant particles, bacteria, and viruses from these natural
resources. This technology will lead to improvement in biomedical fields for
cell sorting and removing impurities from biological suspensions. This will lead
to advances in understanding of diseases. In addition, this technology will also
provide significant advances in the areas of defense, environmental protection,
and medicine. As part of the educational plan, talented underrepresented
minority groups from the Meyerhoff Program at UMBC as well as domestic students
will be targeted for this research. The Meyerhoff Program is a national model
for attracting and retaining, primarily minority students, who will pursue
advanced degrees in mathematics or science with an emphasis in helping
underrepresented groups.