* 0827133
* US-Egypt International Workshop on Frontiers in High Energy Astrophysics:    From Neutron Stars to Gamma-ray Bursts, Alexandria, Egypt August 24-30, 2008
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2011
* Jonathan Grindlay, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 05/31/2011
* USD 45,100.00

0827133&lt;br/&gt;Grindlay&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is for a U.S.-Egypt
Workshop entitled "US-Egypt Workshop on Frontiers in High Energy Astrophysics
from Neutron Stars to Gamma-ray Bursts" to be held in Alexandria, Egypt, August
24-30, 2008. The U.S organizer is Dr. Jonathan Grindlay, Department of
Astronomy, Harvard University. The Egyptian co-organizer is Dr. Alaa Ibrahim,
Cairo University, Egypt. The Workshop will bring together astrophysicists from
the US, Middle East, North Africa, and neighboring Mediterranean countries to
meet and discuss the new developments in the neutron star and gamma-ray burst
fields, to expose and retrain junior researchers and students on new research
trends and results, and to initiate collaborative projects of mutual interest
between US and regional scientists. The workshop will serve as a platform to
conduct a set of invited lectures on frontier topics on Neutron Stars (NSs) and
Gamma Ray Bursts (GRBs) and will also provide an opportunity for young
researchers to present and discuss their work with senior scientists in order to
foster exchange of ideas. Key topics to be discussed include: neutron star
structure, spin and magnetic field evolution as deduced from NSs in a variety of
astrophysical settings; NS mergers in short GRBs; the NS-black hole interface
and distinctions as revealed by accretion vs. jet dominated systems; and
understanding GRBs to enable their use as probes of the high-z Universe. The
over-arching goal is to bring together senior and junior members of the NS and
GRB communities for joint discussion and interactions to facilitate new
understanding and to develop collaborative research and education programs in
high energy astrophysics. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Neutron stars are the
most exotic astrophysical forms of matter, and Gamma-ray bursts the most
energetic single events, that can be directly studied. They are both prime
examples of how research in high energy astrophysics is undergoing significant
development and expansion, both on the theoretical and observational fronts. The
National Academy of Sciences has recognized the frontiers in astrophysics in its
reports Astrophysics in the New Millennium (2001) and Connecting Quarks with the
Cosmos: Eleven Science Questions for the New Century (2003). The Workshop
program will relate to many of these central questions as they are further
defined for the coming Decade. The Workshop will be of particular usefulness to
junior researchers. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The Workshop will broaden the
depth and breadth of the participation and involvement of scientists from the
region who are generally under-represented. It will also promote the
participation of minorities, women, and graduate students, and junior scientists
(from the US &amp; the region) to facilitate ongoing and future collaboration
with senior researchers. The talks will be digitally video-taped and made
available on a DVD to be distributed separately with the published (by AIP)
proceedings to regional and US universities and research institutions. An online
version will be made available from the Workshop website for a broader audience.
Furthermore, since the advanced IT tools in astrophysics research are becoming
increasingly important also in many other fields, e.g., engineering, business,
and finance, this international workshop will have spin-off effects by enhancing
the scientific profile of the regional countries. Six junior U.S. scientists and
3 U.S. graduate students will be supported for participating in this workshop.
This project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which
provides grants to scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out these
cooperative activities.