* 0827414
* New Research Opportunities in the Earth Sciences at the National Science Foundation
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Anne Linn, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 06/30/2012
* USD 536,965.00

Much has changed in the geological sciences since the NRC's report "Basic
Research Opportunities in the Earth Sciences" which started ten years ago. This
new project, "New Earth Science Research Opportunities at the National Science
Foundation," has the same objectives and will use the same methods as the
previous study to identify and make recommendations about the next generation of
basic research opportunities at the NSF's EAR. A committee of experts will be
asked to come to a consensus on new research opportunities and it will be aided
in its deliberations by published literature, input from scientists at committee
meetings, as well as through symposia held at major Earth science meetings,
e.g., annual meetings of the AGU and GSA. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Earth scientists
tend to work on highly specific projects in specialized subdisciplines. The
fundamental research questions underlying these projects are often implied or
stated in technical terms. It will be challenging to think beyond these
subdisciplines to develop the next generation of research opportunities likely
to drive the field as a whole. This study will seek to overcome this challenge
by careful choice of a committee of experts in the Earth sciences. Committee
members will be well-respected individuals who have a reputation of thinking
broadly and beyond their individual specialties. Some will be members of the
National Academy of Sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this
report is to communicate the importance of Earth science to nonspecialists,
including members of Congress, university administrators, and the general
public. Members of these groups may not have a sophisticated understanding of
the complexity and excitement of Earth science. A wide dissemination of the
final NRC report may increase the visibility of and funding for the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;