* 0827264
* Planning a Biological and Geological Research Station in the Big Bend Region of Tex
* BIO,DBI
* 01/15/2009,12/31/2010
* William Cook, Midwestern State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 12/31/2010
* USD 23,711.00

Midwestern State University is awarded a grant for strategic planning to develop
the Dalquest Research Station for the study of biological and geological past,
patterns, processes, and phenomena of the northern Chihuahuan Desert. The
project will conduct two workshops: one on-site and one on-campus in Wichita
Falls. The Panel will include experts from a broad array of disciplines and
specialties. They will be asked to provide guidance and written recommendations
to MSU for (1) a mission statement and (2) long-term goals and landmarks for
gauging success in (a) basic research and research-training needs; (b) data
management systems and interconnectivity; (c) specimen documentation; (d)
required laboratory-space and equipment; (e) necessary support facilities; (f)
communication and energy systems; (g) funding opportunities; and other issues
that emerge.

Dalquest Research Station (DRS) is a 1200 ha, pristine, Chihuahuan Desert canyon
land in the Big Bend region of West Texas. The site is remote and ungrazed for
the last 50 years by domestic ungulates. It lies close to and between two
historic trails?the Comanche War Trail and the Chihuahua Trail. In 1996, the
original site was donated to Midwestern State University (MSU) as a research
facility. MSU purchased adjacent land to form DRS. MSU faculty and their
colleagues/ students began preliminary biodiversity surveys of modern and fossil
taxa in 1999, and the first geological/anthropological camp was held at DRS in
2005. Several new species of spiders and fossils and one new family of spiders
have been reported.