* 0827262
* UBM-Group: An Integrative Analysis of Human Cancer:  Exploiting the Synergy of Mathematical and Molecular Biological Approaches in Studying a Complex Problem
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Michael Roberts, Dickinson College
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 08/31/2012
* USD 229,801.00

This project develops a model of interdisciplinary training that takes advantage
of the effectiveness of classroom instruction and the power of research
experience. The project includes the linkage of a course in Biology, The Biology
of Cancer, and a course in Mathematics, Mathematical Techniques in the
Biological Sciences, in which cohorts of students will co-enroll in the spring
semester of their junior year. Faculty will coordinate the courses so that they
prepare the students for a year-long research experience. The research projects
will use a common model system, a human leukemia cell line that can be "coerced"
to exhibit normal cell properties in culture. Students will work in teams with
the faculty mentor team to develop research projects that explore the molecular
events that convert cells from the cancer state to the normal state, using
modern methods that require integration of biological and mathematical
techniques.

The project brings together faculty with training in molecular biology and
mathematics that can be synergistically applied to the study of an important and
complex problem, the biology of cancer. Many of the important unanswered
questions in science are likely to be solved in the 21st century through
collaborative efforts involving individuals trained as interdisciplinary
thinkers, and this project will nurture such interdisciplinary thinking at the
undergraduate level. From 18-30 undergraduate students will gain in-depth
interdisciplinary training and collaborative research experience through this
3-year program.

