* 0827136
* UBM-Institutional: Undergraduate Training in Theoretical Ecology Research (UTTER)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2014
* D Hawkins, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 08/31/2014
* USD 780,946.00

The Undergraduate Training in Theoretical Ecology Research (UTTER) program at
the University of Texas at Arlington provides an integrated research and
education experience for cohorts of undergraduates in biology and mathematics.
Five cohorts of eight students each pursue a two-year program of mentoring,
seminars, interdisciplinary research, and specially designed coursework in
mathematical biology, with each component and new course being jointly developed
and coordinated by six faculty members from biology and mathematics with
experience in interdisciplinary research and education. UTTER's four primary
goals are: (1) to recruit talented students from historically underrepresented
groups to complete interdisciplinary training in mathematical biology; (2) to
develop curriculum and infrastructure for this training through new courses and
formalized interactions between faculty and students from the two departments;
(3) to involve participating students in interdisciplinary research through
structured and mentored long-term experiences within and across cohorts; and (4)
to facilitate participant transitions into graduate studies and other
interdisciplinary careers following program completion and graduation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project lies in: (1) the
integration of mathematics and biology into each of the research projects, and
how each of the projects helps students develop specific skills; (2) the
continued development of an interdisciplinary curricular framework to support
students as they pursue their research and to encourage the development of an
on-going community of students interested in theoretical ecology; and (3) the
strength of the research projects which are all significant, conceptually
interesting and timely, and which all fit well under the general theme of
theoretical ecology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's broader impacts
include: (1) its focus on the recruitment and support of students from
underrepresented groups, particularly through a recruitment plan targeting local
community colleges; (2) the development of three new interdisciplinary courses
that involve many students other than those directly participating in the
project and foster a culture of interdisciplinary cooperation among faculty; and
(3) the development of new models of effective interdisciplinary undergraduate
training in mathematical biology as well other academic areas.