* 0827298
* Student Travel Support for IEEE INFOCOM 2008 Conference
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2008,03/31/2009
* Vinod Vokkarane, Institute of Electrical & Electronics Engineers, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 03/31/2009
* USD 20,000.00

The 2008 IEEE INFOCOM Conference on Computer Communications will be held in
Phoenix, Arizona, USA from April 13 to April 19, 2008. This preeminent technical
conference is the primary venue for presenting new research results in the area
of computer communications, and is widely attended by researchers and
practitioners in the field. Attending conferences such as INFOCOM is of great
importance for the development of graduate students. Participants have the
opportunity to present their work, attend panel and keynote sessions, and
interact with hundreds of others performing leading-edge research in the field.
This award provides funds to support approximately twenty graduate students in
the United States to attend this premiere conference. The travel awards will
target graduate students, in particular, women and under-represented minority
students, since attending conferences is an important part of their educational
experience, and they often have limited travel funds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of the proposal resides in encouraging and supporting
graduate student attendance to INFOCOM 2008, which will continue the tradition
of the previous INFOCOM conferences as a premier venue for bringing together
academia, industry, and government to share newest developments in
communications. Besides technical paper presentations, the conference offers a
wide range of technical activities including workshops and
tutorials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of its broader impact, this proposal
aims at providing graduate students conducting research in the field of
communications with the opportunity to attend the INFOCOM 2008, one of the main
technical conferences in the field. Attending such high-caliber technical venues
is extremely valuable for future researchers. Not only they will be exposed to
the state-of-the-art in the field, but also they will have the opportunity to
interact with peers from institutions worldwide, meet with leading researchers,
and take part in discussions that are likely to shape the future of the field
(e.g., in terms of technology, standards, etc).&lt;br/&gt;