* 0827016
* AOC: The Dynamics of Secessionist Regions: Eurasian Unrecognized Quasi-States after Kosovo's Independence
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2014
* John O'Loughlin, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 09/30/2014
* USD 759,970.00

Quasi-states are secessionist regions that have established internal territorial
sovereignty but lack widespread recognition and legitimacy as states. Despite
their tenuous and contested status, such regions have long been features of
world political maps. A U.S-Russian research team will focus on four quasi-
states in the Balkans-Black Sea region - Kosovo, Transdniester Moldovan Republic
(TMR) in Moldova, Abkhazia and South Ossetia in Georgia. These sites were chosen
because of research access, contrasting historical experiences, sources of
dispute between Russia and the Euro-Atlantic community, and the varied
implementation of international norms of refugee protection and recognition of
self-determination. Two fundamental research and policy concerns are raised by
quasi-states. First, how and why do certain quasi-states endure and, second, why
are some more successful at accumulating legitimacy than
others?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The contested declaration of independence by Kosovo
in early 2008 and concern about a precedent effect render these questions
particularly timely. The establishment of internal and external legitimacy in
the wake of wars that defined the political unit is a key factor in accounting
for the robustness of quasi-states. The specific research questions include: a)
What is the character and localized distribution of the agricultural,
industrial, trade, social and political dynamics of the unrecognized quasi-
states? b) What factors (war experience, governance structure, nation-building
and identity construction, migration or displacement, border relations and
international control) helps explain these distributions? c) How do state-
aspirant elites work across a variety of scales to promote legitimacy, in the
wake of the Kosovo precedent? d) How appropriate is it to make comparisons
between these 4 cases? e) How does the enduring of quasi-states affect global
norms concerning ethnic cleansing and violence?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To overcome
potential difficulties in accessibility and reliability, a multi-methods data
gathering approach has been adopted to examine the internal legitimacy of quasi-
states across a variety of scales. This includes public opinion sampling of
about 1000 persons in each study site (among both residents of the quasi-states
and the displaced populations), focus group discussions (including about 400
persons in all) and elite interviews. Public and unpublished statistical data
are also analyzed in a geographical information system, incorporating land cover
change derived from repeat Landsat satellite imagery over the past 20
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The four frozen conflicts are outcomes of civil wars
in the 1990s that were characterized by ethnic cleansing, destruction of
infrastructure, and deteriorating relations between the countries from which the
secessionist quasi-states splintered and external supporters (Russia in three of
the cases). The quasi-states themselves are often marked as grey zones of
smuggling (especially drugs and weapons), money laundering, border violations,
transit points of terrorists, and refuges of criminals beyond the reach of
international law. Without more information about the conditions inside the
quasi-states (level of legitimacy with their own populations, the extent and
nature of their contacts with the supporting countries, the willingness of the
populations to accept territorial compromises or other settlement options, the
level of inter-ethnic distrust, and border controls), policy formation and
implementation is significantly removed from "facts on the ground".&lt;br/&gt;