* 0827719
* Nanostructure in Cell Adhesive Forces
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Andres Garcia, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 08/31/2011
* USD 239,999.00

CBET-0827719 A. Garcia, Georgia Institute of Technology

Integrin-mediated cell adhesion to extracellular matrices regulates the
organization, maintenance and repair of numerous tissues, and abnormalities in
adhesive interactions are often associated with pathological states. Moreover,
cell adhesive interactions with synthetic materials govern host responses to
biomedical devices, biological integration of tissue-engineered constructs, and
development of biotechnological cell culture supports. The adhesive process
comprises integrin receptor binding to their extracellular ligand, integrin
clustering, and assembly of discrete supramolecular structures containing
cytoskeletal and signaling molecules. These focal adhesion complexes function as
structural links and signal transduction elements between the cell and its
extracellular environment. While significant progress has been attained in
deciphering biochemical pathways regulating adhesion, the mechanical
interactions between a cell and its environment remain poorly understood.

The objective of this project is to analyze the effects of nanoscale focal
adhesion geometrical structure (cluster number, size, spacing) on cell adhesive
force and focal adhesion signaling. It is hypothesized that the geometrical
organization of the focal adhesion modulates adhesive force based on the
"contact splitting" principle. "Contact splitting" mechanics explains how many
small contacts can produce a higher adhesion force than one contact with equal
contact area. The architecture of the adhesive interface will be modulated using
various configurations of clustered nanopatterned adhesive islands and multi-
valent ligands to alter integrin clustering and focal adhesion area and spacing.
Integrin binding and focal adhesion assembly and signaling in fibroblasts will
be quantified using biochemical and immunostaining techniques, and adhesion
strength will be analyzed using our hydrodynamic spinning disk assay.

The proposed research will integrate robust quantitative assays, nanopatterning
approaches, and unique cell biology reagents to precisely manipulate focal
complex organization and biomolecular structure in order to analyze how these
adhesive complexes generate adhesive forces. These studies will provide
rigorous, integrated analyses of the contributions of nanoscale organization and
structure to the generation and regulation of adhesive forces. These studies
will generate a new understanding of the regulation of mechanical interactions
between a cell and its extracellular matrix.

This project will also result in the advanced training of undergraduate and
graduate researchers with unique analytical skills based on a multi-
disciplinary, integrative perspective. One underrepresented minority student,
either from Georgia Tech or our Atlanta University Center (AUC) Initiative, will
be recruited every year to work in this project to encourage advanced education
and future careers in science and engineering. The AUC is the world's largest
consortium of African American private institutions of higher education,
including Clark Atlanta University, Morehouse College, and Spelman College.