* 0827907
* Novel Methods and Computational Studies for Global Optimization
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Christodoulos Floudas, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/2013
* USD 373,882.00

CBET-0827907&lt;br/&gt;Floudas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop novel theoretical,
algorithmic and computational techniques for global optimization problems. The
computational techniques will apply to a variety of chemical engineering process
design, synthesis and operations problems. The PIs will investigate four sub-
areas: (i) the development of a new class of tight convex underestimators for
twice-continuously differentiable univariate functions which will enhance the
piecewise quadratic perturbation-based aBB (Meyer and Floudas (2005)) approach
and will form the theoretical basis for applications in a variety of phase
equilibrium, design and synthesis problems; (ii ) the theoretical development of
tight convex underestimators for multivariate twice continuously differentiable
functions and study its algorithmic development for bivariate, multilinear and
general multivariate functions; (iii) a new theoretical and algorithmic approach
for deterministic global optimization via an Augmented Lagrangian framework; and
(iv) the development of new, hybrid global optimization methods combining the
beneficial elements of the tight convex underestimators of the enhanced aBB
deterministic global optimization framework and the augmented Lagrangian
approach with stochastic based approaches. The PIs will also study the
distributed computing implementations and apply them to medium- and large-scale
non-convex optimization problems that arise in standard, extended, and
generalized pooling and blending applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this
research, the PIs expect to identify new theoretical, algorithmic, and
computational results affecting global optimization and methodologies. The
innovative features the PIs expect to derive are: (a) new tight convex
underestimators for twice-continuously differentiable constrained nonlinear
optimization models for both univariate and multivariate functions; (b) new
methods for deterministic global optimization via an Augmented Lagrangian
framework; (c) improved deterministic global optimization methods that embed the
convex lower bounding advances and can address medium to large scale global
optimization problems; (d) novel hybrid global optimization methods that combine
the rigor of deterministic methods with the tight convex underestimators and
computationally efficient stochastic approaches; and (e) sequential and
distributed computational tools. This research focuses on improving medium- to
large-scale global optimization applications by enhancing process synthesis,
design and process operations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will develop rigorous global optimization
methods addressing important problems in process design, synthesis and process
operations. By facilitating faster response to the market demands and enabling
the more efficient use of the processing facilities, petrochemical, chemical,
pharmaceutical, manufacturing, and services/software companies will benefit from
these methods, and thereby, the research will directly impact the US economy.
Additionally, the research will enhance educational activities. The PIs will
incorporate the research results into an elective graduate course on Nonlinear
Mixed Integer Optimization in the form of lectures and projects. The PIs will
also use selective algorithmic tools as part of a capstone senior design course
called Design, Synthesis and Optimization of Chemical Processes. The PIs will
broaden the participation of underrepresented groups through recruiting
undergraduate and graduate students for the project. The PIs will disseminate
the research results through presentations at domestic and international
meetings, scholarly refereed journal publications and through a web page.