* 0827384
* Multi-scale modeling of health behavior choices: Water, sanitation, and child survival in Africa
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2008,07/31/2014
* Jenna Davis, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 07/31/2014
* USD 1,244,805.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Davis - 0827384&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multi-scale
modeling of health behavior choices: Water, sanitation, and child survival in
Africa&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project integrates theory and methodologies
from behavioral sciences, epidemiology, and microeconomics so as to better
understand behavior change processes related to water, sanitation, hygiene and
health. The broad research goal is to assess the extent to which, and the
mechanisms by which, household-level information about risk for enteric illness
(specifically water quality and hand cleanliness data) affect household
perceptions and behavior related to water management, sanitation practices, and
personal hygiene. The research approach includes (1) the collection of household
and community information through repeated, structured surveys of households;
(2) the collection and microbiological analysis of water and hand samples from
household members; (3) the use of these water and hand rinse test results as
personalized informational treatments that will be randomly assigned to clusters
of households; (4) the modeling of observed changes in behavior, contamination
levels, and/or health outcomes as a function of human, cultural, and physical
environmental factors operating from the individual to the community scale; and
(5) ?process tracing? in order to characterize specific causal mechanisms
underlying observed changes. The field site for the project is in Tanzania,
where one in six children dies before his/her fifth birthday, with diarrhea
being the second leading cause of death after malaria. The project also seeks to
inform research communities focused on decision making and behavior change
related to health. Whereas the particular focus of the project relates to water,
sanitation, and hygiene, the framework employed is relevant for many other areas
of health research, particularly those in which both technology use and behavior
change are involved.&lt;br/&gt;