* 0827507
* U.S.-Russia Planning Visit:   North Asian Sources of Greenhouse Gases; Collaborative Research using Ground- and Space-based Instruments.
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2010
* Leonid Yurganov, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Tran
* 07/31/2010
* USD 16,690.00

OISE 08-27507&lt;br/&gt;Leonid Yurganov&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project provides support for a planning visit to the Institute of Atmospheric
Physics in Moscow and Ural State University in Ekaterinburg, Russia. The U.S.
principal and co-principal investigators are Leonid Yurganov and William
McMillan from the University of Maryland Baltimore County. The Russian
counterparts are Dr. Evgeny Grechko in Moscow and Dr. Vyacheslav Zakharov in
Ekaterinburg.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this planning activity, the US
participants aim to establish a long-term collaborative research partnership
with their Russian colleagues. Together they will study the influence of Siberia
and Western Russia on the concentrations of climatically important gases
(primarily, CO and CH4, and eventually, CO2) in the atmosphere.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The majority of the scientific community agrees that
current climate change is most likely connected with human activity. However,
the increase of greenhouse gases and surface temperature can trigger emissions
of additional carbonaceous gases that amplify the initial changes. This concept
of a self-supporting climate change triggered by human activity is currently a
controversial idea in the atmospheric sciences. One of the most important
geographic regions in this respect is boreal Siberia due to its huge reserve of
carbon on and below the surface. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaboration is
complementary in nature in that it brings together US and Russian expertise at
important field sites to address a timely scientific topic. &lt;br/&gt;