* 0827012
* Whole Genome Sequencing and Annotation of Representative Strains of Spiroplasma Mirum
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Frank Bastian, Louisiana State University Agricultural Center
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2012
* USD 185,000.00

Mollicutes are an evolutionarily interesting group of bacteria with small
genomes and without cell walls; they typically live as parasites. Spiroplasma
are unusual mollicutes in that these cells have a helical morphology and move in
a corkscrew fashion. Spiroplasma mirum is a potential pathogen in animals and
crustaceans. There is evidence that S. mirum has been associated with
transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSE) of animals with significant
implications to agricultural practices and human health. Also, spiroplasma are
generally poorly studied at the molecular level. &lt;br/&gt;Drs. Frank Bastian
and Ronald Thune of Louisiana State University Agricultural Center will be
obtaining a finished, complete sequence of three spiroplasma genomes:
Spiroplasma mirum, a rabbit tick isolate; a Spiroplasma sp. isolated recently
from scrapie-infected sheep brain and closely related to S. mirum; and a non-
pathogenic spiroplasma, Spiroplasma montanense. To this point, only partial
Spiroplasma kunkelii and Spiroplasma citri genomes have been sequenced. However,
these spiroplasma are plant pathogens and widely divergent from S. mirum. S.
mirum is the only Spiroplasma sp. to experimentally cause persistent infection
in animals, including mice, rats and ruminants. These investigators postulate
that direct comparison of the genomes of S. mirum, an S. mirum-like spiroplasma
from TSE-affected ruminant brain, and a non-pathogenic spiroplasma will provide
evidence for the pathogenesis of TSE in some animals and in humans. Comparative
studies by the Bastian lab of pathogenic animal spiroplasma and those infecting
plants and insects will lead to the identification of S. mirum virulence genes.
The Bastian/Thune project will have a number of education and outreach
activities which will interweave with the research. First, a Ph.D. graduate
student will be trained in microbial genomics and as a mentor for undergraduate
students and by providing microbial genomics instruction to high school
teachers. Second, the project will be supporting an undergraduate student
through the Howard Hughes Program and a veterinary student through the LSU/SVM
Summer Scholars Program as active participants in the research and in the
Spiroplasma Genome workshop during the International Organization for
Mycoplasmology (IOM) International Scientific Congress in 2010. Thirdly, the
Bastian/Thune labs will be conducting 3-4 workshops for high school biology
teachers, which will be providing training with a variety of online resources
which can be accessed from their classrooms. Finally, the Bastian/Thune labs
will be adding 3 complete spiroplasma genomes to the community database, which
will increase understanding of spiroplasma biology in plant and animal diseases
and in human health. These three genomes will permit comparative bioinformatic
analysis of the previously sequenced S. kunkelii and S. citri genomes, as well
as of other available mollicute sequences.