* 0827285
* Shock-induced reactive turbulent mixing at a density interface
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Riccardo Bonazza, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Horst Henning Winter
* 08/31/2011
* USD 240,000.00

CBET - 0827285 &lt;br/&gt;Bonazza&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mixing processes
induced by a planar shock wave striking a chemically reactive spherical density
discontinuity (a bubble filled with a gas different than the surrounding) will
be studied experimentally and numerically. In particular, a bubble filled with a
hydrogen-oxygen mixture diluted in an inert gas will be released in a neutral
environment (e.g. nitrogen) and accelerated by a planar shock. Preliminary
calculations have demonstrated that, by appropriate choice of the inert gas
inside the bubble, the shock propagating through the bubble will raise the local
temperature to values large enough to ignite the combustion of the H2-O2 mixture
thus providing very accurate knowledge of the flow geometry and thermophysical
conditions at the start of the chemical reaction. The progress of the chemical
reaction will be monitored by non-intrusively measuring the local concentration
of the hydroxyl radical, OH, by planar laser induced fluorescence. In parallel
to the experiments, numerical simulations of the flow will be performed using
the open source FLASH code developed at the University of Chicago FLASH center
under DOE's Advanced Scientific Computing Initiative working in close
collaboration with Prof. Fausto Cattaneo and his team. Molecular mixing will be
studied in a geometry very different from the more commonly investigated ones
(jets, shear layers, internal combustion engines). The experimental initial
condition and time of ignition will be precisely characterized. The time
evolution of the chemical reaction will be observed and simulated. Most
importantly, understanding of the mixing due to shock diffraction and wave
reverberation will be extended to include the effects of the chemical reaction.
In a broader sense, the relevance of these results reaches all the way into the
field of astrophysics where shock-ignited combustion and deflagration to
detonation transition are postulated to be the primary drivers in a certain
class of supernova explosions. The program has also a significant impact on
outreach and education by regularly involving undergraduate and high school
students in our research. Minority undergraduate students from out of state
universities have been hosted for 10 weeks through a program developed by the
UW-Madison College of Engineering Diversity Affairs Office while high school
students have been hosted for 8-week summer periods through a program organized
by Madison's high schools.