* 0827470
* GSE/RES: A Longitudinal, Mixed-Method Test of a Social Cognitive Model of Women's Adjustment to STEM Majors:  Building an Empirical Foundation for Theory-Based Interventions
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Robert Lent, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 08/31/2012
* USD 472,085.00

This project involves a set of "mixed method" studies testing a new model
extension of social cognitive career theory (SCCT; Lent, Brown, &amp; Hackett,
1994). SCCT has proven to be a heuristic framework for understanding women's and
men's interest in, choice of, and performance and persistence in various
academic and career fields. This model offers promise as an integrative
framework, bringing together a number of factors (e.g., personality, cognitive,
social, and behavioral) that have been shown individually to predict or promote
positive adaptation. In particular, this project will test, using a longitudinal
design, the new SCCT model of academic satisfaction and adjustment, focusing on
the dynamic relations among the social cognitive variables during a formative
period in women's and men's transition to the STEM environment: their first two
years in college. This part of the project will involve development or
adaptation of psychological instrumentation, a large sample of students at two
predominantly White and two historically Black universities in the mid-Atlantic
region, and structural equation modeling procedures. In a companion study,
participants will be queried using semi-qualitative methods to explore in more
depth how they experience the academic environment and what strategies they use
to cope with their transition as STEM majors. The University of Maryland, Morgan
State University, Virginia Tech, and Howard University have agreed to
participate in this study. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
proposed project is intended to advance scientific understanding of how women
and men adjust to the STEM environment by (a) testing the new SCCT model of
satisfaction and adjustment, (b) assessing invariance of model-data fit across
gender and institutional context, (c) examining differences in particular model
paths for women versus men, and (d) exploring women's perception of
environmental resources and barriers and personal/social coping strategies. The
project will address gaps in prior research applying SCCT to women's adjustment
to STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The findings can inform
the design of educational interventions to promote women's positive adaptation
to, and retention within, STEM majors by focusing on variables and processes
that are amenable to modification. The project team will (a) communicate the
findings to scientific and educational audiences via presentations at
professional meetings and journal publications; (b) make instrumentation
developed as part of the project available to other researchers; (c) build a
local, multi-disciplinary network of social scientists, physical scientists, and
engineers who can pursue additional research on how to increase representation
of women and other underrepresented groups in STEM fields; and (d) provide
research training opportunities for female and ethnic minority graduate
students.