* 0827553
* GSE/RES: Women's Persistence in Engineering Careers: Barriers and Supports
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Nadya Fouad, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 09/30/2012
* USD 497,577.00

Intellectual Merit: This study is designed to understand the factors that lead
some women to persist in engineering careers and others to leave it. Most of the
research on effective interventions has focused on increasing women's choice of
engineering major. However, though women are now 20% of engineering graduates
only 11% of professional engineers are women. Clearly, women are
disproportionately choosing not to enter or persist in engineering careers, but
research has not systematically investigated what factors may contribute to
their decisions. This may be due to their own concerns about managing the
organizational climate, performing engineering tasks, or balancing work and
family roles or could be due to environmental barriers, such as a chilly
organizational climate.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Social Cognitive Career Theory
(SCCT) model may help to explain the factors related to retention for women in
engineering career. SCCT predicts that self-efficacy and outcome expectations
act indirectly on persistence through their influence on interests, which in
turn influences choice behavior (e.g., choice to stay in the career or leave).
This study will extend this SCCT research to women in engineering careers (or
who have left those careers) by examining three domains of self-efficacy and
outcome expectations (engineering tasks, work/family balance, and organizational
climate), interests and barriers and supports for women in different stages of
their career (5, 10, 15, 20 years post graduation). One premise of the work is
that career commitment and job satisfaction predict withdrawal cognitions and
the intent to quit, which in turn, predict either persistence or turnover. The
study will follow cohorts of women longitudinally, providing both cross-
sectional and a longitudinal perspective on factors influencing their decisions
to stay, or leave, an engineering career. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
Beyond the publication in relevant professional journals, the findings will also
be used to provide practical guidance to organizations that may help them in
designing and implementing effective policies that lead to the retention of
women engineers. The findings may also be used to help develop interventions
that may help to increase the retention of women in engineering careers.
Finally, the broader impact will include preparing graduate students as future
professionals with an expertise in social cognitive career theory and in
examining careers of women engineers.