* 0827386
* SGER:  VOCALS--Clinometer Stabilized MAX-DOAS Measurements of Aerosol Precursor Trace Gases Over the Tropical and Southeast Pacific Ocean
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Rainer Volkamer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* John Eugene Mak
* 08/31/2009
* USD 85,000.00

A novel, clinometer-stabilized Multi-Axis Differential Optical Absorption
Spectroscopy (MAX-DOAS) instrument will be deployed and tested aboard the NOAA
R/V Ron Brown during the 2008 VOCALS-REx (VAMOS Ocean-Cloud-Atmosphere-Land
Study Regional Experiment) field campaign. The objectives are to (1) investigate
the physical presence of glyoxal (CHOCHO) and halogen oxides over the Gulf of
Mexico, and the Tropical and Southern Hemisphere Eastern Pacific Ocean, (2)
develop the MAX-DOAS technique for use from ships, and (3) directly probe one of
the most poorly studied atmospheric environments on Earth. Glyoxal, iodine oxide
(IO), and bromine oxide (BrO) are directly linked to photochemical hot-spots
that produce secondary organic aerosol (SOA), marine particles, and tropospheric
ozone depletion, respectively. The MAX-DOAS data will be used in combination
with measurements of ultrafine aerosol size distributions, phytoplankton, and
other parameters measured from the Ron Brown to study particle formation at the
ocean-atmosphere interface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will promote the
education and training of a graduate student and a postdoctoral researcher, who
will participate in the field deployments. The development of MAX-DOAS
technology will benefit the atmospheric science community. Broader scientific
impacts of this project include a better understanding of the climate effects of
secondary organic aerosol, marine particle production, and halogen oxides in the
marine troposphere.