* 0827208
* UBM Group - Investigating the Mathematical Biology of Metabolic Scaling using Manduca InSTaRs (Interdisciplinary Science Training and Research)
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2008,12/31/2013
* Haruhiko Itagaki, Kenyon College
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 12/31/2013
* USD 236,410.00

Project Abstract - UBM Group - Investigating the Mathematical Biology of
Metabolic Scaling using Manduca InSTaRs (Interdisciplinary Science Training and
Research)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metabolism is ?the fire of life.? Animals take in
food from their environment and transform it metabolically to fuel all living
processes, including growth, maintenance, foraging, defense, and reproduction.
Thus, the rate of metabolism provides a fundamental index of how fast an
organism lives. Principally, we are interested in the problem of metabolic
scaling; that is, how the rate of metabolism changes with the size of the
organism. Across over 20 orders of magnitude in size, spanning creatures as
different as bacteria and blue whales, metabolic scaling takes on a consistent
mathematical form known as an allometric power law. However, we currently lack a
complete explanation for why the pattern takes the form that it does. To meet
this challenge, we will establish a collaborative group of undergraduate and
faculty researchers in mathematical biology to study metabolic scaling in larvae
of the tobacco hawkmoth, Manduca sexta, which is the familiar ?hornworm? known
by many gardeners as the bane of their tomato plants. Small interdisciplinary
research teams will use molecular, morphological, and physiological approaches
combined with mathematical modeling and statistics to investigate factors that
underpin metabolic scaling. Manduca is an ideal experimental platform for the
study of metabolic scaling, because the larvae grow approximately 10,000-fold in
mass in less than three weeks, without large changes in morphology or behavior.
The ability to address metabolic scaling in an experimental setting provides a
unique opportunity to test recent theories proposed to explain the origin of
metabolic scaling, including those focused on the importance of fractal-like
exchange surfaces and resource distribution networks inside
organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical biology presents one of the most
exciting interdisciplinary research frontiers of the 21st century. However, at
the undergraduate level, interdisciplinary collaborations are challenged by the
limited disciplinary background and ongoing cognitive development of young
researchers. By convening student-faculty teams applying a diversity of
biological and mathematical approaches to a common model organism, we will
engage undergraduates with a wide range of interests in cutting-edge research
while also helping them to develop a more integrative understanding of
biological phenomena and the interface between biology and mathematics. Based on
a competitive proposal review process, six biology and math majors will be
grouped into teams of two or three to participate in an intensive ten-week
summer research program, followed by presentations to peers, faculty, parents,
and the college trustees at an autumn poster session. Throughout the academic
year and summer, research team interactions will be supplemented by regular
whole group meetings, which will help place team projects in the context of the
larger research goals described above. Metabolic scaling provides an ideal focus
for this research and training program because it involves fundamental
biological processes at multiple levels of organization, from molecules to cells
to organisms to ecosystems, and because this fertile and active area of current
research has already benefited from and advanced the integration of mathematical
and biological approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;