* 0827526
* Looking inside high school science classrooms: An exploration of males' and females' subjective experience
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Jennifer Schmidt, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 08/31/2012
* USD 476,131.00

This project will provide a descriptive account of what a variety of high school
science contexts feel like from the perspective of female and male students.
This three-year project, to be conducted through Northern Illinois University,
is focused on immediate outcomes; namely, individuals' momentary levels of
cognitive and affective engagement while involved in everyday science activity.
The project will systematically record students' classroom experiences as they
happen, linking various aspects of subjective experience to specific courses,
content units, and classroom activities. Using a combination of surveys,
interviews, classroom observations, and experience sampling techniques, this
mixed-methods research will make a unique contribution to the understanding of
the daily processes that contribute to the engagement of both females and males
in science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is that
it will provide crucial foundational knowledge about students? actual
experiences in science classes. This information will fill a gap in the
literature in science education in that it will explore affective processes
involved in learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this project
is that it could have substantial effects on instructional practices, course
design and curriculum in high school science education. The project is
positioned to produce a strong knowledge base about the affective and
motivational components of science learning, linking particular subjective
states to specific courses, content units, and instructional practices. Beyond
this, if the expected gender differences are found in students? subjective
experience, the findings could suggest specific ways to alter science curricula
in an effort to fully engage males and females in science classrooms.