* 0827815
* Nanoscience/Nanotechnology Workshop at NanoTR4, Istanbul, Turkey June 9-13, 2008.
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2010
* Erol Sancaktar, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Robert Carter
* 05/31/2010
* USD 42,000.00

The goal of this workshop is to bring together American and Turkish
Scientists/Technologists/Academicians, who work in Nanoscience and
Nanotechnology areas for the ultimate purpose of preparing joint research
projects on various aspects of nanoscience and nanotechnology and to start
collaborative research programs. The Workshop will be organized and managed by
Prof. E. Sancaktar in collaboration with his Turkish counterpart,
Prof.&lt;br/&gt;H. Unlu, Chair of the Physics Department at Istanbul Technical
University (ITU). The Workshop will be held concurrently with NanoTR 4
((http://www.nanotr4.itu.edu.tr/) scheduled for June 9-13, 2008, in Istanbul,
Turkey, at the campus of ITU. This Workshop will be useful to both the U.S. and
Turkey, as it will allow American scientists/Technologists/Academicians to
interact with their regional counterparts from Turkey, as well as those from
other countries, including Canada, Germany, Ireland, Japan, the Netherlands and
the U.K., to increase their awareness on nanoscientific and nanotechnological
activities in the U.S., and Turkey, as well as different countries around the
world, and to encourage collaboration in these areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
American attendees will have an excellent opportunity to accomplish the goals of
the Workshop with the ability to interact with a large number of internationally
renowned scientists/technologists. Thus, these interactions will constitute the
yearly phases of developing and coordinating research and education activities
with foreign partner(s) (NSF). The American attendees of the Workshop
are&lt;br/&gt;academicians (13) and graduate students (5) representing 13
Universities from 10 different states, as well as 2 scientists from U.S. Federal
research organizations. The participating academicians hold ranks varying from
assistant professor to distinguished professor. These prospective participants
were invited pursuant to nomination by their peers from the U.S, as well as by
the&lt;br/&gt;Scientific Advisory Board and the Organizing Committee of NanoTR
4.&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of this proposal reside in the originality
of the research to be presented by 14 prominent American researchers (Drs. I.
Aksay, A. Erdemir, B. Hinds, N. Horing, J. Irudayaraj, A. Isayev, L. Jia, A.
Madakannan, R. Martini, H. Onyuksel, J. Rogers, J. Ross, R. Ruoff, E. Sancaktar,
T. Yildirim), as well as 5 promising American doctoral students (T. Lewis, T.
McNeish, M. Saunders, M. Wadley, J. Weatherall), two of whom from the African-
American minority group, and the furthering of these research activities by
constructive discussions and possible future collaborations to be established.
The topics to be covered and advanced are of vital importance to a wide range of
modern technologies in most industries, healthcare, conservation of materials
and energy, biology, environment, and education, and thus, will have broad
impacts on our society. In this Workshop, we will address fundamental issues
with particular emphasis on the nanomaterials solutions to a wide range of
problems. The Workshop will bring together researchers from physics, chemistry,
materials science and engineering to review the current status, to share new
ideas and results to delineate outstanding problems and to guide future
research. This Workshop will also have a strong educational
and&lt;br/&gt;student outreach component and will provide opportunities for
young investigators to present their research findings and to learn about the
most recent developments in this rapidly moving field. This project is jointly
funded by CMMI and the Office of International Science and Engineering.