* 0827965
* Collaborative Research: Facility Support to Renew Operation of the National Center for Airborne Laser Mapping (NCALM)
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2014
* William Dietrich, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2014
* USD 1,062,869.00

0827965 Dietrich

Airborne Laser Swath Mapping (ALSM) allows for the measurement of surface
topographic features with decimeter-level accuracies and meter to sub-meter
spatial resolution. High resolution, georeferenced, digital elevation models
(DEMs) processed from raw ALSM data (point clouds of laser postings in xyz
space) are critical for observing a multitude of geomorphic features at scales
appropriate to the fundamental processes that govern their topographic
expression. Examples include, fault structures, hill slopes, river channels,
coastal features, glaciers, volcanic edifices and vegetative canopy structure.
DEMs developed from ALSM can be used to model and therefore better understand
the dynamics of these landforms and the underlying processes that form them. The
technique also has obvious applications in civil engineering.

This grant provides five years of continued support for the management and
operation of the National Center for Airborne Laser Mapping (NCALM). A
collaborative effort between the University of Florida (UF) and the University
of California - Berkeley (UC-B), NCALM provides project planning services, ALSM
flight and ground crew operations, technical support for data analysis, and
access to computational resources and software to make available to the broader
geosciences community, high accuracy, high spatial resolution digital
topographic data. NCALM makes available to the science community, an Optech
GEMINI 167 kHz and 33 kHz ALSM systems owned by UF that can be flown on a UF
twin engine Cessna 337 aircraft equipped with GPS equipment and an inertial
measurement system. These systems can also be flown on leased aircraft for
international projects or projects that dictate high altitude flights. NCALM
staff are also involved in: 1) development of new laser ranging technologies
including MHz photon counting ALSM operating at wavelengths that allow for water
penetration for coastal bathymetry; 2) developing methods and software for
multi-sensor data collection and fusion; 3) training students in ALSM techniques
and applications through the UF graduate program in Geosensing Engineering; 4)
administering a competitive seed grant program for student investigators; and 5)
community outreach through ALSM workshops and organization of ALSM science
sessions at national meetings. NCALM is managed by PIs at UF and UC-B and is
advised by a steering committee (SC). The SC provides guidance and review on the
following: 1) scheduling and prioritizing projects; 2) cost effective management
of the Center; 3) information dissemination; 4) opportunities and necessities
for technological upgrades; and 5) contact and coordination with major programs
(EarthScope, CUASHI, Margins, etc.) and agencies (NASA, FEMA, USGS).

***

