* 0827254
* Collaborative Research: Gymnosperms on the Tree of Life: Resolving the Phylogeny of Seed Plants
* BIO,IOS
* 11/30/2007,09/30/2011
* Nico Cellinese, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 09/30/2011
* USD 333,332.00

AToL for Gymnosperms: Resolving the Phylogeny of Seed Plants&lt;br/&gt;An award
is made to Sarah Mathews (Lead PI), Jianhua Li (Co-PI), Harvard University; Reed
S. Beaman (PI), Nico Cellinese (Co-PI), Yale University; Christopher S. Campbell
(PI), University of Maine; Richard C. Cronn (Collaborator), USDA Forest Service;
Sean W. Graham (Co-PI), University of British Columbia; Stefanie M. Ickert-Bond
(PI), University of Alaska; Dean G. Kelch (PI), University of California-
Berkeley and California State Herbarium; Aaron I. Liston (PI), Oregon State
University; Linda A. Raubeson (PI), Central Washington University; Gar W.
Rothwell (PI), Gene Mapes (Co-PI), Ohio University; Andrea E. Schwarzbach (PI),
University of Texas-Brownsville; Dennis W. Stevenson (PI), New York Botanical
Garden; Ruth A. Stockey (Co-PI), University of Alberta to construct sequence-
based phylogenetic hypotheses for all living gymnosperms and for seed plants
overall, and morphology-based hypotheses to include ALL living species of
gymnosperms (conifers, cycads, Gingko, and Gnetales) including examples from the
fossil record, along with exemplar angiosperms (flowering plants). Nuclear,
plastid and mitochondrial sequences will be utilized in the analysis along with
the morphological characters to allow the rich record of fossil gymnosperms to
be included. All of the data (molecular, morphological, voucher, etc.) will be
submitted to standardized and accessible databases through an enhanced version
of the web-based informatics tool TOLKIN (Tree Of Life Knowledge and Information
Network, www.tolkin.org). The evolution of the seed marks one of the most
important innovations in the history of land plants and led to greater mating
control and to enhanced survival and dispersal capabilities. Seed bearing plants
dominate the landscape; today, forests and grasslands are among our most
important resources. Understanding the origin(s) of seeds is basic to
understanding seed plant phylogeny. Obtaining the needed phylogenetic framework
is not a trivial undertaking and the multi-faceted approach is designed to
address the inherent complexity of the problem, incorporating approaches not
considered by all projects (e.g., including all gymnosperms, serious attention
to the fossil data). While phylogenetic inference will be the main focus of the
project, data will bear significantly on the understanding of historic patterns
of biotic change at the global level, and will provide insight into the origins
of many important plant traits, including those that are the basis of breeding
programs in horticulture and forestry. In addition to training students,
workshops for K-12 teachers will be held at several botanic gardens.&lt;br/&gt;