* 0827027
* DHB: Large-scale Spatially Embedded Interpersonal Networks: Measurement, Modeling, and Dynamics
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2008,03/31/2014
* Carter Butts, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 03/31/2014
* USD 749,245.00

The past several decades have seen a tremendous growth in the depth and breadth
of our knowledge regarding social networks. While the majority of research to
date has centered on the study of networks within small communities, the
properties of networks in larger populations constitute a topic of increasing
interest. Prior research has pointed to geography as a key factor in network
formation, suggesting a spatial approach to the description and modeling of
large-scale network structure. Further progress toward understanding the
dynamics of large-scale social networks is hampered by the lack of data on the
geographical structure of personal ties, and by the relative paucity of
specialized methods for analyzing such data. The purpose of this project is to
address these issues through two basic thrust areas: the collection of novel
data on the spatial structure of large-scale social networks, and methodological
research that will allow these data to contribute to our scientific
understanding of social structure. The data to be collected will contain
information about the spatial and demographic structure of personal ties at
regional and national scales. These data will enable the estimation and
evaluation of models for the effects of geography on network structure, and for
the impact of social networks on neighborhood-level outcomes. The methodological
research conducted as part of this project will enhance current network models
-- which characterize the probability of different types of social ties between
individuals -- by including the effects of spatial constraints, geographic
heterogeneity, and demography. These data and methodological contributions will
enhance fundamental knowledge about the complex ways that individuals interact
with other through space. To perform these tasks, this project brings together
an interdisciplinary team drawn from the fields of sociology, geography, and
criminology; the team's research will leverage current developments in network
modeling and spatial statistics, as well as computational advances in the
simulation of networks with large numbers of nodes. In addition to expanding our
knowledge of the social ties which help knit communities together, the project
will create new data and software tools that will be shared with other
researchers and educators. The practical utility of the methodology and tools
developed through this project will also be demonstrated with an application of
spatial network modeling to the assessment and calibration of information
dissemination systems for use during natural disasters and other large-scale
emergency situations. By measuring and modeling the properties of large-scale
social networks, this project will yield new insights into the social fabric in
which people are all embedded.