* 0827602
* Generating electrical power by coupling aerobic microbial photosynthesis to an electron-harvesting system
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2009
* Ilia Baskakov, University of Maryland Biotechnology Institute
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 07/31/2009
* USD 90,000.00

CBET-0827602 Baskakov

Energy needs in the world continue to increase, driving demand at an
unsustainable pace. While switching to different types of fossil fuels is
possible, it will cause additional releases of carbon dioxide that will
accelerate global warming. For the last 30 years, biological approaches for
generating energy in a self-sustainable manner have been focused on two large
areas: (1) microbial fuel cells (MFCs), and (2) biological production of
hydrogen. MFCs harvest electricity from oxidation of organic compounds and/or
waste waters. Hydrogen is produced by green algae or cyanobacteria by splitting
water through biophotolysis. The PI and collaborators is proposing a third
approach - direct generation of electrical power by cyanobacteria through
coupling of photosynthesis to an electron-harvesting system in Photosynthetic
Microbial Fuel Cells (PMFCs). This novel approach offers advantages over
previous strategies, as it promises to produce electrical power directly and in
a self-sustainable manner using only the energy of sunlight.

The objective of this research is to evaluate the feasibility of a new concept
that aims to produce electricity in solar-powered PMFCs through coupling
cyanobacterial photosynthesis with an electron-harvesting system. Toward this
goal, PMFCs containing cyanobacterial cultures will be constructed and their
performance will be evaluated using electrochemical tests. This work will expand
our knowledge on mechanisms for harnessing solar energy. The proposed study is
likely to catalyze the development of new technologies for generating renewable
energy in a self sustainable manner. In addition, this work will also extend our
knowledge on electron transfer between microorganisms, a possible new mechanism
of energy sharing within bacterial communities.

The proposed study addresses two of the most urgent crises that human society
will be facing in the near future - lack of energy and global warming. In
addition to the potential utility of the research itself, the current project
will provide great educational opportunities for high school students and
teachers. The studies on solar-powered PMFCs will be integrated into learning
modules of the SciTech program, a growing outreach program conducted by the
University of Maryland Biotechnology Institute for high school students and
teachers from Maryland and nearby states. Through a PMFC-based learning module,
the students will be introduced to a new concept of generating energy in a self-
sustainable, CO2-free manner using alternative energy sources.