* 0827097
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Geoarchaeological Investigation of the Jaketown Site: A Late Archaic Poverty Point Settlement in the Lower Mississippi Valley
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2010
* Lee Arco, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2010
* USD 11,228.00

Archaeological research of the Poverty Point culture (ca. 3800-3000 Cal B.P.) in
the Lower Mississippi Valley (LMV) has contributed much to the understanding of
prehistoric hunter and gatherer social organization. During the Late Archaic
Poverty Point Period, construction of monumental architecture, extensive long-
distance trade, technological developments, and elaboration of lapidary arts
reached scales unprecedented in the prehistory of eastern North America. Recent
archaeological and geologic investigations in the LMV have identified evidence
of catastrophic flooding and attendant fluvial reorganization (ca. 3000-2500 Cal
B.P.) that are thought to be implicated in the dissolution of the Poverty Point
culture. However, our understanding of this exceptional hunter-gatherer culture
and the fluvial events temporally correlated with its demise are primarily based
on research conducted at the Poverty Point site and proximate settlements and/or
regions within the Tensas Basin of northeast Louisiana. The lack of
comprehensive data sets from more distant communities and regions throughout the
LMV has limited understanding of Poverty Point society and the interplay between
the dynamic alluvial environment of the Mississippi River and prehistoric
settlement, human behavior, and cultural processes in the region.

The proposed dissertation research project will employ geoarchaeological methods
to investigate the occupation chronology, intra-site stratigraphy, and the
depositional and geomorphologic history of the Jaketown site in the Yazoo Basin
of west-central Mississippi. Jaketown is the second largest extant Poverty Point
settlement and the Yazoo Basin contains the majority of all known Poverty Point
sites. However, many questions related to the site remain unanswered and much
about the Late Archaic culture in the region remains unclear. The site-scale
data acquired from Jaketown will represent one of the few comprehensive data
sets on a Poverty Point site and constitute a first step towards expanding our
regional understanding of Poverty Point culture and knowledge of prehistoric
human-landscape interactions in the dynamic LMV floodplain.

Fundamental goals of archaeological research include the explanation of cultural
processes and transformations as well as the investigation of sources and roles
of change within social, political, economic, and cultural systems. In addition
to refining understanding of Jaketown, the site-scale data acquired through the
proposed research will allow these broader research issues to be addressed on a
regional scale. Results of the proposed project will permit comparative analysis
of the occupation histories of Jaketown and the Poverty Point site, advancing
understanding of the regional chronology, diachronic development, and trajectory
of the two principal settlements within the Poverty Point interaction sphere.

In addition to addressing these archaeological issues, the research at Jaketown
will have several broader beneficial impacts. Results of the project will be
widely disseminated to the academic and public communities and will provide
updated archaeological information, maps, and photographs for the local Jaketown
interpretive museum in Belzoni, Mississippi. Field investigations will integrate
undergraduate student participation, providing the irreplaceable educational
experience of field-based research. Students will receive training in
archaeological field methods, will learn about the archaeology of the region,
and will be well-informed of the research project in which they are engaged. The
research at Jaketown will also promote public interest and education in
archaeology through collaboration with the Jaketown interpretive museum and
through interaction with the local community during field investigations.