* 0827150
* U.S.-Australia Workshop:   Self-Organizing Wireless Networks Based on Cross Layer Interactions
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2009
* Christopher Davis, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* R.  Clive Woods
* 07/31/2009
* USD 49,748.00

0827150&lt;br/&gt;Milner&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: U.S.-Australia Workshop:
Self-Organizing Wireless Networks Based on Cross Layer
Interactions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the participation of
American researchers, postdocs, and graduate students in a U.S.- Australia
workshop on self-organizing wireless networks based on cross layer interactions
to be held in Melbourne in November 2008. The co-organizers are Professor Stuart
Milner of the Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering at the
University of Maryland, College Park and Professor Marimuthu Palaniswami in the
Division of Electrical and Electronic Engineering at the University of Melbourne
and Convenor of ARC (Australian Research Council) Research Network on
Intelligent Sensors, Sensor Networks and Information Processing (ISSNIP).
Wireless communication networks that can self-organize or autonomously
reconfigure their architecture, (e.g., the network topology, the communication
protocols, etc.) in response to degradation and/or loss of system
function/connectivity as well as dynamic application requirements represent a
new and potentially transformative research idea. Such networks can sense,
diagnose, and reconfigure to function uninterruptedly during and after unplanned
events. The goal of the meeting is to advance the fundamental understanding of
self-organizing networks, to advance their theoretical foundations, to identify
the challenges of these networks, and to allow the analysis and design of
autonomously reconfigurable engineered systems integrating physical, networks
and application domains. Specifically they will be discussing the importance of
the dynamic topological reconfiguration capabilities of the network to
autonomous operation and responsiveness for real-time network
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is sufficient overlap of interests
between the University of Maryland and the University of Melbourne to indicate
that they can successfully pursue the activities proposed and that the
interaction will benefit both sides. Users of next generation wireless and
mobile systems would benefit from advantages provided by the self-organizing
wireless network technologies being discussed. This workshop will provide the US
postdocs and graduate students an excellent opportunity to receive a global
research experience. It is anticipated that they will maintain contacts and
collaborations with the Australian researchers and students throughout their
careers. Information about the workshop and its findings will be made available
via respective websites (U.S.: http://www.cnis.umd.edu: Australia:
http://www.ee.unimelb.edu.au/ISSNIP/.) The workshop is being jointly funded with
NSF?s Division of Electrical, Communications and Cyber Systems.&lt;br/&gt;