* 0827024
* AOC: Social Dynamics in Response to Shifting Immigration Policy and Practice: Latino Social Networks, Resource Flow, and Household Reorganization
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2013
* Alexandra Brewis, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 09/30/2013
* USD 752,249.00

Immigration is a major area of concern shaping contemporary policy, practice and
debate in the United States. As a large scale agent of change, shifts in policy
and perceptions concerning immigrants ripple through social networks, affecting
household arrangements and resources that impact not only individuals, but
families and whole communities. These impacts are felt by immigrants,
naturalized citizens and natives who share the same communities, households and
families. Recent research suggests that social networks among the urban poor can
be eroded by macro-level economic and political uncertainty and instability, but
comparatively little is known about how this process unfolds. Clear scientific
evidence demonstrating how people are affected by such policy shifts can provide
evidence for developing immigration-related policy and practice with fewer
negative unintended consequences. With backgrounds in sociology, anthropology,
human biology, geography and demography, the project team examined Latino
households with at least one Spanish-speaking adult in south Phoenix, Arizona.
Households were recruited by partnering with Latino community educators who are
well-established in the area. Field interviews were conducted by bilingual
students at Arizona State University. Using a range of tools and methods,
including social network analysis and mathematical modeling, researchers
determined if and how the households reorganized in response to changing
immigration policy and practice. The study examined the social networks that
link household members to each other and larger networks, and model the
implications of this for the resource flows to household members and ultimately
for household resiliency and the well-being of family members. Agent-based
models were then applied to examine the potential impact of future large-scale
shifts in immigration perceptions and policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By focusing
on the mechanism of social networks?as the framework in which decisions
concerning resource flows are made, played out, and constrained?the study
empirically ties well-being of household members to social policy shifts outside
the household in new and more explicit ways. The project?s unique approach to
data construction makes it possible to clarify the potential for changes in
immigration enforcement or employer sanction laws to impact individuals who may
or may not be directly targeted by these policies. At the local level, the data,
findings, and related outreach activities will contribute to the development of
research capacities within the target community and raise public awareness.
Research findings, such as determining which factors enhance household stability
and how social networks can be leveraged to move limited resources where they
are most needed, were shared with local stakeholders to support their goals of
building healthy communities. &lt;br/&gt;