* 0827416
* Combining Ecological and Molecular Models to Understand the Evolutionary Dynamics of Influenza
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Katharina Koelle, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 08/31/2013
* USD 610,071.00

Intellectual merit:&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project seeks to develop a
theoretical modeling framework and statistical approaches for understanding how
viral pathogens evolve. Its specific application is on the evolution of
influenza?s hemagglutinin protein, a protein that rapidly evolves to escape host
immunity and enables re-infection with influenza. The framework proposes
combining models across two distinct scales of organization: the scale of the
host population and the scale of the virus?s molecule. The host population
component will describe influenza?s outbreak dynamics; the molecular component
will describe the genetic changes to the hemagglutinin protein. The proposed
statistical developments will allow for a direct comparison between the
quantitative predictions arising from the modeling framework and influenza
sequence data. The project will apply the framework to influenza evolution in
different host species (avian, equine, and swine).&lt;br/&gt;The project?s
significance goes well beyond its focus on influenza?s hemagglutinin. First, the
proposed framework for influenza?s hemagglutinin can be used as a future basis
for incorporating additional complexities of influenza?s viral genome, including
the important role of reassortment between viral gene segments for seasonal flu
and pandemic flu. Second, the proposed framework will be applicable to other
rapidly-evolving viral pathogens, including rotavirus, dengue virus, and HIV.
Finally, this project interfaces with several topics of interest in biology
today, including how ecological and evolutionary processes interact and how
evolutionary patterns can be shaped by genetic constraints. &lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project are several. First, an
upper-level&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate course with a focus on the ecology and
evolution of infectious diseases will be developed and taught at the P.I.?s home
institution. Second, undergraduate students including members of under-
represented minority groups will be recruited for work-study, independent study,
and senior thesis research on aims related to this project. These students will
learn how to access epidemiological data from biological, medical, and
veterinary literature, how to perform phylogenetic analyses, and how to test
model-driven predictions. Third, one graduate student and two post-doctoral
fellows will be trained as part of this highly interdisciplinary project.
Fourth, a web page will be designed and used as a repository for the model code
and simulated data that arise from this project. Finally, results of this
project will be presented to the Duke Human Vaccine and Global Health
Institutes, which focus on using basic science research findings to inform
medical applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;