* 0827722
* Learning and processing of electrosensory patterns in mormyrid electric fish
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Todd Leen, Oregon Health & Science University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2012
* USD 700,000.00

A key challenge in computational neuroscience is to understand how the central
nervous system processes and stores sensory information. Sensory systems process
information by means of a complex neural circuitry. One of the major problems
these systems must solve is how to identify 3-dimensional objects when sensory
information about these objects is 2-dimensional, such as visual information
from the retina. This research project investigates a special sensory processing
system that is particularly suitable for answering questions about how complex
objects are interpreted by a 2-dimensional sensory processing sheet. The system
of interest is the electrosensory system of mormyrid weakly electric fish, in
particular the lateral line lobe (ELL) in the hindbrain. Mormyrid fish employ an
alternative sensory system during their nocturnal activity phase: active
electrolocation. This allows the fish to detect and recognize 3-D objects in the
absence of light.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a stimulus
apparatus that will provide the means to experimentally test the predictions of
models that simulate neural activity in the 2-dimensional ELL. The stimulus
apparatus will enable the exploration of new experimental questions of
interactions between different locations on the skin serface. The model will
extend previous studies of single cell activity to include interactions across
the 2-dimensional sheet of neurons in the ELL. This modeling and engineering
work will improve the coupling between theory, physiological experiment, and
behavioral phenomenology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The computational aim of this
project is to model the spatiotemporal activity patterns in ELL that result from
electrical images on the skin. Previous models of ELL will be extended to
represent a sheet of interconnected neurons. The model will incorporate
presently known anatomy and physiology of the system such as spike-timing
dependent plasticity. This modeling project will advance understanding of how
homeostatic synaptic learning can be controlled by the changing state of the
sensory system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The engineering aim of this project is to
develop and distribute to the labs of collaborating experimenters a stimulus
environment that will be able to present precisely-controlled spatial-temporal
electrical images to the mormyrid electric fish. This electrosensory stimulus
apparatus will overcome the limitations of current experimental paradigms, and
thus help verify and challenge sensory processing models. The algorithms
embedded in those models are basic to many sensory systems, and modeling the
electrosensory system in mormyrids will refine the understanding of their
implementation and function.&lt;br/&gt;