* 0827169
* Collaborative Research: Effects of Eddies and Waves on the Westward Transport off Central California
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,05/31/2012
* Leonid Ivanov, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 05/31/2012
* USD 333,904.00

The study focuses on understanding the role of mesoscale variability and Rossby
waves in the offshore propagation of kinetic energy, heat, salt and tracers to
the west [referred as westward transport (WT)] in the California Current System
(CCS). In-situ observations, remote-sensed observations, and numerical modeling
are used to nowcast meso-scale eddy variability in the CCS off Central
California and to quantify associated WT. The goal is to understand how eddies,
jets and waves as well as their interactions affect WT and to determine the
scales responsible for this process. Parameterization schemes for WT will also
be developed in a form sufficiently simplified to be verified from sparse
observations and to permit biological and climate applications.

While each component of the study has its own stand-alone objectives, components
are combined in a synergistic way to produce the desired nowcast product based
on fusion of model results and data. Model integrations through a hierarchy of
regional ROMS (UCLA) nested with a global SODA will be used as guidance in
constructing reliable three-dimensional dynamics of the region of interest on
mesoscale and sub-mesoscale. Satellite data (SST, altimetry and color), drifter
(WOCE) and subsurface (Argo and RAFOS) float observations, and hydrographic
(CTD/VMADCP) data will be used to provide a physical description of the CCS
independent of the model and as a basis for independent model validation. The
ROMS is validated through the feature-oriented approach using multiple metrics
to find an accepted model configuration for reproduction of along- and across-
shore transport in the most accurate manner. WT characteristics are revised and
updated through correlation and scaling analyses applied to model results and
data.

The project will contribute to understanding the westward transport induced by
eddies and waves in a subtropical eastern-boundary upwelling system as well as
the across slope exchange on climate time scales. Eddies and waves play a major
role in the transport of mass and momentum, thus affecting transport, drag, and
dissipation in mesoscale flows. Due to their long lifetimes, eddies and waves
redistribute the cold water upwelled near the margin that may also affect the
overlying atmosphere and hence through air-sea interactions impacting both
weather and climate. A significant deviation of the westward transport from
conventional diffusion necessitates search for new types of parameterizations
for heat and salt transport accounting for long time lag correlation effects.
The proposal suggests and develops such a parameterization in context of the
telegraph transport model, which may be useful for forecasting biological
productivity along the Central California coast and in climate applications of
oceanic models. A set of mathematical tools for image analysis, for
identification and classification of coherent eddies and waves, data merging,
Lagrangian analysis and model-data comparison is developed for the analysis of
output fields of high-resolution oceanic models and observations.

The project will involve graduate students and post-docs including women from
the Naval Postgraduate School (Monterey, CA) as well as other Monterey area
institutions. Research results will be converted into teaching aids for graduate
and undergraduate courses at the Naval Postgraduate School and MLML. These
educational materials will also be used for a graduate-level marine science
textbook. Contributions will also be made to state-of-the-art surveys of marine
sciences. Results should have relevance for biological productivity, fisheries,
oil and gas recovery operations and navigation. Activities will include open
communications and presentations to the public, policy-makers, private companies
and local government officials.