* 0827695
* Characterizing nonlinear auditory computations
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2013
* Kechen Zhang, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 09/30/2013
* USD 524,999.00

Many neurons in the auditory system respond to sounds nonlinearly; that is, its
response to two sounds played simultaneously differs from the sum of its
responses to each sound played alone. Nonlinearities are necessary for many
computational functions, but unlike nonlinear models that allow closed-form
solutions, nonlinear models are often too hard to characterize in practice. To
make nonlinear models tractable, this project will combine single-unit recording
in awake marmoset monkey with automated online stimulus design by parallel
computing. The goal of this stimulus design is not to maximize the firing rate
of a neuron, but to extract the most information about the global stimulus-
response relationship. Optimal sounds will be designed "on the fly" according to
a neuron's response history, with the help of a fast parallel computer whose
running time is compatible with the single-unit recording experiment. The
proposed research is expected to produce practical and widely applicable methods
for characterizing nonlinear sensory neurons. The auditory system is an ideal
system for this type of online experiment because sound space is of lower
dimensions and allows faster computations. The methods developed here are
expected to generalize to nonlinear problems in other sensory modalities.

Theory and algorithm development will focus on generating sound stimuli which
can either most accurately estimate a given model, or maximally distinguish
competing models. Nonlinear models with various degrees of complexity, including
neural network models, will be used simultaneously, and contrasted against one
another in the automated experiment. The model-based sound design method will be
used to characterize complex response properties of neurons in auditory cortex
and inferior colliculus of awake marmoset monkey, a vocal primate. This project
focuses on the auditory cortex because studies of its pronounced nonlinearities
may potentially benefit most from the new method. For comparison the same method
will also be applied to the inferior colliculus, the inputs to which are better
known, allowing more realistic hierarchical models to be developed. The models
obtained from this method should provide a concise summary of the global
stimulus-response relationship of a neuron that generalizes across all types of
stimuli. Neural network models may also help extract additional information
about the connectivity between different neuronal types, thus providing a link
between the stimulus-response function and the structure of the underlying
neural circuits.

