* 0827412
* CAREER:     Sorption and Biodegradation Processes for Removal of Pharmaceutical Compounds in Biological Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2008,10/31/2011
* Willie Harper, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Debra Reinhart
* 10/31/2011
* USD 314,325.00

Harper&lt;br/&gt;0546388&lt;br/&gt;The focus is biodegradation and sorption of
pharmaceutical compounds (PhACs) in engineered
bioreactors.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. These research results are expected
to be an important part of the foundation needed for understanding fate of PhACs
in both engineered and natural systems. The use of FED modeling for predicting
biological transformations has not been done before, and may provide the
missing, conceptual framework needed for a more complete understanding of
transformation pathways. The proposed sorption studies will establish the basic
thermodynamic properties of PhAC sorption and will fully uncover the connection
between particle size and hysteresis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The expected results
have potential to make fundamental scientific contributions, while also making
direct connections to design and operating strategies for water quality
professionals. The research uses basic scientific concepts from quantum
chemistry and thermodynamics, and the experimental tasks utilize modern
analytical techniques and computational software. The four key research
hypotheses are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) The biological oxidation of PhACs and
their metabolites will occur at the location where the frontier electron density
(FED) is highest. FED may be established as an organizing principle for
predicting biologically-mediated PhAC transformation. These results may impact
the understanding of PhAC mass transport in bioreactors, surface waters, and
sediments.&lt;br/&gt;2) PhAC sorption is entropy-driven, endothermic, and
diffusion-controlled. Establishing the thermodynamic baseline for PhAC sorption
to activated sludge biomass will help to understand available data in a
meaningful way.&lt;br/&gt;3) Sorption hysteresis is more pronounced as the
particle size distribution shifts toward larger sizes. The results could produce
a fundamental understanding for how sorption hysteresis is affected by activated
sludge particle size.&lt;br/&gt;4) PhACs or their metabolites located within the
interior of larger floc particles are more persistent. When both biodegradation
and sorption occur simultaneously, PhACs and their metabolites may become
trapped within the interior of activated sludge floc particles, where biological
activity is lower.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Education and outreach. The integrated
education and outreach activities will enrich the environmental engineering
program at Auburn University with new course elements that enhance learning,
promote diversity in engineering through collaboration with the Auburn
University BellSouth Minority Engineering program (BMEP), and promote
environmental literacy among middle school students. The new course elements
include using the cooperative learning strategy and interdisciplinary design
projects. BMEP activities faculty mentoring, problem-solving labs, and direct
involvement in the research project. I also propose to promote environmental
literacy in young people by incorporating a 1 hr environmental learning module
in Auburn University annual interactive learning conference for middle school
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts are expected that at the
successful completion of this project will help place the members of my research
group near the center of the international, interdisciplinary dialogue
concerning the proliferation of PhACs in the environment. I further expect that
the curriculm at Auburn University will be strengthened through new course
elements, diversity in engineering will be enhanced, and local middle school
students will become more environmentally literate.&lt;br/&gt;