* 0828002
* Collaborative Research: Model Reformulation for Lithium-ion Batteries -- Parameter Estimation and Dynamic Optimization
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2010
* Venkat Subramanian, Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 02/28/2010
* USD 169,558.00

CBET-0828002&lt;br/&gt;Subramanian&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will pursue a
wide range of activities in modeling, parameter estimation and dynamic
optimization of Lithium-ion batteries. While physics-based models have been
widely developed and studied for these systems, the rigorous models have not
been employed for parameter estimation or dynamic optimization of operating
conditions. This is an unexplored area requiring model reformulation and
approximations for efficient simulation of coupled partial differential
equations. Along these lines, this is an in-depth analysis of model
reformulation to facilitate (1) parameter estimation for understanding capacity
fade of Lithium-ion batteries and (2) dynamic optimization technique to optimize
the usability and efficiency of future power
sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research Objectives&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific
research objectives include:&lt;br/&gt;* Reformulated efficient physics-based
models for Lithium-ion batteries: reformulate and develop efficient models by
careful analysis and analytical/approximate methods for rigorous numerical
models with the aid of various advanced mathematical methods including
analytical solution of banded matrix equations, decoupling coupled equations,
etc.&lt;br/&gt;* Prediction of capacity fade in Lithium-ion batteries by keeping
track of the change of transport and kinetic parameters with cycle
numbers.&lt;br/&gt;* Optimum operating conditions: develop, validate, and
implement ideal operating conditions to minimize utilization loss and maximize
energy efficiency (and hence reduce the specific weight) of Lithium-ion
batteries by performing dynamic optimization on reformulated-efficient
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* The
reformulated physics-based models for Lithium-ion batteries will have CPU times
two orders-of-magnitude lower than the current state-of-the-art.&lt;br/&gt;* The
reformulated models are more amenable for parameter estimation and
dynamicoptimization while the current state-of-the-art transport phenomena
models are computationally inefficient.&lt;br/&gt;* The work will help predict
and understand capacity fade in Lithium-ion batteries by tracking changes in the
parameters with cycles. This will help design better batteries for the future.
The proposed work will optimize the operating conditions of batteries for high
energy and utilization efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* The model reformulation technique will be
applicable for a wide range of engineering problems like monolith reactors, fuel
cells, bioreactors, etc. Training and development of a wide range of
battery/fuel cell professionals, ranging from engineers and researchers to
educators. Crucial to maintaining national preeminence in the field.&lt;br/&gt;*
Increased participation of under-represented groups in engineering research.
Dissemination of results through peer-reviewed research articles, presentations
and website for research modules will have an impact on student and research
community worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;* Develop user-friendly modules to aid
experimental researchers in modeling electrochemical power sources.&lt;br/&gt;*
A new addition to the existing graduate course that trains the students in model
reformulation of electrochemical power sources.