* 0828767
* Surface Studies of Multifunctional Oxygenates on Metals
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Will Medlin, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 08/31/2013
* USD 439,727.00

CBET-0828767 &lt;br/&gt;Medlin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit. The
development of integrated biorefineries for production of fuels and chemicals
from biomass-derived sugars poses a number of key challenges for catalysis.
Among these challenges is the need to design catalysts that are selective for
reactions of a single functional group within a multifunctional oxygenate
molecule. Nearly all of the so-called biorefining building block
molecules?including polyols, levulinic acid, and their derivatives?incorporate
at least two functional groups that are typically oxygen-containing. In the case
of polyols these functional groups are invariant, whereas in other cases (such
as for levulinic acid and its cyclic derivatives) the various functional groups
are distinct. In all cases, however, it is desirable to be able to control
reactivity to a single functional position. To design catalyst structures with
controlled selectivity, a better understanding is needed of the binding
configurations adopted by multifunctional oxygenates on key catalytic surfaces,
such as Pt-group metals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is proposed to study the
adsorption and thermal chemistry of a variety of multifunctional oxygenates,
focusing on polyols and cyclic esters or ethers, on the Pd(111) surface. High
resolution electron energy loss spectroscopy will be employed to characterize
adsorbate structure and to identify reaction intermediates, and temperature
programmed desorption will be used to track the kinetics for adsorbate
desorption and the evolution of volatile reaction products. Density functional
theory calculations will be employed as a tool to facilitate atomic-scale
interpretation of spectroscopic results. Molecular parameters such as the number
of functional groups, the spacing between functional groups, and the length of
pendant alkyl groups will be varied in the studies of adsorption and thermal
chemistry of these oxygenates. The primary objective of the proposed work is to
identify how the presence of multiple functional groups in oxygenate molecules
affects adsorption and surface reaction pathways. The ultimate goal of this line
of research is to aid in developing strategies for achieving better control over
reactivity toward a single functional group in a complex carbohydrate molecule.
While this goal will require consideration of how surface processes are altered
by changes in surface structure and composition, the principal focus of this
proposal is on a thorough assessment of how changes in the molecules themselves
control surface chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact. The general
objective of achieving selectivity control in reactions of molecules with
multiple functional groups on surfaces would be transformative for many
applications related to production of both petroleum- and biomass-derived
chemicals. Furthermore, the surface chemistry of compounds such as polyols and
furans is important both within the biorefining concept and in the traditional
chemical sector. A better understanding of the factors controlling multiple
binding of adsorbates could therefore make an impact in a number of industries.
The proposed research is well-aligned with the objectives of the Colorado Center
for Biorefining and Biofuels (C2B2), an industry-supported center for which the
PI is the University of Colorado site director. The project will benefit from
several programs associated with C2B2, including a program modeled after the NSF
REU program, a postdoctoral fellows program, and regular meetings with industry
sponsors. A program for involvement of minority undergraduate researchers in
this research is also proposed.