* 0828123
* Collaborative Research:  Model Reformulation for Lithium-ion Batteries - Parameter Estimation and Dynamic Optimization
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Richard Braatz, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/2011
* USD 106,000.00

CBET-0828123 Braatz

The PIs will pursue a wide range of activities in modeling, parameter estimation
and dynamic optimization of Lithium-ion batteries. While physics-based models
have been widely developed and studied for these systems, the rigorous models
have not been employed for parameter estimation or dynamic optimization of
operating conditions. This is an unexplored area requiring model reformulation
and approximations for efficient simulation of coupled partial differential
equations. Along these lines, this is an in-depth analysis of model
reformulation to facilitate (1) parameter estimation for understanding capacity
fade of Lithium-ion batteries and (2) dynamic optimization technique to optimize
the usability and efficiency of future power sources.

Research Objectives

Specific research objectives include: * Reformulated efficient physics-based
models for Lithium-ion batteries: reformulate and develop efficient models by
careful analysis and analytical/approximate methods for rigorous numerical
models with the aid of various advanced mathematical methods including
analytical solution of banded matrix equations, decoupling coupled equations,
etc. * Prediction of capacity fade in Lithium-ion batteries by keeping track of
the change of transport and kinetic parameters with cycle numbers. * Optimum
operating conditions: develop, validate, and implement ideal operating
conditions to minimize utilization loss and maximize energy efficiency (and
hence reduce the specific weight) of Lithium-ion batteries by performing dynamic
optimization on reformulated-efficient models.

Intellectual Merit

* The reformulated physics-based models for Lithium-ion batteries will have CPU
times two orders-of-magnitude lower than the current state-of-the-art. * The
reformulated models are more amenable for parameter estimation and
dynamicoptimization while the current state-of-the-art transport phenomena
models are computationally inefficient. * The work will help predict and
understand capacity fade in Lithium-ion batteries by tracking changes in the
parameters with cycles. This will help design better batteries for the future.
The proposed work will optimize the operating conditions of batteries for high
energy and utilization efficiency.

Broader Impacts

* The model reformulation technique will be applicable for a wide range of
engineering problems like monolith reactors, fuel cells, bioreactors, etc.
Training and development of a wide range of battery/fuel cell professionals,
ranging from engineers and researchers to educators. Crucial to maintaining
national preeminence in the field. * Increased participation of under-
represented groups in engineering research. Dissemination of results through
peer-reviewed research articles, presentations and website for research modules
will have an impact on student and research community worldwide. * Develop user-
friendly modules to aid experimental researchers in modeling electrochemical
power sources. * A new addition to the existing graduate course that trains the
students in model reformulation of electrochemical power sources.