* 0828612
* GOALI: Pore-Scale Understanding of Ohmic Polarization in Solid Oxide Fuel Cell Electrodes
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Aaron Crumm, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 09/30/2011
* USD 96,000.00

CBET-0828612&lt;br/&gt;Chiu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The solid oxide fuel cell
(SOFC) is one of the most efficient electrical conversion devices with the fuel
flexibility to accommodate both natural gas and methane-based biogases from
wastewater plants, farms, landfills, and products from biomass gasification with
relatively low cleaning requirements. However, substantial losses can arise in a
SOFC due to the cell's electronic and ionic resistances. These losses, which are
known as ohmic polarization, can generally account for upwards of 40% of the
SOFC's electrochemical potential depending on the cell design and operating
conditions. This research will develop pore-scale models to understand and
reduce ohmic losses by optimizing the SOFC electrode microstructure for enhanced
performance, thus enable the SOFC to be adopted as a technologically and
economically viable alternative for efficient energy conversion and
sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A combination of x-ray imaging and model
development will be used to achieve this goal. We will 1) use x-ray computed
tomography (XCT) developed by the PI and Xradia, Inc. to obtain sub-50 nm
resolution 3-D reconstruction of porous SOFC electrodes provided by Adaptive
Materials, Inc. (AMI) as input for analysis, 2) develop pore-level models at 50
nm resolution to describe electronic and ionic charge transfer in the electrode
microstructure, 3) determine ohmic losses and structural integrity of XCT-imaged
SOFC electrode structures using charge transfer predictions coupled with thermal
stress analysis, and 4) validate predictions with XCT imaging of pre- and post-
operational SOFC electrodes at Xradia and SOFC experiments performed at AMI.
Models developed will be used to determine electrode microstructures with
minimal ohmic losses. This work will integrate well with our current Army-funded
effort on hydrocarbon-fueled SOFC that focuses on mass transport, internal
reformation and electrochemistry in the gas phase region of the electrode's pore
structure. This activity will be located at the Connecticut Global Fuel Cell
Center (CGFCC), which offers one of the largest core academic capabilities in
fuel cell science and technology in the nation. The program will involve 2
graduate students, 1 undergraduate student, and will have outreach activities
involving 7th grade to high school students, teachers and industry.