* 0828508
* Individual Nomination
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Philip Kutzko, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Daphne Y. Rainey
* 08/31/2011
* USD 10,000.00

PHILIP KUTZKO University of Iowa&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Philip
Kutzko has been a leader, in the Department of Mathematics, at the University of
Iowa, at the three Iowa Regents Universities and nationally, in the effort to
increase the participation of groups that are underrepresented in STEM fields.
Dr. Kutzko's specific focus is underrepresented minority doctoral students. He
was among the initial group to conceive and implement the Department?s ongoing
project to build an inclusive and diverse graduate program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Kutzko finds that community building is equally
important to mentoring; as mentoring will foster mentoring, building community
will foster support to strengthen students in their pursuits. He feels that it
is only by institutionalizing the values of mentoring in the context of a
welcoming and inclusive department, or discipline, or university that one might
hope to transform these institutions so that changes transcend the efforts of
individuals and become permanent. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2000, Dr. Kutzko
wrote the proposal that resulted in the Department of Mathematics becoming
designated a Sloan Minority Scholarship Department. This designation resulted in
a total of fourteen of the department's minority students receiving Sloan
Scholarships as they passed their Comprehensive Exams. Indeed, all of the recent
Ph.D.?s have been Sloan Scholars. Dr. Kutzko has mentored at least twenty
minority students in the Department. Three of these students have earned the
doctoral degree and are employed as faculty or postdoctoral fellows.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Kutzko founded and co-Directs the National Alliance
for Doctoral Studies in the Mathematical Sciences, an NSF-sponsored partnership
of math sciences departments at the Iowa Regents Universities and Mathematics
departments at approximately twenty minority serving institutions. He serves as
the Iowa Regents mentor at Florida A&amp;M University and has mentored 21
students there. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Kutzko has served as a consultant to
several math departments who are interested in building programs that emulate
the community based, mentor intensive strategies of the department at Iowa.