* 0828786
* SGER - µ-Raman Analysis of Ice-Core Samples
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Robert Barletta, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 08/31/2011
* USD 79,687.00

Barletta &lt;br/&gt;0828786&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a Small
Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) for a project to conduct a limited scope,
proof-of-concept study of the application of Raman spectroscopy to the analysis
of ice cores. As a non-destructive analytical tool with high spatial resolution,
Raman spectroscopy has found widespread application in situations where water is
a major constituent in the sample, including marine science and the analysis of
clathrates in ice-cores themselves. Raman can provide information at high enough
sensitivity (ppm to ppb) to make its use as a non-destructive survey tool for
ice core samples attractive. Laser-based techniques such as Raman can be used to
obtain chemical information at near diffraction-limited resolution allowing
particulates on the order of 1micron or less to be characterized. Preliminary
work has demonstrated the selectivity of Raman spectroscopy for determining
related polyatomic species (ions and compounds), and the ability to discern
oxidation state from such analysis. In spite of the potential of this technique,
instrumentation necessary to analyze ice core samples using micro-Raman
spectroscopy with UV excitation is not readily available. Even with visible
excitation, libraries of Raman spectra necessary for mixture de-convolution are
not available. The proposed effort is a novel extension of Raman into the area
of polar and climatic research, providing data on chemical speciation hitherto
unavailable, of critical importance to the understanding of the biology present
in glacial ice as well as the sources of particulate material found in ice
cores. Since the availability of ice-core material at critical horizons is
limited, this non-destructive technique will help to maximize the information
obtained from these samples. The broader impacts of the work are that it will
bring a new researcher into the field of polar ice core analysis and it has the
potential to also bring a new non-destructive technique into the field. Finally,
the research will take place at a predominately undergraduate institution in
South Alabama with a large proportion (24% of undergraduates) of minority
students. The proposed effort is high-risk because, although based upon
established principles of vibrational spectroscopy, the application to the
analytical problems of trace environmental analysis are unique, and the
precision requirements are stringent. Moreover, this work will demonstrate the
feasibility of an integrated approach to ice core analysis, while addressing
specific problems in glaciology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;