* 0828979
* Molecular Simulation Study of Wetting at Rough Surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Jeffrey Errington, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 08/31/2011
* USD 200,001.00

CBET-0828979 Errington

Intellectual Merit

In a wide range of both naturally occurring phenomena and industrial processes
fluids interact with solid substrates. Such fluids exhibit a rich variety of
behavior that is distinct from that observed for bulk fluids. The response of a
fluid at a surface depends qualitatively upon the relative strengths and ranges
of the fluid-fluid and fluid-substrate interactions and the structural
characteristics of the substrate. It is the latter of these influences that we
focus on here. Specifically, this project will examine the effect of nanoscale
substrate roughness and curvature on wetting behavior. Our proposed studies are
motivated by recent efforts that employ tunable nanostructured substrate
features to modify and control the wetting behavior of a system. Examples
include the use of oxygen-plasma treatment to produce polymer surface
topographies with periodicity in the 50-300 nm range, the construction of
surfaces with aligned carbon nanotube arrays, and the use of silicon nanowires
with 20-50 nm diameters to produce fractally rough surfaces.

The project proposes two molecular simulation studies that will both complement
recent experimental work and advance fundamental knowledge with respect to the
wetting behavior of fluids on heterogeneous and/or curved surfaces. Three model
fluids will be utilized in this work: an atomistic Lennard-Jones fluid, water,
and n-alkane chains. In our first general study we will examine the interfacial
properties of fluids at substrates characterized by topographies with a period
and amplitude in the 1-10 nm range. This effort will enable one to describe the
influence of regular roughness at a length scale that is difficult to probe
experimentally. To accomplish this task, the investigators will employ a model
that enables us to systematically vary the relative amplitude, length scale, and
shape of substrate features exposed to a fluid. Recently-developed simulation
methodologies will be used to quantitatively probe how these nanoscale features
influence important interfacial properties, including the contact angle, solid-
vapor and solid-liquid interfacial tensions, and the line tension, as well as
the order of the wetting transition. In the second general stud, they will probe
the role of substrate curvature on wetting behavior. A number of recent
strategies for controlling the contact angle of a droplet involve the exposure
of a fluid to a porous assembly of cylindrical objectives (e.g. carbon
nanotubes, silicon nanowires) with diameters on the order of 30-100 fluid
molecular diameters. At the molecular level fluid particles interact with highly
curved substrates. Density functional calculations with simple systems suggest
that this degree of curvature has a significant impact on wetting properties.
Given that the diameters of these cylindrical objects can often be controlled,
quantitative knowledge of the extent to which curvature influences wetting will
prove useful in the design of nanostructured substrates. Within this proposal,
the investigators describe a means to quantitatively probe the interfacial
properties of fluids at cylindrical objects with diameters spanning from a few
to thousands of fluid molecular diameters.

Broader Impact Development of a deeper fundamental understanding of the behavior
of fluids in the presence of a surface would have a profound influence on the
ability of scientists and engineers to design novel technologies and harness the
unique features of natural systems. The results that emerge from this study will
have broad impact on numerous scientific disciplines and industrial
applications. Examples that illustrate the need for knowledge of how a fluid
interacts with a surface are numerous, and include the design of water-repellent
and stain-resistant fabrics, friction-reducing surfaces, sensors, medical
implants, and nanoscale optofluidic devices. On the education front, this
project will impact students at the elementary, undergraduate, and graduate
levels. At the university level, students will be trained in the areas of
surface thermodynamics, statistical mechanics, and computer simulation. The PI
will actively recruit undergraduate students to participate in the project
proposed here. Also, the PI will continue an outreach program in which he
annually visits 5th grade classrooms at Big Tree Elementary School.