* 0828574
* Identification of the Polycation Molecular Factors That Promote the Intracellular Trafficking of Polycation/DNA Complexes
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* You-Yeon Won, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 07/31/2011
* USD 240,000.00

CBET-0828574 Won

Polycation-based gene carriers, though promising as safer alternatives to viral
gene carriers, have been limited in large part due to their poor biological
activities. Future design and development of better polycation gene carriers
will be greatly facilitated by an improved understanding of the relationship
between the polycation chemistry and performance mechanisms. Using combined
state-of-the-art polymer synthesis and biological imaging techniques, the
proposed research aims to address the gap that exists in our understanding of
how the chemical and molecular properties of polycation carriers influence their
biological activities and delivery performances in overcoming the two important
cellular-level transport barriers, i.e., endosomal escape and nuclear import.
Two associated specific aims will be addressed. First, the PI will investigate
how the polycation molecular characteristics (in particular, the pKa of the
amine group in the polycation, and the spacing between the amine groups along
the polycation chain) impact the pathways and kinetics of the early
intracellular trafficking processes (endocytosis and endosome escape); for this
purpose, polycations with systematically varying chemical/molecular structures
will be designed and synthesized, and the endosomal trafficking processes of the
DNA complexes based on these polycations will be examined by confocal
microscopy. Second, the PI will study the interrelationship between the exact
subcellular location (cytosol or nucleus) of partial/complete DNA dissociation
from the polycation complex and the nuclear import/transcription of the
delivered DNA; for this study, a chemically cross-linked polycation carrier that
is degradable upon exposure to mild UV irradiation will be developed and
utilized to precisely control the timing and location of the DNA release.

The proposed research will use a unique combination of polymer science and cell
biology methodologies, this research will provide useful information toward
understanding (i) the exact chemical and molecular factors that promote the
timely escape of polycation/DNA complexes from endosomes and (ii) the exact
mechanisms by which certain polycations (such as polyethylenimine) so
effectively enhance the nuclear localization and release/transcription of the
delivered DNA.

A precise molecular-level understanding of these polycation chemistry vs.
performance relationships will provide a fundamental basis for developing new
materials and strategies for vastly improved efficiencies of non-viral gene
delivery systems, and will therefore help further vitalize the gene therapy
field toward realizing the full potential of the technology in both conventional
and emerging areas of its applications. The proposed research will provide
integrated training for graduate and undergraduate students in a
multidisciplinary, collaborative and intellectually stimulating environment to
learn skills necessary for the future generation of chemical and biological
engineering researchers. Aspects of the proposed research will be used to
enhance curricula in the area of nanomedicine.