* 0828782
* Characterizing Near-Wall Electrokinetics of Colloidal Particles
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2008,12/31/2012
* Minami Yoda, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
*  Ashok S. Sangani
* 12/31/2012
* USD 314,998.00

CBET-0828782 Yoda

Microfluidic "Labs on a Chip" (LOC) have revolutionized genomics and enzymatic
assays by shrinking the contents of an entire analytical chemistry laboratory
down to a few cm2. Shrinking from micro- to nanofluidics requires a fundamental
understanding of interfacial transport since at these scales, the entire flow
will be within 1 ìm of the wall-and surface (e.g. electrostatic) forces will
become significant. Recently, a number of studies have suggested that the no-
slip condition breaks down at submicron scales. Most of the experimental studies
(e.g., microscale particle-image velocimetry or ìPIV) use techniques that
determine the velocity of nanoparticle tracers, and assume that the tracer
velocity is the fluid velocity. Yoda has recently shown that are ìPIV tracers
excluded, most likely by electrostatic repulsion, from the first 100-150 nm next
to the wall. Correcting their PIV data for this non-uniform tracer distribution
gives no slip at the wall and velocity gradients in agreement with analytical
predictions. Assuming, as is standard, uniformly distributed tracers gives false
slip lengths >200 nm. To our knowledge, no other experimental studies have
considered or quantified how near-wall particle distribution or electrostatic
forces affect their data. We therefore propose a fundamental, mainly
experimental, three-year investigation on the dynamics of colloidal particles
suspended in a conducting solution near a planar wall subject to an external
electric field for a variety of particle-solution-wall systems. This is a basic
model of: - new nanoscale assembly techniques that exploit electrokinetic
phenomena to precisely manipulate and assemble nanoparticles suspended in a
conducting liquid; and - PIV studies of the microscale electrokinetically driven
flows used in a wide variety of LOC.

The research objectives of this effort are to:

I. Develop new colloidal tracers that access the flow region within 150 nm of
the wall-including the wall EDL-and extend the measurement capabilities and
accuracy of u/nPIV, the leading microscale velocimetry techniques. II.
Understand which physical properties that affect the near-particle and wall
charge distributions have the greatest impact on near-wall colloidal particle
electrokinetics and why these properties have such an effect.

The proposed research will build on an existing collaboration between the PIs,
leveraging Yoda's novel interfacial diagnostics and Olesik's novel nanoparticles
and surface chemistry expertise.

Intellectual merits: This work will advance knowledge and understanding of
microfluidics by: - Developing particles, including new carbon nanoparticles,
with well-controlled surface charge that can be used both as flow tracers and
for electrokinetically driven nanoparticle assembly; - Improving the accuracy
and near-wall capabilities of microscale velocimetry techniques - which could
transform the debate on the breakdown of the no-slip condition; and -
Determining how particle, wall and surface properties, by changing the near-
particle and nearwall charge distributions, affect particle-wall interactions
and dynamics.

This research is potentially transformative because: - Robust, reliable and
scalable methods for electrokinetically driven nanoscale assembly would
transform nanoelectronics and bring the benefits of nanotechnology to the
public; - Reliable and accurate interfacial velocimetry techniques will help
develop new technologies based on surface forces for controlling and actuating
flows at the sub-micron scale, and transform nanofluidic devices.

Broader impacts: This work will support development of: - High-school level Web-
based presentations on basic aspects of electrokinetically driven flow; - Hands-
on demonstrations for 6th-12th grade students that show how micro and macroscale
flows differ, for example, in terms of the different methods of propulsion
(twisting vs. flapping) used by micro- and macro-organisms. Both PIs will
continue to mentor students from underrepresented groups, and ensure that their
outreach activities include schools with a high fraction of students from such
groups