* 0828240
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:Â  Social Class, Migration and Assimilation in the United States
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2009
* Lingxin Hao, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2009
* USD 7,500.00

SES-0828240&lt;br/&gt;Lingxin Hao&lt;br/&gt;Mindelyn Buford, II&lt;br/&gt;Johns
Hopkins University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation research will study
the processes by which highly-educated, foreign-born, Black persons (Nigerian
and Ghanaian immigrants) integrate into U.S. society. Specifically, it will
examine how Nigerian and Ghanaian immigrants (1) make the decision to migrate to
the United States despite racial inequality in the U.S.; (2) become recognized
as part of Black and foreign-born groups by the U.S. government, society, and
labor market; and (3) assimilate into different sectors of the society. Data is
collected through a background survey, in-depth interviews, social network
analysis, and "shadowing" observations with Nigerian and Ghanaian immigrants
residing in Maryland. These data will be supplemented by archival research on
the social structure of the home societies to provide a complete view of migrant
backgrounds and experiences. These migrants have a class advantage, but race
disadvantage in the U.S., and thus provide an interesting case to compare to
other non-White immigrants and native-born African Americans.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study has broader implications for education, social
science research, and society. First, it will promote teaching, training and
learning as the research design, methodology, empirical findings, and theory
construction will be integrated into courses on migration, race and ethnicity,
social inequality, and research methodology. Second, the research could
potentially inform the process of how to broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups. Finally, findings from this study could inform policy
debates in the U.S., Nigeria, and Ghana on migration, race, and ethnicity.