* 0828331
* Acquisition of a Diode-Pumped Solid-State Laser for MicroFabrication Research
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2009
* David Willis, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Theodore L. Bergman
* 07/31/2009
* USD 34,000.00

Proposal Title: Acquisition of a Diode-Pumped Solid-State Laser for
MicroFabrication Research&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Willis,
David A.&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Southern Methodist University&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
No: CBET-0828331&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This NSF grant funds the
acquisition of a laser that will be utilized for laser-assisted microfabrication
research. Laser-assisted microfabrication is a group of technologies that uses a
laser as a heat source for directly manipulating matter to generate small
structures. Structures with dimensions measured in micrometers (one-millionth of
a meter) may be fabricated by these techniques. In some cases, structures with
nanometer-scale (one-billionth of a meter) features can be generated. Potential
industrial applications of laser microfabrication include electronic and optical
device fabrication and manufacturing of biomedical devices. The laser will be
part of the Laser Micromachining Laboratory at Southern Methodist University
(SMU), where it will be used for fundamental and applied studies of laser
micromachining, laser texturing, and materials deposition.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this research are enhancement of
the research infrastructure at SMU and education of undergraduate and graduate
students. The enhancement of infrastructure is significant, since the Laser
Micromachining Laboratory does not have a laser with the capabilities of the
laser acquired by this grant. The laser will increase the types of materials
that can be processed, increase the speed at which experiments are performed,
and decrease the minimum structure size the can be fabricated. Since research in
the Laser Micromachining Laboratory is performed by graduate and undergraduates,
students at all educational levels in the Mechanical Engineering Department will
receive training on this laser. Additionally, undergraduate students
participating in the NSF-funded Research Experiences for Undergraduates Site in
the Department of Mechanical Engineering will gain experience with the laser.
The intellectual merit of the research is the diverse array of fundamental
research in laser-material interactions that will be openly disseminated to the
public through scientific literature, including laser microfabrication, laser-
material interactions, laser micromachining, laser-based materials deposition,
and laser texturing. The research is transformative in that the laser will be
used to study new ways of manufacturing at the micro- and nanoscale. Laser-based
microfabrication techniques use fewer manufacturing steps than other methods,
potentially changing the way manufacturing is performed at the micro- and
nanoscale. &lt;br/&gt;