* 0828882
* WIRELESS TRACKING OF TONGUE MOVEMENTS FOR WHEELCHAIR CONTROL AND COMPUTER ACCESS
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Maysam Ghovanloo, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Ted A. Conway
* 12/31/2012
* USD 261,758.00

PI: Ghovanloo, Maysam Proposal Number: 0828882

Problem Statement: The number of people with disabilities is increasing among
all age groups, especially the elderly (+65) who currently comprise 12% of the
U.S. population. Individuals severely disabled as a result of various causes
from spinal cord injuries to stroke, cerebral palsy, and ALS find it extremely
difficult to carry out everyday tasks without continuous help. Despite the wide
variety of assistive technologies (AT) available for individuals with lower
levels of disabilities, the above population is still considered underserved,
and would greatly benefit from having more choices, particularly in utilizing
adaptable ATs that can take advantage of whatever remaining capabilities that
they might have. We intend to help individuals with little or no upper extremity
functions to improve their quality of life by enabling them to control their
environment, drive their powered wheelchair (PWC), and access computers by
simply moving their tongue. Intellectual Merits: The main purpose of the
proposed research is to develop an unobtrusive, minimally invasive, low cost,
and wireless AT called the 'Tongue Drive' system (TDS), which can potentially
substitute some of the arm and hand functions in people with quadriplegia.
Conceptually, the TDS consists of an array of small magnetic sensors located
inside the mouth, on an orthodontic brace (internal version - iTDS), or outside
of the mouth, mounted on a headset (external version - eTDS). The sensor array
measures the magnetic field of a small permanent magnet, the size of a grain of
rice, which is attached to the tongue by means of tissue adhesives,
implantation, piercing, or clipping. The sensor signals are transmitted
wirelessly to an external ultra-portable PC, which is worn by the user. The
received data is processed to determine the coordinates, orientation, and
relative motion of the magnet with respect to the array of sensors in real time.
This information is then used to control the movements of a cursor on the PC
screen, and to perform all other functions that can be done with a mouse pointer
or a joystick. The principal advantage of the TDS is that a few magnetic sensors
and an inherently wireless permanent magnet could potentially capture an
unlimited number of tongue movements, each of which can represent a specific
user command. A set of dedicated tongue movements could be tailored for each
individual user based on his/her preferences, lifestyle, and remaining
abilities, and mapped onto a set of customized functions for computer, PWC, and
environmental access. Thus, TDS can offer a high degree of adaptability and
cover a large group of users with different levels of disabilities. In addition,
the TDS has the potential to provide its users with proportional control, which
makes it a lot easier to maneuver PWCs in crowded and confined spaces. This
research also involves a thorough evaluation of the TDS efficacy, usability and
user acceptability.

Broader Impacts: We intend to help the most severely disabled individuals to
live active, selfsupportive, satisfying, and productive lives, equal to the
other members of the society. Paralysis is considered to be one of the most
expensive types of disabilities. Solutions such as the TDS could help reduce
healthcare and assisted-living costs, increase the employability of people with
disabilities, and allow users to participate more fully in the society, while
relieving their family members or dedicated caregivers.

Educational Plan: The PI's main educational objective is to stimulate the
interests of undergraduate and graduate students by taking advantage of the
'multidisciplinary' nature of the proposed research. Undergraduates will be
recruited through senior design and presidential undergraduate research award
(PURA) to participate in development of the TDS graphical user interface. A
graduate student will also be involved in the proposed research by developing
the TDS hardware and sensor signal processing algorithms as well as helping with
human trials.