* 0828472
* Micellization of Block Copolymers in Dilute Near-Critical Solutions: How Model Impurities and Drugs Partition Between Micellar and Solvent Phases
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2011
* Maciej Radosz, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 02/28/2011
* USD 141,512.00

CBET-0828472 Radosz

Near-critical solvents are compressed and compressible fluids used either below
or above their critical temperatures. If such a compressible fluid is selective
enough with respect to the blocks that form a block copolymer, it will lead to
near-critical solution in which micelles can be formed not only by decreasing
temperature, which leads to micellization temperature, but also by decreasing
pressure, which leads to micellization pressure. The goal of the proposed
research is to understand the micellar and bulk phase transitions of model
copolymers composed of blocks that differ in polarizability or polarity or both,
such as styrene-block-diene, an example of a uniform and well-characterized
material, and polyethylene glycol-block-polycaprolactone, an example of a drug-
delivery material, both in selective near-critical solvents. This is crucial to
understand and exploit the pressure-sensitive micellization that can lead to
novel drug- and gene-delivery nanoparticles. Such micellization processes are
fast and reproducible because polymer solutions in near-critical solvents have
low viscosity and high diffusion rates. The micelles produced from such
processes are not only easy to separate from the near-critical solvent, but also
reliably retain their structure upon recovery and subsequent dissolution in
aqueous formulations.

The proposed experimental tasks evolve around characterizing the bulk cloud-
point, crystallization, melting, and micellar phase transitions of the model
block copolymer samples. The bulk and micellar transitions will be determined
from high-pressure dynamic light scattering. This work will help understand drug
and impurity partitioning in compressible micellar systems, and hence help
transform the science and engineering platform for making unique polymeric
nanoparticles.

Broader Impact The proposed project will enable two doctoral students working on
this subject to continue their projects on characterizing self assembling
molecules that lead to nanostructured materials. These students will not only be
exposed to the experimental characterization methods in the PI's lab, but also
to the synthesis and neutron scattering facilities at the Oak Ridge National
Laboratory. Furthermore, the high-pressure dynamic light scattering method of
characterizing micellar solutions of blocky polymers will be incorporated in the
graduate and undergraduate thermodynamics and polymer science classes. This
project will also advance a novel micelle-based nanoparticle technology (patent
pending) by providing basic understanding how to form and recover dry drug-
loaded micelles from near-critical solvents, without having to freeze the
solvent, which is essential to manufacturing drug and gene delivery
nanoparticles.