* 0828615
* SPHERE: Sustainable Photosynthetic Hydrogen Evolution Research
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2008,10/31/2010
* Barry Bruce, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 10/31/2010
* USD 90,000.00

CBET-0828615&lt;br/&gt;Frymier&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Toward the end of this
century, the production rate of petroleum will have reached its peak and the
supply will begin to decline. In the mean time, the combustion of fossil fuels
generates carbon dioxide and nitrogen oxides, with the potential to
significantly affect the global climate. How will we as scientists, engineers
and educators address this new challenge and others like it? How should we be
preparing the next generation of scientists and engineers to solve problems in a
resource limited world, where they will need to assess the environmental
sustainability of technologies to meet energy and resource needs? To this dual
challenge, we present a single solution that is built around the Sustainable
Photosynthetic Hydrogen Evolution Research (SPHERE) program.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This research involves the development of a 1st generation fully
functional sustainable process based on a Sustainable Photosynthetic Hydrogen
Evolving Research-Improved Complex (SPHERIC) device that would take the dilute
energy of the sun and, using only water, produce a concentrated, environmentally
benign fuel. To develop this process requires the solution of several
challenges. First, photosystem I (PSI), suitable electron transfer mediators,
and a suitable hydrogenase must be purified/cloned from their host organisms.
Next using molecular biology these proteins must be made to work together,
outside of their host organisms and engineered to produce H2 at a sufficiently
high rate. While a sustainable process would contain all four elements, in this
proposal we will first tackle the problem of accelerating the transfer of
electrons from cytochrome c553 through PSI, to the hydrogenase enzyme where H2
will be produced (although this reaction will use ascorbate as an electron
source, future work will try to utilize the H2O splitting of PSII). We propose
to accomplish this goal in a series of steps with multiple routes to success.
Specifically, we will 1) increase the interaction of cyt c553 with PSI via three
strategies, 2) select, clone and characterize oxygen and thermotolerant
hydrogenases, and 3) couple the appropriate hydrogenase with PSI in vitro and in
vivo. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to meet current and future challenges to
sustainable processes for fuel and chemicals production, we need to train
engineers to take cues from biology for potential solutions and to train
scientists to apply engineering design and analysis principles to biological
processes. Our previous experience has shown us the value of teams of students,
formed with appropriate regard to academic, ethic and cultural diversity, in
solving design problems posed at the interface of biology and engineering. We
will pursue three initiatives to address the educational challenges of
developing sustainable solutions: 1) Recruit highly qualified undergraduates
from underrepresented populations to work in groups on the development of
solutions to resource and energy problems within a context of sustainability. 2)
Develop a collection of challenge problems targeted at high school and lower
division undergraduate students that emphasize sustainability analysis for
energy and resource alternatives, 3) Advise the students in producing a biweekly
podcast that highlights the current and dynamic landscape of research in areas
with application to sustainable energy.