* 0828163
* Non-Newtonian Fluids in Squeeze Films
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* William Ducker, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
*  Ashok S. Sangani
* 07/31/2012
* USD 309,499.00

CBET-0828163&lt;br/&gt;Ducker&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The flow of fluid in narrow
channels is receiving increased attention because of the growing importance of
both microfluidics and nanoparticle science and engineering. Reduction to
smaller length scales raises interesting questions, including: what is the
boundary condition at the solid-liquid interface? How can the flow of fluid be
enhanced in narrow channels? How is the flow of complex fluids affected by
confinement into a thin film? Here we propose to address these questions by
using colloidal probe microscopy to study the flow of fluids in the squeeze film
between a sphere and a plate. This method has recently been successful in
confirming the no-slip boundary condition at the solid-liquid interface for
simple liquids, and is now ready for the study of more complex fluids. The
outcomes of this work have implications in two fields. First, the forces acting
on small particles as they approach plates are important for in their own right
because of the widespread use of particles and the presence of particle
contamination on membranes, semiconductor wafers etc. Second, these measurements
open a window on fundamental questions such as the fluid boundary conditions and
the importance of confinement on fluid flow. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal
is to use force microscopy to measure the force, velocity and displacement of a
colloidal particle as it approaches the plate. The particle will be immersed in
a fluid. The measured parameters will be compared to theoretical values to
validate theories. The first order theory will be Brenner's lubrication result
for simple liquids under creeping flow. Comparison to this theory allows us to
determine the effective slip-length and the effective viscosity. Measurements
will be made on a variety of non-Newtonian fluids, including polymer melts,
surfactant solutions, nanoparticle dispersions, and rarefied gases. Some
development of theory will be necessary to interpret these measurements.
Attempts will be made to enhance flow through the adsorption of low viscosity
fluids or films at the interface. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal is also to
improve the colloidal force measurement by increasing the range of frequencies
and shear rates that are accessible. Greater shear rates will be accessed by
incorporating a high velocity drive, and greater frequencies will be accessed by
development of an oscillatory drive. This oscillatory drive will enable the
simultaneous measurement of elastic and dissipative responses over a small range
of separations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The advantage of colloidal probe
microscopy is the very high resolution in displacement and force that is
achieved. For example, colloidal probe microscopy can determine the slip-length
with only a few nanometers of uncertainty. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational
component of this proposal will be to train a post-doctoral researcher, a
graduate student and undergraduate students.