* 0828805
* Center For Ocean Science Education Excellence  - the Colorado Collaborative (CCC)
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Lesley Smith, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 08/31/2013
* USD 149,960.00

The Center for Ocean Science Education Excellence -- the Colorado Collaborative
(CCC) proposes to develop a synergistic partnership between the University of
Colorado-Boulder (CU) and COSEE-West (University of Southern California and
University of CA at Los Angeles) to bring ocean sciences education to inland
audiences, make it personally relevant to their lives and increase ocean
literacy. By combining the intellectual strengths of each organization, CCC will
expose non-coastal teachers and students to high quality ocean sciences
education. The hallmark of CCC will be an ocean scientist lecture series
combined with a Summer Teacher Institute that will engage regional ocean
scientists in ocean sciences education to facilitate the integration of ocean
sciences research and education. Each year will have a different focus on
cutting edge ocean science research, such as air-sea interactions and regional
climates; polar ice and sea level; and oceans, climate and public policy.
Running themes of the CCC will include stewardship of the oceans and a systems
approach to earth science. The use of videoconferencing to deliver presentations
to teachers across Colorado and in the Los Angeles Unified School District,
along with a summer teacher exchange program, will allow teachers from diverse
geographic and cultural backgrounds to interact and develop a camaraderie that
will carry to their students' classroom experiences. By reaching out to teachers
and schools with ethnic, socioeconomic and geographic diversity, we hope to
increase opportunities for under-represented populations to participate in ocean
sciences education and consider careers ocean science. &lt;br/&gt; The overall
intellectual merit of this project is in the value of collaboration between
coastal and inland research scientists, classroom teachers and outreach
educators to develop ocean literate students, who will in turn impact their
community and become informed voters. The intellectual merits and anticipated
outcomes of the proposed partnership include: enhanced teaching and
communication skills of the research scientists and graduate students; K-12
students who are motivated and excited about ocean sciences and are exposed to
new ideas, resources and potential careers; interaction of teachers with
scientists will allow teachers to incorporate cutting edge research into their
teaching; and interactions between teachers in Colorado and California will
promote a global awareness of the impacts of a changing hydrosphere in different
regions, as well as cross-fertilization of ideas and future collaborations among
teachers and scientists. Evaluation of the program will help elucidate the ocean
science education needs of inland audiences, which will be shared with the COSEE
Network. &lt;br/&gt; The broader impacts of the proposed program are three-fold.
First, we will deliver a high quality teacher professional development program
to a segment of Colorado school districts, the rural schools, which are
traditionally under-served. This program will open new pathways for students who
rarely get a chance to interact with scientists or get first-hand knowledge of
the ocean-- a realm that that to some may seem light-years away from their home.
Second, we plan to develop the scientist lecture/Summer Teacher Institute
program into a sustainable model CU scientists can plug into when proposing
their education outreach portion of their research proposals. Finally, the
partnership between COSEE-WEST and CCC will yield a richer program that combines
the intellectual strengths of each organization and will have impact beyond
their local school districts.