* 0828411
* Chromium(III) Oxidation and Mobilization Through Coupled Biotic/Abiotic Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Baolin Deng, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 08/31/2012
* USD 348,692.00

CBET- 0828411&lt;br/&gt;Deng, Baolin &lt;br/&gt;University of Missouri-
Columbia&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal objectives of this
proposal are to systematically identify potential pathways/mechanisms for Cr
(III) mobilization via coupled biotic and abiotic processes and to evaluate
their relative significance for Cr mobility. Chromium (Cr) is a key contaminant
of concern throughout the world because of its carcinogenic and toxic nature
combined with common occurrence at numerous hazardous waste sites. Common Cr
oxidation states in the aquatic environment are Cr (VI) and Cr (III). Since Cr
(VI) species are more water soluble and toxic than Cr (III) species, remediation
efforts have focused on the in-situ reduction of Cr (VI) to Cr (III). However,
recent studies indicate that certain natural processes may oxidize and mobilize
Cr (III), potentially affecting the long-term stability of reductive treatments.
This project investigates the mobility of Cr(III) species in the environment in
terms of (1) Chromium(III) mobilization through non-oxidative mechanisms; (2)
Chromium(III) mobilization through oxidation by Mn oxides; and (3) Impact of
coupled biotic/abiotic processes on Cr mobility in complex
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research results will be useful for environmental
managers in assessing long-term stability of Cr following reductive treatment
and whether Cr (III) oxidation in the subsurface by Mn oxides contributes to the
observed Cr (VI) in groundwater. The PI will train undergraduates in the lab and
has a recruitment plan for underrepresented minorities at nearby Lincoln
University of Missouri, an 1890 land grant HBCU (Historically Black Colleges and
Universities) institution.