* 0828514
* Unifying Granular Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2008,03/31/2013
* Charles Campbell, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
*  Ashok S. Sangani
* 03/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

CBET-0828514&lt;br/&gt;Campbell&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many thousands of tons of
granular material are handled daily in industries ranging from mining to
chemical to pharmaceutical. Their values range from cents per ton to thousands
of dollars per gram. Handling massive amounts of small-value material can be
expensive if done inefficiently and potentially make a project uneconomical. At
the same time, high-valued products must be handled carefully to avoid damage
with consequently large economic losses. Yet the mechanical behavior of granular
materials is not well understood. Classically granular flow have been studied in
two limiting flow regimes - the fast-flow or "rapid flow" regime and the slow-
flow or quasistatic flow regime. There has been little understanding as to what
occurs in between, and without that information, it has been impossible to even
quantify the conditions under which each flow regime is valid. Recently, the
P.I. has been able to fill in this intervening space and create unified flowmaps
covering all regimes of granular flow behavior - at least for simple materials.
The key was including as a rheological parameter, the stiffness of the
interparticle contacts, the property that links the elastic properties of
individual particles to the elastic properties of the bulk material - and thus
to bring solid properties back into the rheology of granular solids. He divided
granular flows into two broad regimes. In the&lt;br/&gt;Elastic regime,
particles are locked in force chains in persistent contact with their neighbors;
the stresses are generated by the deformation of those contacts and are thus
proportional to the contact stiffness. In the Inertial regime flows become
independent of the stiffness. These were further subdivided into four sub-
regimes, Elastic-Quasistatic, the old quasistatic regime, the Elastic-Inertial
when inertial effects have comparable order, the Inertial-non-Collisional
regime, which behave inertially, but the particle interact in cluster, and the
Inertial- Collisional regime, where binary contacts dominate (the old Rapid-flow
regime). The goal of the project will be to extend this work through coupled
experiments and computer simulations to further flesh out the rheological
behavior. The coupling between simulation and experiment will occur in several
ways. First, as these are new and not-well understood flow regimes, simulations
will be used to guide the design of an annular simple shear rheometer. Also,
simulations of the experiments themselves will yield insight into what is
happening inside the shear cell and aid in the interpretation of the results. In
turn, the experiments will guide future simulation development. A particular
goal will be to determine adequate contact models that allow the simulations to
replicate the experiments. Finally, the simulations will be extended to further
probe elastic granular rheology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
elastic theory is transformative in being the first unified theory of granular
flow and fills out the entire flowmap, connecting the rapid and quasistatic
regions and all the intervening regimes. While at the moment, like most granular
theories, it is limited to monodisperse spheres with simple contact models, it
nonetheless demonstrates the fundamental scaling laws that must in some form
apply to more complex systems and thus provides the key to future expansion of
granular flow theories. The proposed work involves experimental verification of
the elastic model as well as a start on its extension to more complicated
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Quasistatic and rapid flow models
are being incorporated in a large variety of computer models used in design
applications for the chemical, pharmaceutical, mining, construction,
agriculture, petroleum, geo-technical, as well as hazard assessment. Until the
flowmaps that were generated from the elastic theory, there was no way to
determine the conditions under which the models were valid. Thus this work will
finally begin to put into perspective, the last 40 years of granular flow
theory. At the same time, it will prevent costly errors resulting from the
misapplication of the wrong model to an industrial
problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educational Impact: Courses taught at USC receive
wide distribution over the school DEN network, now available worldwide and on
demand by streaming video on the internet. In particular, granular flow theory
makes up a large portion of the P.I.'s course, AME533 Multiphase Flows. In
addition, USC is located in a low-income, largely African-American, area, South
Central Los Angeles, and has many community outreach programs to connect with
local residents and students. In the past the P.I. has supported three female
PhD students. Finally the P.I. is partnering with another professor to bring in
underrepresented summer interns, many from the University of Puerto Rico, to
give hands on experience and to educate in simulation techniques. Particular
emphasis will be put on the simulation techniques as most rheological scale
simulations can now be performed on home PC's. This will permit the intern to
continue the collaboration when he or she has returned home at the end of the
summer.