* 0828779
* Sustainability and Capital Project Portfolios: Modeling the Emergent Properties of Total Cost of Ownership
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Kristen Sanford, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2012
* USD 331,858.00

CBET-0828779&lt;br/&gt;Pearce&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cost estimates for
sustainable or "green" facilities in the public sector are presently developed
just as those for traditional facilities would be, except a premium is often
added to account for "sustainability costs". A scaleable, agent-based model
(ABM) at the facility project-level will be developed and tested under the
hypothesis that it will be able to more accurately predict the Total Cost of
Ownership (TCO) of a green facility at the earliest stages of concept
development. The agent-based model will allow definition of both the social and
engineering systems that characterize a facilities lifecycle. The project
includes several partner public agencies with significant facility portfolios
that wish to use policy measures (including additional investment) to increase
both project sustainability and overall sustainability of their capital project
portfolios in ways that make economic sense. The outcomes of this research are
intended to further the goals of sustainability in public sector capital
projects by providing a more comprehensive picture of the relationships between
investment and outcomes. The project will impact research and undergraduate
education at both Virginia Tech and Lafayette College, an undergraduate
institution. In addition, the project will (a) target the recruitment of
graduate and undergraduate students from underrepresented groups to participate
in this project; (b) create a sustainability game and kit underpinned by ABM for
use in secondary math and science courses as well as at the undergraduate level.