* 0828875
* Characterization and Quantification of Monomers, Oligomers and By-Products from Hemicellulose during Pretreatment
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2014
* Greg Thoma, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 07/31/2014
* USD 331,936.00

CBET-0828875&lt;br/&gt;Carrier&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to analyze and characterize
aspects of hemicellulose used during pretreatment in the production of ethanol.
The PI ultimately seeks to help reduce ethanol production costs by economically
converting both the hemicellulose and cellulose sugars. In this project, the PI
focuses on the hemicellulose depolymerization aspect versus cellulose
conversion, which has been highly researched in the past. Hemicellulose
represents 20-40% of the lignocellulosic biomass used in ethanol production. If
completely depolymerized without sugar degradation, the hemicellulose
depolymerization could increase the current productivity of lignocellulosic
conversion to ethanol by at least 15%. Hemicellulose depolymerization is not a
simple task. Depolymerization of hemicellulose in the presence of dilute acid or
hot water forms a host of previously uncharacterized oligomers, as well as
desired sugar monomers and undesirable degradation products such as furfural.
This particular research will produce and characterize xylan-derived and
switchgrass-derived hemicellulose oligomers; determine whether these oligomers
depolymerize as conceptualized in the literature; and determine dissociation
constants for oligomer depolymerization and monomer degradation in the
development of a probabilistic model describing monomer formation. The PI will
purchase xylan but will also extract hemicellulose from switchgrass. By
monitoring the depolymerization of the individual oligomers, the PI will
calculate dissociation rate constants and will generate a model describing the
depolymerization of oligomers through Bayesian analysis. This model will be used
to predict the operating conditions that minimize inhibitory by-product
formation. The PI also seeks to identify the mechanisms by which hemicellulose
depolymerizes to five- and six-carbon carbohydrate monomers providing better
fundamental understanding of cell wall breakdown in the biomass to liquid fuels
conversion process. This research will characterize the mechanisms by which
monomers are released from these oligomers. Characterization of the kinetics of
oligomer conversion to xylose is crucial because monomeric xylose can yield
furfural, a by-product which must be eliminated, or at least minimized.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
focuses on important aspects in energy, environmental and educational fields.
The results of this work will address the issues of energy sustainability by
maximizing the potential that lignocellulosic material offers as a feedstock for
energy production. Additionally, through this research, the PI will educate two
PhDs and several undergraduate students, including students from
underrepresented groups, in sustainable energy engineering.