* 0828426
* Investigation of Microsphere Convective Deposition for Photonic and Biological Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Nelson Tansu, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
*  Ashok S. Sangani
* 07/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

CBET-0828426&lt;br/&gt;Gilchrist&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will
generate a fundamental description of the physics involved in the deposition of
a monolayer of particles using convective self-assembly. Drawing an evaporating
meniscus across a substrate, a process related to the "coffee ring effect" and
the Langmuir-Blodgett technique, forms a structure of particles ranging from
random and ordered sub-monolayer to well-ordered multilayers. Although many
recently developed processes take advantage of this technique, primary questions
remain regarding the fundamental physics involved with particle convection and
self-assembly. In situ investigation of monolayer deposition will be performed
using high speed confocal laser scanning microscopy. Preliminary results suggest
many parameters not previously considered affect deposition and various
mechanisms generate microsphere pre-alignment in the thin film prior to
deposition. Experiments that incorporate processing, suspension, and substrate
conditions not previously explored will be used to develop a model to shed light
onto the mechanisms that link the controllable macroscopic properties to the
microstructure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fabrication of colloidal monolayers will
be used directly in two specific applications. Performance of InGaN light
emitting diodes (LEDs) is inhibited by the index mismatch of the GaN/air
interface. The proposed process will be used to fabricate microlens arrays where
the microstructure determines the light extraction efficiency. Preliminary
results demonstrate increased light output power by 219%. In a parallel effort,
design of monolayer arrays labeled with antibodies for whole blood detection of
CD4+ lymphocytes will enable enhanced screening for HIV/AIDS. The microstructure
of these deposited monolayers will dictate the capture efficiency and
proliferation of target cells and enable release of these cells for analysis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although colloidal
convective deposition is used in many technologies, the fundamental physics is
poorly understood. This research will develop a predictive model based on
observations obtained from direct 3D particle tracking during deposition for
various surface and suspension properties. Through this research, the importance
of controlling this microstructure will be demonstrated in two applications that
have significant potential impact on their respective industries. First, the
microlens arrays fabricated using this technique have the potential to surmount
the current state-of-the-art LED photon extraction, allows scale-up for
industrial applications, and is low-cost as compared to current techniques of
surface patterning via electron beam lithography. In whole blood analysis, this
technique can be generalized for a variety detection schemes and will aid
development of a process that aims to bring low cost detection to regions
lacking proper medical resources. This work will directly provide both graduate
and undergraduate educational opportunities in an area at the convergence of
several technologically-critical research areas including microfluidics,
suspension transport, photonics, and bioengineering.