* 0828104
* Self-Assembly and Chaining of Particles in Viscoelastic Liquids:  Fundamentals and Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Roger Rangel, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
*  Ashok S. Sangani
* 06/30/2012
* USD 300,000.00

CBET-0828104&lt;br/&gt;Rangel&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intelectual Merit: The
proposed work seeks our understanding and establishes applications of the
properties of aggregation, self-assembly and chaining of small particles in
flows of polymer solutions (viscoelastic fluids). Particle-particle interactions
in viscoelastic fluids are dramatically different than in Newtonian fluids:
particles disperse in the flow of Newtonian fluids and they aggregate in the
flow of viscolastic fluids. We have done analyses which suggest that the
chaining of the particles in viscoelastic liquids is local and based on two
pillars; the first is a viscoelastic ?pressure? generated by normal stresses due
to shear. The second is due to the change in the sign of the normal stress which
we compute in the second-order order fluid. Different numerical and experimental
experiments will be carried out to validate this theory. We will establish the
limits of particle size, concentration, particle to fluid density ratio, liquid
rheological parameters, flow field etc for which particles aggregate in
viscoelastic fluids. The basic assumption of particle image velocimetry (PIV) is
that small particles seeded in fluid will not interact in flow. This assumption
is valid for Newtonian fluids where tracer particles disperse, but it will not
work in viscoelastic fluids in situations in which particles aggregate. This
study will determine the conditions under which small particles track the flow,
as is assumed in studies of PIV. Understanding the rage of parameters at which
interaction and chaining of particles occurs will benefit several other
applications in oil, composite, food, and pharmaceutical
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The participation of women and
individuals of underrepresented groups in the proposed effort will be encouraged
by coordinating recruitment of new graduate students through established
programs at UC Irvine. These student oriented programs are designed to encourage
the participation of women and minorities in the science and engineering fields
and include the Center for Opportunities and Diversity in Engineering (CODE) and
the California NSF Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (CAMP). One
of the coPIs is the UCI Division Director for CAMP and he will provide a
connection between this project and the underrepresented STEM students on campus
interested in research. The research team includes two female graduate students.
In 2005, female graduate students comprised 150 out of a total number of 630
graduate students enrolled in the Henry Samueli School of Engineering at UCI,
representing 24% of the student body. The graduate level research opportunities
generated by this effort will be used to support these underrepresented graduate
students in engineering and provide a solid base for advancement to the
postdoctoral level and future achievement in academia. The project will also
provide research opportunities for undergraduate students through the
Undergraduate Research Opportunities Program (UROP) at UCI. The investigators
have a long history of involvement in this program and will ensure the
participation of undergraduates, particularly in the experimental aspects of the
project.