* 0828582
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Medicalization Processes and Prescription Advertising: Effects for Consumers, Physicians and Society
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2009
* Jennifer Arney, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2009
* USD 4,625.00

PI and Co-PI: Cecilia Menjivar and Jennifer B. Arney
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Doctoral Dissertation Research: Direct to consumer
advertising of psychotropic medications: Effects for consumers, physicians, and
society at large&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SES - 0828582
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Doctoral Dissertation
Research Support project examines the advertising of prescription medications
toward consumer audiences, a practice referred to as direct-to-consumer
advertising (DTCA). The primary goal of the study is to inform debates regarding
current drug advertising regulations by providing insight into the benefits,
consequences, and processes associated with DTCA of antidepressant medications.
The doctoral student explores the effects of DTCA on consumers, attitudes and
behaviors, their experiences with the institution of medicine, and the
production and perpetuation of broader understandings of physical and emotional
experiences. Inquiry is guided by the following research questions: How does
DTCA affect consumers? interpretations of their physical and emotional
experiences and their decisions about health care? How does DTCA affect
consumers? experiences with the institution of medicine? Does DTCA facilitate
the gendering of mood disorders? If so, how is this achieved? This project uses
a multi-method, triangulated research design in order to combine qualitative and
quantitative data. Data to be analyzed include 1) print advertisements for
antidepressant drugs collected from the 1997-2006 issues of three female-
directed magazines, three male-directed magazines, and four common readership
magazines, 2) a total of 50 one-hour interviews with physicians, psychiatrists,
and consumers residing in the southwestern U.S., and 3) the Attitudinal and
Behavioral Effects of Direct-to-Consumer Promotion of Prescription Drugs patient
and physician surveys (US FDA 2002). This holistic analysis is expected to
advance understanding of how environmental factors, like advertisements, shape
individuals? identities, their health care decisions, and their interactions
with others. The project provides insight into one of the factors that shape
public perceptions about mental illness and treatment. The study advances
theories associated with DTCA and methods used in its analysis. Findings
contribute to new understandings and applicability of sociological theories
involving identity, self-labeling, physician-patient interactions,
medicalization, social control, and gender roles and identities. The project is
central to the training and education of the co-PI, and involves the mentoring
and training of an undergraduate research assistant. Findings will be presented
to the scientific community at several national and regional meetings and
conferences, and the project is expected to render several publishable journal
articles. At the broadest level, this investigation provides a point of
departure for an assessment and critique of the current organization of the
American health care system. Results help inform suggestions to improve the
organization and delivery of health care in America, a very timely topic in
policy circles.