* 0828131
* Modulated Thermal Stress to Manipulate Cell Protein Expression
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Kenneth Diller, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 08/31/2012
* USD 299,587.00

CBET-0828131&lt;br/&gt;Diller&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Overview. Advances in
molecular biology have demonstrated that cells may respond to graded thermal
stress by alternate pathways leading to either cell necrosis or enhanced
production of heat shock proteins (HSP) which will enhance survival. In
applications such as treating cancer, thermal therapies are designed most
effectively when there is a rational basis for predicting the domains for which
necrosis and survival occur. When the constitutive behavior of a specific cell
type is characterized quantitatively as coupling the time course and magnitude
of hsp expression enhancement with the time and temperature dimensions of an
applied thermal stress, it then becomes possible to design a thermal protocol to
elicit a specific therapeutic or prophylactic response in target cells and
tissues. This proposal is directed toward developing a set of bioengineering
data and tools for manipulating hsp expression in normal and cancerous cells of
the prostate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Approach. The experimental system is two and
three dimensional cell cultures established from canine prostate normal and
cancerous tissues, cloned with fluorescent proteins to display hsp expression
and cell necrosis. Of particular interest is quantification of the kinetics of
the expression process in terms of the applied temperature and time profile.
Cells will be subjected to controlled thermal stress regimens as defined by the
imposed exposure temperature and time, and the response measured in terms of hsp
27, 60 and 70 expression, apoptosis and necrosis. Since there already exists a
significant body of knowledge about thermal injury effects, this study will
focus on characterizing the kinetics of hsp expression. The constitutive
property data will be expressed in mathematical formulations that can be used
for process design. The analysis and modeling methods will be transformed into
new learning tools for biotransport based on state-of-the-art learning science
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The proposed study is
designed around our well established capability to measure, characterize and
apply the manipulation of hsp expression in selected cells types via controlled
thermal stress. A strength of this work is the development of a quantitative
method for designing thermal protocols to apply to living systems that balances
targeted cell destruction and enhanced survival which can be applied for patient
specific therapies. A critical component of the success of this approach is to
identify constitutive data for the kinetics of temperature driven processes in
specific cell species, which we anticipate will be a pioneering contribution of
the study. It will lead to an increased ability to control therapeutic injury
imposed on tissue by manipulating the ability of tissue to repair itself, with
applications for the design of thermal procedures for prophylaxis and
therapy.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. This study features a close
integration of research and education aspects. The educational component is
based on the science of How People Learn (HPL) and is focused on developing and
applying learning materials that facilitate students acquiring adaptive
expertise for problem solving. A key component is the use of open ended
challenge problems that deal with realistic engineering issues and that are
based on present research findings, such as will be developed in proposed study.
These learning tools are readily exported for use by other established
educational partners including the University of Texas - Pan American (which has
the highest Hispanic enrollment of any continental institution in the US) and
the Elgin, TX High School (a rural minority school district with which the PI
has obtained a current Texas STEM award). The educational materials also will be
disseminated in the archival learning science and engineering education
literature in which the PI publishes regularly. The research results will be of
direct benefit to society in terms of medical advances in cancer treatment via
established translational partnerships of the PI with colleagues at UT MD
Anderson Cancer Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integration of Research and
Education. Knowledge gained from the research results will be incorporated into
new educational tools for engineering students. Two new types of learning
challenge problems will be developed for use in the HPL educational framework.
One will focus on determination of the thermal kinetics of hsp expression as a
function of an applied temperature stress pattern. A second will involve
definition and solution of an inverse problem to design an applied thermal
stress to produce a desired hsp and cell injury pattern in a target tissue.