* 0828512
* Development of highly efficient Aquaporin based membranes for Aqueous Separations
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Mark Clark, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 08/31/2013
* USD 399,999.00

CBET- 0828512&lt;br/&gt;Clark&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aqueous separation
processes are increasingly used for water and wastewater treatment and for
medical, industrial, and municipal applications such as dialysis, high-quality
water preparation, ethanol concentration, and juice and aroma concentration. The
use of reverse osmosis (RO), a pressure-driven aqueous separation processes, is
limited by low productivities of existing membranes and the high energy
consumption for maintaining operating pressures. The principal objective of this
proposal is to develop advanced reverse osmosis membrane (ROM) technology for
water and wastewater treatment. The overall hypothesis of the proposed study is
that highly efficient solute-rejecting osmotic membranes can be developed by
incorporating biological water-channel proteins (Aquaporins or AQPs) into
synthetic polymers. The proposed research consists of two major research tasks.
In the first task insertion of AqpZ into ABA polymers will be optimized in terms
of permeability, selectivity, and stability. In the second task, templated flat
AqpZ-ABA membranes will be synthesized and characterized. The project will
advance knowledge of transport in hydrophobic nanopores which has great
potential for efficient gas and liquid separations and will enhance
understanding of protein insertion behavior and transport properties in self-
assembled biomimetic supramolecular materials. It will also help develop
procedures for 2D crystallization of proteins using templating
polymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful development of this new ROM technology
may have broad applications beyond water and wastewater treatment, including
drug delivery systems, and gas and liquid separations systems in the chemical
process industry. There is international collaboration on the project including
graduate student education in Switzerland to learn advanced polymer synthesis.
Undergraduate students will be involved in the project through the College
Summer Research Opportunity program. An effort will be made to recruit minority
high school students through the McWest program in Chicago. The PI is also
involved with the McWest programs in Chicago lecturing high school students
about career opportunities in engineering.