* 0828022
* Lipid bilayer-inorganic nanoparticle interactions: Model systems to examine the role of particle size and surface chemistry on cell membrane stability
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Geoffrey Bothun, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Karn
* 08/31/2011
* USD 194,493.00

CBET- 0828022 &lt;br/&gt;Bothun&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As nanomaterial-based
commercial technologies and products emerge, it is important that studies be
conducted in tandem to gauge their potential health and environmental impacts.
Biological membranes define cell structure and function, and provide an initial
point of contact for cell/nanomaterial interactions. However, quantifying these
interactions and relating them to nanomaterial biocompatibility has proven
difficult using in vitro or in vivo studies. This project will examine
thermodynamic and transport properties of lipid bilayers, as model membranes,
exposed to engineered nanoparticles. The goal is to determine the effect of
nanoparticle composition, size, and surface chemistry on biomembrane stability
by elucidating specific bilayer/nanoparticle interactions mechanisms. Materials
of immediate interest include carbon fullerenes, and native or hydrophobically
modified alumina, iron oxide, and silver nanoparticles ranging from 5 to 20 nm.
Research will be conducted under four specific aims: (1) Protocols will be
developed for examining biomembrane-nanoparticle interactions using model lipid
bilayers in the form of vesicles and supported lipid membranes (SLMs, planar).
Complimentary information will be obtained from the two geometries. (2) Changes
in thermodynamic properties, such as phase behavior and melting cooperativity,
associated with biomembrane response to nanoparticles will be characterized.
This includes nanoparticles adsorbing within the bilayer (hydrophobic) or at the
lipid/water interface (hydrophilic). (3) The ability of adsorbed nanoparticles
to alter the lateral diffusion of lipids within the bilayer, which relates to
the dynamic behavior of cell membranes, will be examined. (4) Changes in
transmembrane permeability due to bilayer stabilization and/or destabilization
with adsorbed nanoparticles will be
characterized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanomaterial toxicity has received
considerable attention as of late, and this project addresses a specific aspect
related to the cell membrane and nanoparticle bioaccumulation. Understanding
such interactions will aid the design of biocompatible nanomaterials. In
addition to publications and presentations, they will disseminate their results
on their research website and the NIOSH Nanoparticle Information Library
website. In addition, the new structures formed will provide interesting hybrid
liposomal systems that could potentially be used in the medical and
pharmaceutical fields. This project will also serve as an educational tool for
high school, undergraduate, and graduate students. The PI participates in a
summer high school intern program and has been contacted by the New England
LSAMP program to mentor students. These programs target underrepresented
students in engineering. Finally, the concepts behind this project and the
results obtained will be used as teaching material in a new interdisciplinary
graduate-level Bionanotechnology course offered in the spring semester.