* 0828903
* Engineering Issues in Understanding Human Speech
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2008,05/31/2010
* Michael Plesniak, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 05/31/2010
* USD 223,813.00

CBET-0828903 M. Plesniak, Purdue University

Under this grant, modeling assumptions that are commonly applied in models of
human phonation (fluid-induced vibrations of the vocal folds) will be
systematically evaluated. Because of the inaccessibility of the larynx, modeling
has long been a primary component of voice research. Speech models seek to
simplify the complicated fluid-structure interactions of human voice production
while still capturing the relevant physics. However, untested modeling
assumptions limit the accuracy of such models. Ultimately, highly accurate
models will be transformative to clinical diagnosis, treatment, and pre-surgical
planning of voice disorders. The prevalence of voice disorders in the general
population is estimated to be as high as 30%, and is twice as high among
professionals who lecture regularly, such as educators. Each year, billions of
dollars in lost productivity costs is due to vocal ailments.

The goal of this project is to assess the validity of untested modeling
assumptions that are routinely employed. Fluid flow investigations will be
performed in a 7.5 times life-size controllable dynamic model of the vocal
folds. Viscous flow phenomena within the glottis will be studied via spatial and
temporal flow field data using Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV) and Laser
Doppler Velocimetry (LDV). Parametric structural analysis will be performed to
determine the sensitivity of the vocal fold structure to eight geometric and six
tissue parameters of several have never been measured. The knowledge obtained
from this study will increase the accuracy and validity of future models,
eventually leading to the creation of clinically relevant models of human
speech. In addition to speech production, the results will be relevant to the
more general fields of fluid-structure interactions, and biomedical engineering.

The existing outreach programs at Purdue University will ensure that in addition
to engineering and societal impacts, the research will have a broader impact on
participation of underrepresented groups, undergraduate research participation,
and K-12 outreach programs. The Summer Undergraduate Research Fellowship (SURF)
program at Purdue University facilitates meaningful guided research for
undergraduate students, in which female and minority participation is especially
encouraged by Purdue's Minority Engineering organization. Participation in
engineering outreach programs such as "Imagination Station", "Middle School
Minds", and EPICS at Purdue University will facilitate the exposure of K-12
students to the excitement of engineering at a young age. A functional model of
the human speech process created in conjunction with EPICS will be used for
instruction in undergraduate Speech Language and Hearing Research (SLHS)
classes.