* 0828214
* Collaborative Research: Optimization of Urban Designs for Air Quality and Energy Efficiency
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2008,01/31/2012
* Eric Pardyjak, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Debra Reinhart
* 01/31/2012
* USD 202,851.00

CBET- 0828214&lt;br/&gt;Pardyjak, Eric - U.
Utah&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CBET-0828206&lt;br/&gt;Willemsen, Peter - U.
Minnesota&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proposal is to increase
knowledge for how environment and urban form interact. Its hypothesis is that
optimal urban structures and layouts exist which can minimize energy use while
also minimizing air pollution exposure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An extremely fast
and inexpensive energy use and dispersion modeling tool for urban areas will be
developed by building on PIs previous work. The modeling system will utilize the
unique computational parallelism afforded by graphics processing units (GPUs,
that are regularly utilized in the video game industry), to run many simulations
in an effort to train an optimization algorithm for determining optimal designs
for urban structures and their layout. This proposed research will also utilize
an interactive and immersive virtual environment to provide better understanding
and refinement of the complex physical processes associated with the energy
balance and pollutant dispersion in an urban setting.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modeling capabilities that will be developed through this
work will aid urban planners in developing useful and novel planning strategies
to improve the sustainability of modern cities. The PIs will work with urban
planners throughout the model development process. These modeling capabilities
will also aid architects by providing them with a tool that not only analyzes
isolated buildings, but also provides understanding regarding the interaction of
multiple buildings during the design process. In addition, this proposal has a
substantial outreach component designed to provide a unique educational
opportunity for American Indians, Alaskan Natives, and other minorities to learn
about various aspects of modeling in environmental engineering. Through our
program, American Indian students from Northern Minnesota will be invited to a
weeklong interactive learning symposium during each of the three years of the
grant.