* 0828271
* Thermal Characterization and Modeling of Intracellular Solution during Cooling
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2010
* John Critser, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 07/31/2010
* USD 49,998.00

CBET-0828271&lt;br/&gt;Solbrekken&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The advent of artificial
tissues, cord blood therapies, cell transplantation procedures, and the desire
to bank germ (egg/sperm) cells have driven the need to establish a means to
reliably store biological materials. Cryopreservation is an effective means to
store biological materials without functional degradation over a prolonged
period of time. The primary cryopreservation challenge is to lower the
temperature of biological materials without destroying the cells through
dehydration or excessive ice crystal formation. Currently, experiments are
heavily utilized in order to establish optimum cryopreservation cooling
procedures. The cost, time, and lack of certain biological materials (such as
human egg cells) required to experimentally develop cooling procedures are
driving the development of mathematical models to predict thermal-hydraulic
behavior upon cooling. The outcome of this project is a tool that will provide
thermal property information of single cells that can be used in such
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to the intellectual merit of this
project, the micro-differential scanning calorimeter (microDSC) to be developed
will be at least 100 times more sensitive than currently available differential
scanning calorimeters. The heightened sensitivity will allow the intracellular
phase change temperature to be measured directly. It is hypothesized that using
the actual intracellular phase change temperature, as opposed to assuming the
intracellular fluid to have the same phase change temperature as the
extracellular solution, will improve the predictive capabilities of the
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As for the broader impacts, the fully functional
microDSC and cryopreservation model improvements that will be developed will
relieve cryobiologists of the large number of experiments needed to obtain an
optimum cooling procedure. The number of cell and tissue types that can be
effectively cryopreserved will be accelerated as the mathematical models will be
capable of predicting successful cryopreservation procedures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to improving the predictive capability of the
cryopreservation models, it is expected that the microDSC will allow studies of
ice crystal formation within cell scale samples by modifying the control
algorithm. The tool will utilize thermoelectric elements that can provide a
prescribed amount heating or cooling to the sample based on the magnitude and
polarity of the applied electric current. Investigations of other biological
phase changes applications where precise temperature control is required, such
as configuration changes in proteins, could be possible with this tool as well.
Insights into the intracellular structure will also be possible. Finally, it is
expected that understanding the phase change phenomena of individual cells will
allow more accurate models of cell masses, such as organs, to be developed.
Those improved organ models will improve our current ability to prolong the
viable life of organs for transplant.