* 0828359
* Static and Dynamic Response of Particulate Media
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,05/31/2012
* Leonardo Silbert, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
*  Ashok S. Sangani
* 05/31/2012
* USD 236,018.00

CBET-0828359&lt;br/&gt;Silbert&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A sandpile is possibly the
simplest and the most common concept of a mechanically stable, granular packing,
yet one that exhibits strongly non-linear and complex behavior. A basic
understanding of the relation between the microscopic distribution of contact
stresses at the grain scale, to bulk, macroscopic, mechanical stability and
material strength, persists as one of the most fundamentally challenging
questions in contemporary granular matter research. This proposal implements
three-dimensional computer simulations of granular materials to address several
key features of the mechanical stability of granular packings subject to static
and dynamic perturbations. (i) Validate the simulations by comparing results
with available experimental data. (ii) Compute linear response profiles in
ordered and disordered packings that conclusively resolves the dispute between
competing theories of stress transmission based on isotropic/anisotropic
elasticity and wave-like propagation models. (iii) Study response crossover
effects in small and large packings and correlate this phenomena to emerging
length scales that control the stress response. (iv) Determine how friction
influences mechanical stability over the range of stable packing fractions, from
the close-packed limit down to random loose packing. Compare how different
packings approach the onset of failure - loss of mechanical rigidity - with
increasing perturbation magnitude, and measure dynamic response of intruder
probe particles flowing through the packing. Novel aspects of this work build on
current experimental and theoretical results for non-cohesive grains, to include
cohesive forces, complex particle shapes, and hydrodynamic effects such as
slurries. Intellectual Merit: Fundamental description of the mechanisms of
stress transmission inside granular packings, relating how microstructural
properties at the grain scale determine macroscopic behavior. Extend our current
knowledge on non-cohesive sphere packings, to new and novel systems that include
cohesive powders and adhesive grains, composites, and slurries. Broader Impact:
Granular materials are found in a wide variety of industrial, natural, and
technological settings, and the research has a broad appeal as this study
belongs to a large class of problems concerned with mechanical rigidity in
amorphous materials including colloidal dispersions, glasses, and polymer and
biological networks. Participating students will be encouraged to develop an
understanding of these broader aspects of the research. Undergraduate and
graduate students are well-suited to the research, and will gain experience in
state-of-the-art simulation techniques, computer cluster management, and/or
development of computational algorithms, which will be made available as open
source software. Simulation configurations, results, and visualizations will be
added to a website for collaborative research and public use. Dissemination of
research results will follow from publication in refereed journals and
attendance at meetings in the physics and engineering communities, and visits to
collaborative institutions. The PI continues to implement simulation aides into
undergraduate classes and is requesting funds for demonstration materials for
class instruction, and future public speaking events. The PI actively promotes
the general vision of the department and institution for involving under-
represented groups in research, particularly in the physical sciences, and
continues to support the recently developed PhD program in the department.