* 0828997
* Cellular and molecular bioseparations using coherently patterned micro/nano devices
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Brian Kirby, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 07/31/2011
* USD 288,000.00

This NSF award by the Chemical and Biological Separations program supports work
by Professor Brian Kirby at Cornell University to use the nonlinear
electrokinetic effects of coherent micro- and nanopatterned ridges on particle
and macromolecule transport to create new techniques for rapidly separating
components of either (a) cellular suspensions or (b) solutions containing
amyloid fibrils. Coherently micro- and nanopatterned surfaces provide exciting
opportunities for scientific and technological breakthoughs owing to both the
rich interplay of multiple physical processes and increased experimental
flexibility achieved through electric field-mediated control of cellular and
molecular transport.

While dielectrophoretic forces have been used to trap and manipulate particles
and, in selected cases, to manipulate macromolecules, their implementation in
rapid, continuous-flow techniques has been minimal, and its exquisite
sensitivity to dielectric properties has not been implemented to create
inexpensive and specific separation screens for cell membrane lipid mutation and
molecular agglomeration. The proposed work combines a novel micro/nanodevice
design with detailed dielectric, ion transport, and fluid transport modeling.
Electrokinetic actuation of cells and molecules will be combined with geometric
manipulation of electric fields to allow for continuous-flow separation
dependent primarily on induced or existing electrical dipoles. A critical and
novel component of the design focuses on the use of coherently patterned
perturbations in a microchannel surface to create a secondary dielectrophoretic
force field that superposes with the linear electromigratory force field. By
using DC-offset AC fields, the relative magnitudes of linear and nonlinear
electromigratory phenomena can be tuned to optimize the separation. The proposed
work bridges the gap between existing batch-processing DEP sorting techniques
and the needed continuous-flow separation screens.

The long-term goal of this work is to develop a design methodology by which
devices can be fabricated for continuous-flow separations of cells and
molecules. The overall objective of the proposed research is to use geometric
manipulation of electrical dipoles to develop rapid, continuous-flow separations
for cells and proteins. The proposal will focus on two distinct but related
hypotheses: 1) coherently-patterned microdevices will allow for continuous-flow
separation of mutated cells owing to coulomb interaction between a spatially-
varying electric field and induced particle electrical dipoles; and 2)
coherently-patterned nanodevices will allow for continuous-flow separation of
proteins (particularly those in fibrillated states) due to coulomb interaction
between spatially-varying electric fields and native protein electrical dipoles.

By implementing design via a model-based engineering formalism for describing
particle transport in ridged micro- and nanochannels, the proposed work will
enable surface patterning design that generates unique nanoparticle and
macromolecule sorting capabilities. Asynchronous instructional materials related
to the ethics of nanotechnology and the modeling of nanoscale transport will be
developed to integrate ethics, coursework, and research.