* 0828226
* Activation of CO and NO Over MnOx/TiO2 Surfaces: Mechanistic Investigations
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Panagiotis Smirniotis, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* George J. Antos
* 07/31/2012
* USD 300,002.00

CBET-0828226 Smirniotis

This proposal describes research plans for the fundamental understanding of CO
activation over the surface of MnOx/TiO2 in the presence of another chemical
species and excess oxygen. This study focuses on specific cases of reactions
where in CO is not oxidized to CO2 (non-selective) but it is rather utilized
towards a selective chemical transformation. This work is inspired by our
remarkable findings of using CO as a reductant for the transformation of NO into
di-nitrogen. More specifically, we found that the MnOx/TiO2 catalyst is highly
active for the reduction of NO with CO, giving more than 90% NO conversion at
200 °C at very high space velocity (GHSV = 50,000 h-1). The activity of the
reaction increased in presence of oxygen and the reaction is highly selective in
the presence of oxygen. Our in-situ FT-IR studies revealed that the reaction
mechanism on MnOx/TiO2 is different from that reported earlier over supported
metal and perovskites-based catalysts, on account of the non-formation of -NCO
species, which is widely reported as intermediate. The non-formation of -NCO
species was confirmed by the absence of prominent absorbance band at 2178 cm-1.

A balanced program for the synthesis, characterization with modern techniques,
and kinetic studies to reveal the reaction pathways/mechanism over the proposed
catalysts will be performed. It is expected that the proposed research will
provide a fundamental understanding of the surface chemistry and reaction
pathways occurring during the activation of CO in the presence of NO over
Mn/TiO2 catalysts in the range of 150 to 350 °C in the presence of high
concentrations of oxygen. Our studies will focus on reactions of CO with NO,
where the latter compounds serve as a promoter for the selective transformations
observed. The specific role of Mn leading to the increased selectivity and
activity observed at low temperatures, and high tolerance to water will be
investigated thoroughly. Extensive surface characterizations, kinetic and
isotopic labeling studies experiments will be carried to explain the remarkable
selectivity observed. Moreover, these tools will be used to obtain useful
insights for the role of Mn in activating CO and NO, understand the nature of
the intermediate surface species, and will identify the role of surface species
on the reaction mechanism. The proposed research has unique practical
implications in relation to environment and energy which are areas of great
importance for the future.

The proposed work is expected to broadly impact the scientific knowledge base,
education, and society in general. The overriding drivers are both the
formulation of more effective environmental processes, and developing new
technological concepts that advance the current state-of-the-art in catalysis
using CO. The impact on education is expected to be manifold. Through the
development of innovative hands-on demonstrations for high school students,
poster presentations and showcase participation at the community level, and
multidisciplinary seminars to industry and academia, a broad constituency will
be introduced to the field. Undergraduate students will be involved in the
research, to encourage innovation and spark an interest in graduate education. A
particular emphasis will be placed on recruiting under-represented minorities
and women.

The proposed work has potentially high socioeconomic impact. If funded it will
provide advanced catalysts more economic to operate for air pollution control.
Moreover, the knowledge gained on selectively transforming CO, will be extended
to other important environmental and energy related processes.