* 0828630
* Delivery of Bacterial Therapeutics to Solid Tumors
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2013
* Fan Yuan, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Kaiming Ye
* 01/31/2013
* USD 241,950.00

CBET-0828630&lt;br/&gt;Yuan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bacteria have been engineered
recently as vectors for gene delivery. Compared to other vectors, they have
several unique advantages, such as being capable of producing therapeutic agents
without infecting host cells and active transport in tissues that may overcome
physiological barriers to gene delivery. However, several key issues remain to
be addressed in order to improve efficacy of bacterium-mediated gene therapy.
For bacterial vectors delivered locally via intratumoral infusion, the first
issue is bacterial dissemination from tumor to normal organs. It may
significantly reduce gene delivery to tumor cells and cause adverse effects in
normal tissues. Therefore, the Specific Aim 1 in the proposal is to investigate
mechanisms of the dissemination using non-pathogenic Escherichia coli (E. coli).
The study will quantify biodistribution of E. coli in mice after intratumoral
infusion and use the data to determine kinetics and pathways of bacterial
dissemination. Based on these results, the Specific Aim 2 is to develop novel
strategies for blocking bacterial dissemination. A thermally sensitive polymer
solution will be used to block the dissemination through tumor microvessels
during intratumoral infusion and a novel synthetic gene circuit will be
implemented into the E. coli for eliminating chronically disseminated bacteria
at a few days after the infusion. The second issue is hindrance to bacterial
transport in solid tumors, which may prohibit homogenous gene delivery. To
improve the transport, the Specific Aim 3 is to genetically engineer E. coli to
constitutively express invasin that can bind to several integrin receptors on
tumor cells to facilitate transcellular transport. The study will quantify
bacterial transport through transcellular and interstitial pathways in vitro,
using both monolayer and multicellular layer (MCL) tumor models. Results from
the study may provide important information on mechanisms of bacterial transport
that can be used to improve bacterial delivery in vivo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of the proposed research is to address key issues in bacterium-
mediated gene delivery. The study is innovative since systemic dissemination of
bacteria has never been characterized in previous studies although intratumoral
infusion has been a routine method for administration of all gene vectors. The
proposed study will quantitatively investigate the dissemination and develop
methods to block it. In addition, the study will explore synthetic biology, an
emerging multidisciplinary field, for improving gene delivery. These innovative
approaches to gene delivery are based on previous studies of the PI and Co-PI,
funded by NSF and other agencies for improving delivery of macromolecules and
viral vectors in solid tumors and developing novel synthetic gene circuits in
bacteria. Results from the proposed study may reveal mechanisms of bacterium
transport in tumors and facilitate discovery of novel design principles for
bacterial vectors, which will likely be applicable to not only the E. coli used
in this study but also other engineered bacteria.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gene
delivery is one of the main challenges in gene therapy. It has limited
therapeutic efficacy in target tissues and caused adverse effects in normal
organs. Results from the proposed research may be used to improve efficiency of
gene delivery and safety in cancer gene therapy. In addition, the proposed
research represents an important step in extending basic concepts and design
methods in synthetic biology to address a pressing issue in cancer treatment. To
further broaden the impact, the research projects will be integrated with
biomedical engineering (BME) education at Duke University. Specifically, results
from the research projects will be incorporated into three BME courses, which
are currently taught by the PI and Co-PI. In addition, the research projects
will involve undergraduate students through independent studies and the Pratt
Research Fellow program at Duke University. Smaller research projects will also
be developed for summer students recruited through an existing outreach program
for underrepresented students and those with disabilities. These educational
activities may stimulate students interests in science and engineering and
encourage them to pursue careers in these fields. Finally, results from the
proposed research will be presented at national and international conferences
and published in scientific journals.