* 0828549
* Ecological modeling of emergent vegetation for sustaining wetlands in high wave energy coastal environments
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Daniel Cox, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2012
* USD 317,128.00

CBET-0828549&lt;br/&gt;D. Cox, Oregon State University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
purpose of this study is to conduct a set of large-scale experiments, guided by
a combination of hydraulic engineering, plant ecology, and coastal wetlands
restoration practices, to develop an understanding of the dynamics of wave-
sediment-vegetation interaction. The project goals are to (1) model the wave
characteristics of two plant types common to high energy wave environments
(Schoenoplectus pungens or 'bulrush' and Spartina alteriflora or 'cord grass'),
(2) compare changes in sediment volume and bed form resulting from wave action
in vegetated and non-vegetated areas, (3) determine the wave thresholds of plant
survivability, and (4) understand the post-storm response of plants,
particularly their root structure. The first goal will parameterize the wave
attenuation through an empirical drag coefficient that can be integrated into
regional-scale wave models currently used in wetland restoration practice. The
second goal will directly impact decisions in land use planning since the
comparisons will provide quantitative information on value of existing vegetated
shorelines (or proposed restoration projects) to reduce shoreline loss. This
study will document the thresholds for bulrush and cord grass survival in terms
of wave energy (height and period), looking at both loss of stem due to breakage
and loss of the entire root system. This information can be used, for example,
to determine the likelihood of plant loss for a given extreme event (e.g.,
hurricane). The project will integrate research and education through an
established Education and Outreach program, including summer Research Experience
for Undergraduates (REU) and Teacher (RET) activities, an annual open house to
increase ecological engineering literacy among the general public, and weekly
K-12 tours and demonstrations.