* 0828649
* Investigating the Stabilization of Biological Systems with Clathrate Hydrates
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2010
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 07/31/2010
* USD 49,688.00

CBET-0828649 A. Sum, Colorado School of Mines

This exploratory one-year proposal investigates a new frontier for the
fundamental understanding and application of clathrate hydrates in the
stabilization of biological systems. Stabilization of biological systems, or
biopreservation, is of major importance for the storage and preservation of
cells and proteins in biology, biotechnology, medicine, and food technology.
Clathrate hydrates are inclusion compounds formed from the hydrogen bonding of
water molecules that enclose small, mostly non-polar compounds. The benefits of
employing clathrate hydrates over current stabilization approaches, namely
lyophilization (removal of water) and cryopreservation (cold storage), are the
preservation of biological systems at fully hydrated conditions and the ability
for stabilization at temperatures above the normal freezing point of water.

The intellectual merit of this novel study is to identify suitable clathrate
hydrate formers to stabilize biological materials and to perform viability
studies on biological systems to demonstrate the suitability of clathrate
hydrate in their stabilization. The experimental measurements will be performed
in a custom-designed cell suitable for hydrate formation and biological studies.
Measurement of hydrate formation conditions will concentrate on hydrate formers
that are benign to biological systems (cells and proteins) and have equilibrium
formation above the normal freezing point of water (0?aC). Some of the hydrate
formers to be considered in this study include mixtures of xenon and carbon
dioxide with tetrahydrofuran and ethylene oxide. Measurements will be performed
in both neat water and biological media. These measurements will serve as the
basis to study the stabilization of biological systems with clathrate hydrates,
which will be initially verified by the activity and viability of microorganisms
and animal cells. This exploratory study is transformative, as it introduces
novel concepts in the area of clathrate hydrates and new approaches for the
stabilization of biological systems.

The broader impact component of the project is the investigation of a unexplored
area of research with potential applications in the stabilization of cellular
and protein systems, in the development of new food processing and preservation
technologies, in the encapsulation of small organic agents, and in the mechanism
for anesthesia and hibernation. The project will demonstrate the unique
properties of clathrate hydrates in biology, which is an area beyond its well-
established areas of research and applications (i.e., energy, storage, and
environment). This project will also include training of a graduate student, who
will work closely with the PI and his collaborator, Prof. Y. Martin Lo at the
University of Maryland-College Park.