* 0828162
* Direct Numerical and Large-eddy Simulation of Supersonic Transverse Jets Using a Novel Numerical Method
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Krishnan Mahesh, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou
* 08/31/2012
* USD 259,139.00

CBET - 0828162 &lt;br/&gt;Mahesh, Krishnan &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PI plans use of direct numerical and large-eddy simulation to study transverse
jets in high-speed cross flow and compare to existing experimental data. The
objectives of the proposed research are to develop a high-fidelity Direct
Navier-Stokes (DNS) database at low Reynolds numbers, and Large-Eddy Simulation
(LES) capability at experimental Reynolds numbers for transverse jets in
supersonic cross flow. Specific studies will concern penetration, entrainment
and mixing characteristics of this flow and developing a novel numerical
methodology using this challenging problem as a testbed. The simulations use a
novel numerical method and subgrid model developed by the PI's group for
unstructured grids. The algorithm ensures robustness and accuracy without
numerical dissipation. It rescales the governing equations and ensures that the
discrete equations analytically reduce to the incompressible equations in the
limit of low Mach number. Discrete operators are derived to be accurate on
highly skewed unstructured grids and a shock-capturing scheme is applied in a
corrector step. The subgrid model solves an evolution equation for the subgrid
kinetic energy with no adjustable coefficients. If successful, this numerical
methodology will have significant impact on a wide class of problems beyond the
scope of this work. High-speed transverse jets are central to enabling sustained
combustion inside scramjet engines which represent the next frontier in aviation
propulsion. Another important application of high-speed transverse jets is
thrust vector control under re-entry conditions. The physical understanding
developed from the simulations will help develop practical scaling laws, while
the unstructured LES methodology will allow actual prediction and design of
these systems. The study also seeks to expand knowledge of turbulent mixing to
high speeds. There is a lack of consensus on fundamental issues such as what
affects jet trajectories, penetration and mixing. This study will be performed
by one PhD student and one undergraduate student. The undergraduate student will
be chosen from the Minnesota Supercomputing Institute's summer internship
program which draws students from across the country. The PI will also
participate in another outreach program of the Super-computing Institute
involving high school students from the Twin Cities area. The proposed work will
form part of the PI's teaching material, and presentations and articles intended
for a broad audience.