* 0828900
* New Generation of Lab on Chip Separators based on Independent Fluid and Analyte Control
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2013
* Steven Cramer, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 02/28/2013
* USD 417,592.00

CBET-0828900&lt;br/&gt;Petsev&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Highly efficient separation,
detection and identification of biomolecules are extremely important for medical
diagnostics, bioengineering, genome analysis, and disease control. This is not
always easy because the biological analytes often have very similar
characteristics, such as their molecular charge and size. The objective of this
project is to develop a novel method for the separation and sensing of
biomolecules (large DNA fragments and proteins) by decoupling the electroosmotic
transport of the fluid from the electrophoretic migration of the solutes. This
will be accomplished by means of new elements which we developed recently -
semiconductor diode pumps powered by an alternate current (AC) field. The
analytes will be independently manipulated electrophoretically by a direct
current (DC). In addition, we propose to explore the fabrication and properties
of a new class of microscopic device-like particles that can move, sense and
respond to biochemical stimuli on their own. The self-propelling particles will
be microdiodes that harvest energy for their motion from a global AC field or
mesostructured entities that are driven by osmotic gradients through a
controlled solute release&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project
involves fundamental studies of electrokinetic phenomena and transport,
electrodynamics, surface science, and biomolecular solution dynamics. We will
reveal the principles for using semiconductor elements powered by AC fields as
smart particles and microdevices that autonomously move or pump water and
respond to chemical stimuli. The successful execution of the proposed research
program will open a completely new range of opportunities in the areas of
biomedical engineering, proteomics and DNA sequencing, medical diagnostics,
microfluidic reactor design, sensing and detection. We will establish the
foundation for the design and operation of new actively controlled and
dynamically reconfigurable fluidic-electronic chips for manipulating liquids and
solutes. A major object for separation in the devices that we will develop will
be megabase DNA, which is important for genomic applications such as genotyping
and purification of clone libraries. DNA in the megabase range (109 Da) is
commonly separated using slab gel electrophoresis; however, standard gels only
resolve fragments up to 75 kb, since resolution for larger fragments is poor.
Our technique will avoid this problem and can become a key in rapid prototyping
on a chip. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program will establish the foundation for
the development of future engineering projects in the areas of chemical and
bioengineering, lab-on-a-chip and microreactor design. It will help the
education of generation of graduate students who will face the challenges of the
emerging microscale and nanoscale technologies. The collaboration between UNM,
NCSU and RPI will help expanding research and educational activities in all
three institutions. It will allow for graduate student exchange and exposure to
diverse research and academic environments. The PI's of the project will also
visit the partner institutions to participate in seminars and present lectures
on specific topics to graduate and undergraduate students The research proposed
in this application will reinforce the educational and outreach activities at
UNM, NCSU and RPI. It will provide research topics for graduate students. It
will also enrich the existing undergraduate laboratory modules with new
experiments and be used in innovative hands-on undergraduate research projects.
In addition, it will promote teaching, training and learning through an update
of the curriculum, participation in K-12 teacher's training workshops and
outreach to other schools in the state.