* 0828074
* COSEE: Education Aquanauts Educator Enhancement Collaboration
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Russell Cuhel, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 08/31/2012
* USD 150,087.00

The Centers for Ocean Science Education Excellence (COSEE) seek to promote
partnerships between research scientists and educators, disseminate best
practices in ocean sciences education, and promote ocean education as a
charismatic, interdisciplinary vehicle for creating a more scientifically
literate workforce and citizenry. One way to increase public awareness of the
oceans and their importance in economic and environmental considerations is
through educator enhancement and public outreach activities based on scientific
inquiry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;COSEE Great Lakes is uniquely situated to take
advantage of mounting global concern over freshwater resources. The Great Lakes
may demonstrate faster response times to global climate change, as already
evidenced by a longer ice-free season on the lower lakes. The Great Lakes have
also been susceptible to an onslaught of invasive species appearances,
predominantly through the shipping lanes of the St. Lawrence Seaway. Research
activities on Lake Michigan ecosystem dynamics by the PIs at the Great Lakes
Wisconsin Aquatic Technology and Environmental Research (WATER) Institute can
provide an ideal opportunity for research education collaboration supporting the
mission of COSEE, especially COSEE Great Lakes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the
last decade, more than half a dozen animal species have invaded the upper Great
Lakes, some of them causing unequivocal and perhaps cataclysmic alterations in
large lake ecosystems. Lake Michigan in particular provides readily accessible
opportunities for sampling and understanding of invasive species ecology. These
issues are widespread in marine environments as well, and comparative learning
can be stimulating. COSEE Great Lakes provides the perfect venue for development
and dissemination of exciting hands-on, interactive aquatic science experiential
learning opportunities. This program seeks to provide exciting, immersion
science learning and resource exposure for teachers of middle and high school
students and informal science educators. Specific objectives are: (1) expand
educator awareness of exotic species occurrence and activities in local waters
as a means for introducing larger topics of aquatic ecosystem processes; (2)
engage educators in 1-week, intense hands-on workshops using modern-day tools
both onboard a research vessel and analytical instrumentation at the laboratory
bench to test specific, tractable hypotheses; and (3) assist the COSEE Great
Lakes in providing educators with resources to access current environmental
research activities and results in their own region and nationally.
&lt;br/&gt;Participating science teachers serving primarily middle and high
school audiences, and informal science educators will be recruited through
collaboration with COSEE Great Lakes, drawing in part upon our own substantial
existing base of participants in JASON and other outreach programs. &lt;br/&gt;