* 0828253
* Computational Simulation of Knee Osteoarthritis Development
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Benjamin Fregly, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Kaiming Ye
* 12/31/2012
* USD 239,989.00

CBET-0828253&lt;br/&gt;Fregly&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to develop
a state-of-the-art adaptive modeling approach to simulate how knee
osteoarthritis (OA) develops over time in response to an altered mechanical
environment caused by anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) injury. The approach does
not seek to capture every minute detail of the disease process with a highly
complicated model but rather seeks to capture the first order effects with a
combination of simple models. Surface geometry, joint motion, and joint load
inputs will come from individual patients with one healthy knee and one
osteoarthritic ACL-deficient knee. The approach will be evaluated by attempting
to change the articular cartilage in a computational model of each patient's
healthy knee into the articular cartilage of the patient's ACL-deficient
knee.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed activity will
be the creation of a new adaptive simulation approach that can predict
progressive changes in articular cartilage thickness over time. The method will
be investigated using a novel empirical cartilage adaptation law incorporated
into iterative joint-level dynamic contact simulations. The proposed research is
transformative in that it may open up an entirely new avenue for studying OA
initiation and progression in the knee as well as in other
joints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the proposed activity
includes the possibility of elucidating the mechanism by which altered motions
and loads lead to cartilage degeneration. Such knowledge could provide a
valuable first step toward the development of new treatments for knee OA. The
broader impact also includes involvement of engineering college students as
mentors at a local high school with a low graduation rate and high percentage of
economically disadvantaged students, and exposure of minority and female high
school and college students to ways that engineering mechanics can be used to
address clinically significant problems related to knee OA.