* 0828699
* Use of Chiral Tracers to Determine Cycling of POPs in Stream Ecosystems
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Cindy Lee, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Debra Reinhart
* 07/31/2012
* USD 358,349.00

CBET- 0828699&lt;br/&gt;Lee, Cindy M.&lt;br/&gt;Clemson
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Use of Chiral Tracers to Determine Cycling of
POPs in Stream Ecosystems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the manufacture and use
of many persistent organic pollutants (POPs) such as polychlorinated biphenyls
(PCBs) and dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT) have been banned for decades,
many US aquatic systems have fish advisories due to continuing body burdens
considered dangerous to human health. Environmental scientists and engineers
have proposed and investigated various hypotheses such as continuing inputs or
ineffective remediation methods, yet there is still an inadequate understanding
of the cycling of POPs in ecosystems, especially the role of biota. Using POPs
that are chiral offers an innovative technique for the studying food webs. There
are 19 chiral PCBs congeners due to restricted rotation around the biphenyl bond
that makes them asymmetric. The resulting atropisomers or enantiomers have the
same chemical and physical properties such as solubility and volatility but can
have different reaction rates in asymmetric environments. Therefore,
biotransformation can result in one enantiomer enriched over the other. The
enrichment can be measured as the enantiomeric fraction (EF) by chromatography
due to recent developments in technology. We propose to exploit chiral analysis
of PCBs to improve understanding of their movement through food webs in a stream
ecosystem. The combination of chiral, congener specific and stable isotope
analyses will elucidate important questions such as the transfer from
contaminated sediment to basal resources such as periphyton (biofilm) and
decaying leaves, which serve as food sources for invertebrates, which in turn
are prey for fish. We present preliminary data that shows the utility of chiral
analysis. To test the working hypothesis that chiral analysis provides
significant insight we will conduct field work in a river contaminated with
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) and a laboratory study over a three year
period. The field study (initiated in Year 1) consists of achiral and chiral
analysis of extracts from samples collected over two years (2003-2004) and the
targeted collection of a comprehensive set of sediment samples. The laboratory
study (initiated in Year 2) will be a controlled feeding study based on the
field results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results can be applied to other POPS
which are chiral (eg. DDT, chlordane, toxaphene) as well as many pesticides and
pharmaceuticals that are of emerging concern. Our understanding is largely
incomplete of the various pathways for POPs as they move from contaminated
sediment to fish, which are a major pathway for human exposure to POPs. Risk
reduction strategies would benefit from the fundamental knowledge gained from
this work. The knowledge will also advance fundamental concepts in ecology
through improved understanding of complex food webs. Two graduate students will
be supported by the project. They will benefit from the collaboration between
Clemson University and the EPA that will expand their perspective of research
opportunities. Clemson has a reputation for recruiting and retaining students
from under-represented groups. Outreach will include presentations to citizen
groups involved in the Superfund and NRDA processes for the study site. A middle
school teacher will participate in the research through a supplement.