* 0828648
* Development of a Sustainable Production Platform for Renewable Petroleum Based Oils in Algae
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2008,10/31/2012
* Wayne Curtis, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 10/31/2012
* USD 358,357.00

Joseph Chappell &lt;br/&gt;University of Kentucky &lt;br/&gt;CBET-0828817
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wayne R Curtis &lt;br/&gt;Pennsylvania State
University, University Park &lt;br/&gt;CBET 0828648
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
primary objective of this project is to genetically engineer algae for the
production of renewable and ecologically sustainable petroleum grade oils that
are suitable for processing into combustible fuels (octanes suitable for
internal combustible engines) and other petroleum-based products. This project
leverages the Principal Investigators (PIs) recent success in isolating the
genes coding for the biosynthesis of rather unique branched-chain, unsaturated
hydrocarbons (methylated triterpenes), and the development of novel tools to
engineer metabolic shunts for high-level terpene production in terrestrial
plants. The PIs' specific aims are to fully characterize these unique triterpene
biosynthetic enzymes, to assess the capacity of transgenic algae engineered with
the respective genes for their ability to accumulate high-levels of the
corresponding petroleum-based oils, and finally to evaluate bioreactor design
and operational strategies for growing high density algal cultures and improving
the capture efficiency for solar radiation. The proposed collaborative research
brings together genetic engineering proof-of-principle with novel process
engineering advances in algae culture required to evaluate these alterative
platforms of agri-culture and alga-culture for commodity-scale displacement of
fossil fuels with renewable, green-house-gas neutral biofuels.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work
represents a strong interdisciplinary effort between chemists, biochemists and
engineers, involving undergraduate and graduate students and postdoctoral
associates, in an effort to shed new insights into how metabolic pathways might
be engineered for enhanced value using emerging technologies.