* 0828655
* Quantifying wind farm power losses due to wind turbine wakes
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2010
* Rebecca Barthelmie, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 09/30/2010
* USD 89,990.00

CBET-0828655&lt;br/&gt;Barthelmie&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Optimal spacing of wind
turbines in large wind farm arrays depends in part on turbine interactions, i.e.
wind turbine wakes that are maximized at close spacing. Wakes are the volume
downwind of individual turbines where wind speed is reduced and turbulence is
enhanced due to energy extraction at the preceding turbine. In large offshore
wind farms, power losses due to wakes can exceed 20% of total potential power
production and lead to an increase in fatigue loading reducing turbine
lifetimes. The objective of the research is to quantify and improve predictive
capability for the development, propagation, combination and dissipation of wind
turbine wakes in large onshore wind farms. Wake models used in current wind farm
prediction tools under-predict power losses in large wind farms. There are two
potential explanations; (1) large wind farms create additional turbulence which
fundamentally alters the structure of the overlying boundary-layer, (2)
combining wakes from individual turbines both downwind and laterally is mis-
specified by the current generation of wind farm models. Evaluation of the
models in small wind farms (three rows or smaller) indicates that models are
able to capture power losses due to wakes which lends support to these two
hypotheses that pertain to large multi-row arrays. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will combine statistical analysis of observed wind farm data with
evaluation and development of three classes of models (from the analytic to
computational fluid dynamics codes) to improve predictions of wake losses. The
goal is to produce a model that accurately captures wake propagation and
interactions in different wind speed, turbulence and atmospheric stability
conditions, to model wake combination in a more realistic way and to account for
changes in the structure of the boundary-layer. Ultimately, this will produce a
model which accurately quantifies wake losses for existing wind farm layouts and
will allow assessment of wind farm layouts (turbine spacing) which are optimized
for wake losses. The outcome from this project will contribute unique insight
into how wakes propagate through large wind farms, and transform the ways in
which wake impacts on power output are modeled.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will be led by Professor R.J. Barthelmie, a renowned leader in wind
energy research, and will be conducted in collaboration with scientists at the
National Renewable Energy Laboratory and Airtricity/E.ON, a world leading
renewable energy company. Both have agreed to provide data from operating large
wind farms and to collaboration on model application and evaluation. This
collaboration will both enhance the project and increase symbioses and knowledge
transfer. The project will also enhance educational and training opportunities
at Indiana University.