* 0828155
* Dynamic Mechanical Materials for Orthotic and Prosthetic Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Stuart Rowan, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Ted A. Conway
* 08/31/2011
* USD 260,000.00

PI: Weder, Christoph and Rowan, Stuart Proposal Number: 0828155

Polymeric materials are used in many orthotic and prosthetic devices - examples
range from ankle-foot orthoses to prosthetic limbs to neural electrodes.
Significant activities are focused on the development of new medical devices
which are referred to as 'active', 'smart', or 'intelligent', for example knee-
ankle-foot orthoses that rely on elastic actuators to enhance knee extension,
adjustable and expandable prostheses that permit expansion for growing children,
and active brace systems for the treatment of scoliosis. Rather interestingly,
the polymers employed in these new devices merely serve a passive role. Adaptive
polymers with electrically switchable mechanical properties would have a
tremendous impact on the development of orthotic and prosthetic devices,
allowing for simpler and more compact design and enhanced functionality.

Proposed is an interdisciplinary research program focused on the design,
fabrication, investi-gation and application of a novel family of synthetic
polymer nanocomposites with electrically controllable mechanical properties. The
targeted materials mimic the architecture and switching mechanism found in the
deep dermis of sea cucumbers and build on the team's recent success in the
development of chemo-responsive, dynamic mechanical materials. The proposed
nano-composites will be comprised of a low-modulus matrix polymer and rigid
nanofibers, which are decorated with electroactive molecules. The electrically-
controlled switching state of these molecules governs fiber-fiber and fiber-
matrix interactions and thereby the overall mechanical properties of the
material.

Uniting researchers with expertise in supramolecular chemistry, polymer science
and engineering, and orthopaedics and rehabilitation, the proposed research will
embrace (i) the design, synthesis and investigation of novel adaptive
nanocomposites, (ii) the combination of rheological studies and theoretical
models to develop a predictive understanding for the structure-property
relationship of these adaptive materials, (iii) the fabrication and testing of
electromechanical elements based on the new polymers, and (iv) the use of the
latter in 'smart' brace systems for dynamic trunk control.

The research is complemented with educational elements that amalgamate research
and education and provide stimulating experiences at both the undergraduate and
graduate levels. The interdisciplinary nature and the integrative research
approach will provide students with an unusually broad education. The main
approach to integrated research and education are Project Research Teams, which
include minority high school students, undergraduate and graduate students, and
faculty. Minority high school students will be integrated through interactions
with a suburban school district. Other elements include a pioneering outreach
activity in collaboration with the Cleveland+ Biomimicry Design Collaborative, a
program of the Northeast Ohio Entrepreneurs for Sustainability (E4S) initiative.

Intellectual merit: On account of its exemplary and fundamental character the
proposed interdisciplinary research program will provide a broad intellectual
basis for the future design, synthesis and manufacturing of advanced functional
materials based on active nanostructures. The development of polymer materials
with electrically switchable mechanical properties is a breakthrough achievement
and the targeted materials and devices will enable a range of technologically
relevant applications. The initially targeted applications are orthotic devices
with controllable characteristics, but the novel materials also enable many
other important applications, for example adaptive protective clothing, and
active vibration dampening systems.

Broader impact: The proposed research will yield blueprints for advanced
polymers with a substantial application potential. The integrated research
approach will provide students with broad educational experiences. The high-
school and undergraduate research and outreach activities are designed to
increase the fraction of underrepresented minorities in engineering, to
integrate research and education, to provide an exciting learning environment,
and to create teaching opportunities for graduate researchers. The partnership
with E4S will enhance the scientific and technological education of local
entrepreneurs that are interested in building the social and knowledge
infrastructure for Biomimicry in the region.