* 0828734
* Workshop:  Performance-Based Infrastructure Asset Management (PBIAM); Istanbul, Turkey; July 7-9, 2008
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2009
* Franklin Moon, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 04/30/2009
* USD 25,000.00

This grant provides funding for US participants to attend a 3-Day international
workshop in Istanbul, Turkey during July 7-9, 2008, to dissect the paradigm of
Performance-Based Infrastructure Asset Management (PBIAM). The workshop is co-
sponsored by the US Federal Highway Administration (FHWA). Partial support has
been promised by Turkish, European Commission, Canadian and Japanese agencies.
While it is broadly recognized that infrastructures are multi-domain and multi-
disciplinary systems with human, natural and engineered elements, there is
currently little awareness and no consensus regarding how innovative paradigms
and concepts need to be integrated and leveraged to advance the engineering and
management of infrastructures in general and transportation infrastructures in
particular. The principal intellectual merit of the workshop will be to bring
experts and stakeholders that have so far remained apart, in order to start
bridging this gap by leveraging highways and bridges for a realistic case study.
The highway transportation infrastructure, its linkages and interdependencies to
other modes of transportation and other infrastructures will be leveraged as
this case study. Turkey is at the cross-roads between Europe and Asia, and the
highway infrastructure connecting Asia and Europe at Istanbul will serve as an
excellent backdrop for the discussions. Specific objectives of the workshop
include: (1) To bring a multi-disciplinary group of engineers and scientists
from academe, government and industry together for discussing how innovative
paradigms and concepts may be integrated and leveraged to advance the
engineering and management of infrastructures in general, and highway
transportation infrastructure in particular. The workshop will explore the
inter-relations and synergies between the concepts and paradigms of asset
management, performance-based engineering, multihazards risks, multi-domain
systems identification, applied systems analysis, health monitoring and
intelligent systems in addition to interdependence, resilience and
sustainability. (2) To construct Ontology of PBIAM of highway transportation
infrastructure to help overcome the fragmentation that is obstructing effective
integration and leveraging of concepts and paradigms with potential to innovate
engineering and management of infrastructures. Ontology has been leveraged as a
mechanism for creating a community sharing a similar worldview and speaking the
same language in order to foster highly complex emerging fields of study that
face integration challenges. Space, defense, AI, IT are examples. (3) To develop
an International Collaborative Research Agenda on PBIAM. This Agenda will
incorporate an in-depth understanding and sharing of recent experiences and
advances on PBIAM in Europe, the Far East and North America. It will also permit
an understanding of how different social and cultural institutions and related
human systems in different regions of the world impact PBIAM
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;No one country or region has yet discovered
the best and most effective framework for efficient, safe, sustainable and
secure operation and preservation of their infrastructures. The path to
innovation has to go through global, coordinated, multi-domain, and multi-
disciplinary research. This workshop was conceived in this manner and the
Ontology and PBIAM Research Agenda will be broadly disseminated through a web
site linked to FHWA's site to promote the adoption of PBIAM principles by
transportation infrastructure stewards throughout the US. To facilitate the
participation of experts from traditionally underrepresented groups in these
workshops, several strategies will be employed. First, leading civil engineering
faculty and practitioners from traditionally underrepresented groups will be
directly contacted by the workshop organizing committee and invited to
participate in the workshop. To aid in the identification of qualified faculty
and advanced graduate students, the Philadelphia Louis Stokes Alliance for
Minority Participation (LSAMP) program, which is housed at Drexel University
will be leveraged. To aid in the identification of practitioners from
underrepresented groups, faculty members and national leaders associated with
professional societies that serve underrepresented groups, will be contacted and
asked to nominate qualified participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
funded by the Division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation and the
Office of International Science and Engineering.