* 0828627
* Rapid, Sensitive and Sequential Detection of E. coli and Total Coliforms Using Engineered Conducting Membranes for Water Quality Control
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,12/31/2011
* Yu Lei, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Debra Reinhart
* 12/31/2011
* USD 166,058.00

CBET- 0828627&lt;br/&gt;Lei, Yu&lt;br/&gt;University of
Connecticut&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rapid, Sensitive and Sequential Detection of E.
coli and Total Coliforms Using Engineered Conducting Membranes for Water Quality
Control&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal objective of this proposal is to
develop a fast, easy-to-use, and sensitive detection system for total coliforms
and E. coli. The intellectual merits of this proposal include: First, two
engineered conducting membranes (polypyrrole and single-walled carbon nanotubes)
will filter water sample and, thus, serve as bacteria concentrator, achieving
the quick concentration and immobilization of bacteria on polypyrrole and SWNT
in a single step; Second, the conducting polypyrrole and SWNT membranes also
serve as working electrodes in amperometric detection and enhances the
sensitivity due to their super-electron conductivity, anti-fouling property, and
strong electrocatalytic capability; Third, two "electrogenic" substrates are
specifically selected/identified for â-D-galactosidase (total coliforms) and
â-D-glucuronidase (E. coli) respectively, and the hydrolyzed products from
enzymatical reactions have distinguishable oxidation potentials, allowing the
sequential detection of E. coli and total coliforms possible. All these features
will make the proposed detection system an ideal analytical tool for drinking
water quality control. The proposed program offers a truly multidisciplinary
training ground for undergraduates and graduate students. Synergistic effects
with existing grants to the PI are expected. The work will advance the
development of biosensor for water quality control in general and, if
successful, might have an enormous impact on the ability to detect total
coliforms and fecal indicator. The multidisciplinary nature of the research
activity lends itself for dissemination in non-technical journals and as a
subject of outreach activities. The proposal includes year-round undergraduate
research projects and will be part of UConn "Frontiers Distinguished
Lectureship" program and UConn?s School of Engineering Da Vinci project
(http://www.engr.uconn.edu/davinci/) to enhance K-12 education.