* 0828356
* Bacterial adhesion and metabolic activity: Investigation of the link between the charge-regulated nature of the bacterial cell surface and cellular bioenergetics
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Derick Brown, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* William Cooper
* 08/31/2013
* USD 382,648.00

CBET- 0828356&lt;br/&gt;Brown, Derick&lt;br/&gt;Lehigh
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bacterial adhesion and metabolic activity:
Investigation of the link between the charge-regulated nature of the bacterial
cell surface and cellular bioenergetics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
principal objective of this proposal is to investigate the effect of bacterial
adhesion to surfaces on metabolic activity, and to develop a predictive model of
how the properties of a surface will affect Äp and cellular ATP levels of
adhered bacteria. The research hypothesis is that there is a direct link between
bacterial adhesion and the proton motive force that forms across the bacterial
membrane, with the result being a shift in the pH at the cell surface. The
project incorporates both microbial biology techniques and numerical modeling to
study the impact of bacterial adhesion, surface properties, and divalent
concentration on bacterial cellular energetics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
anticipated that this study will show (1) that there is a direct link between
bacterial adhesion to a surface and changes to Äp; (2) that these changes to Äp
are due to a shift in pH at the cell surface upon adhesion; and (3) that these
changes to Äp will be a function of the bacterial and solid surface properties
and multivalent cation concentration in the bulk solution, as predicted by the
charge regulation effect. If the hypothesis is shown to be true, this will open
up a spectrum of new research areas in microbiology and microbial ecology (e.g.,
understanding how cells make use of this enhanced Äp and ATP, such as altering
cellular growth yields or initiating other processes upon adhesion, such as cell
signaling and production of extracellular polymers for biofilm formation), and
environmental engineering, bioengineering and materials science (e.g.,
engineered design and application of surfaces to achieve desired enhancements or
reductions in metabolic activity, such as with bioreactors, medical devices and
implants, and pipelines). A key component of this project is the integration of
research with education by involving graduate, undergraduate and high school
students.