* 0828590
* Protein Adsorption and Transport in Chromatographic Bioprocessing
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Abraham Lenhoff, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 08/31/2012
* USD 305,995.00

CBET-0828590&lt;br/&gt;Lenhoff&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF award by the
Chemical and Biological Separations program supports work by Professor Abraham
Lenhoff at the University of Delaware to characterize quantitatively the
structure-performance relationship in ion-exchange chromatography of proteins.
The results of such analyses will then be used to develop systematic approaches
for predicting chromatographic behavior on the basis of a small number of
relevant experimental measurements. Ion-exchange chromatography is a major unit
operation in industrial bioprocessing, and the prevalence of empirical screening
methods can make efficient methods for reducing the scope of trial-and-error
methods of optimization particularly valuable. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will distinguish between traditional adsorbents on
consolidated polymeric or gel-like base matrices, and polymer-modified phases in
which additional flexible inclusions of various kinds have been shown to offer
some performance improvements. For the traditional adsorbents, prior work has
produced approaches to predict adsorption isotherms and transport properties to
a degree that should allow effective prediction of overall chromatographic
behavior. Such capabilities are still lacking for the polymer-modified
adsorbents, however. We will therefore measure retention and transport
properties for the polymer-modified adsorbents and seek to correlate them with
structural characteristics of the materials. In addition, starting with
traditional media and moving on to polymer-modified ones, mechanistic methods
will be used to develop predictive models of protein loading and elution in
packed columns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research should have an impact
in several areas. First, it should contribute significantly to improving the
efficiency of conceptual and detailed design of chromatographic steps in
bioprocessing. A complementary contribution will be to stationary-phase design,
where suitable use of our results can allow desirable characteristics to be
designed into such materials. Second, the research will be an effective
educational vehicle for training of graduate and undergraduate students;
numerous such students who have worked on previous projects of this kind are
employed in the biotech and pharma industries. Finally, the proposed research
will include a component to disseminate the findings to the larger community
interested in chromatographic research and practice by making computational
packages for column modeling available as both Matlab routines and as applets
that can be run in any web browser.