* 0828467
* Doctoral Dissertation: Perceptions and Practice in  Social Movements
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2009
* Jeffrey Goodwin, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2009
* USD 7,494.00

SES-0828467 Jeffrey Goodwin Grace Yukich New York University

Social movement studies usually conceptualize "religion" and "movement activism"
as distinct entities, but elsewhere the division between "religion" and "the
secular" is being recognized as an analytic distinction that is not
representative of the perceptions and lives of many religious people.
Sociological studies using the "lived religion" perspective emphasize the ways
in which people perceive and experience everyday activities as "religious
practice." Applying these insights to the study of social movements, this
project asks: Do religious people see "religion" as separate from movement
activity, or do they view activism as a part of their everyday religious
practice? Why do they view it in the ways they do? Do their perceptions help
explain the level of their participation in a social movement? For core
participants, (how) do their perceptions influence individual and movement-wide
choices about strategy? These questions will be examined using ethnography and
interviews with participants in the New York City Sanctuary Coalition and the
Los Angeles Sanctuary Coalition, two congregation-based movement organizations
working on immigration issues as part of the national New Sanctuary Movement.
The researcher expects to find that religious people think about
religion/activism in a variety of different ways, that these perceptions are
related to their wider theological beliefs, and that ideas and principles (not
just organizational ties and pragmatic considerations) influence participation
in movements and activists' strategic choices. In showing the extent to which
religious people perceive social movement activism as a form of lived religion,
this project will demonstrate whether the strict division between religion and
movement activism is appropriate or whether a new framework may be called for in
movement studies. The study will also show whether perceptions about religion
matter for movement recruitment and choices about strategy.

Broader Impacts. This project will provide a more complete understanding of the
role of religion in public life by stressing the perspectives of religious
people themselves on what constitutes religion, an important task in a nation
where most people consider themselves religious. It will also provide essential
information from the frontlines of the fiery battle over illegal immigration,
including the often unheard voices of immigrants. By providing in-depth
information on a movement at the center of this issue, this study will help
illuminate a timely and important political debate.