* 0828433
* Combinatorial Multiscale Modeling and Simulation of DNA/Surface Interactions for Improved Microarray Design
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Thomas Knotts, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Eddie Chang
* 08/31/2012
* USD 401,234.00

CBET-0828433&lt;br/&gt;Knotts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The
primary goal of this work is to develop an improved fundamental understanding of
the transport mechanisms in porous ceramic based proton exchange membranes
(PEMs). The performance of several types of fuel cells is limited by PEM
performance, which has lead to a plethora of efforts to develop novel, high
performance PEM materials. Standard materials used for such applications today
are sulfonated perfluorcarbon polymers such as Nafion® whose greatest drawbacks
include their poor performance at high temperatures (_80°C) and/or when not well
hydrated. Inorganic solid acids, including some nanoporous ceramic materials,
are among the novel membrane materials reported in the literature and have been
demonstrated in the PI's lab to have greater proton conductivity and reduced
fuel crossover flux as compared to Nafion®. It is expected that proton transport
in such materials proceeds through both a bulk mechanism in the pores and a
surface mechanism along the pore surfaces, with the relative importance of each
dependent strongly on membrane properties such as surface area and surface
acidity as well as environmental parameters such as pH and temperature. This
work will systematically investigate the dependence of transport behavior in
PEMS fabricated from modified porous alumina on such key variables. Physical and
chemical characterization of the membranes will inform input files for molecular
dynamics based simulations. Results of these simulations will be coupled with
experimental measurements of transport behavior, primarily from impedance
spectroscopy, to develop continuum and equivalent circuit models and determine
relevant transport parameters such as diffusivities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The proposed work will train graduate
students in interdisciplinary research at the interface of two areas widely
identified to be of critical importance to the United States: fuel cells and
nanotechnology. While the immediate application of this work is to the
development of PEM fuel cells for applications ranging from battery replacements
for portable electronics to automotive engines, it will also impact a variety of
sensor technologies which rely on ion conducting membranes. This project will
also involve undergraduate students from both Louisiana Tech University and
Grambling State University (GSU) through one of the PIs who has a joint
appointment between the two universities. The a high percentage of African-
American students for a non-HBCU (~15% of enrollment) at Louisiana Tech and at
GSU, an HBCU, combined with concerted outreach efforts ensure that this project
will have a significant impact on underrepresented minority groups in
engineering and science in addition to enhancing partnerships between Louisiana
Tech and Grambling. Additionally, the inclusion of undergraduate students in
research activities will encourage these students to attend graduate school.
This work will be performed in Louisiana, an EPSCOR state, impacting geographic
diversity in scientific research. The PIs along with participating graduate and
undergraduate students will present results from this project at national
conferences in addition to participating in an ongoing nanotechnology seminar
series at Louisiana Tech. These activities will serve both to disseminate
results to a wide audience while also providing the students extremely valuable
learning experiences and exposure, particularly for undergraduate students.