* 0828724
* Revealing protein switch design principles through directed evolution
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Marc Ostermeier, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 09/30/2012
* USD 390,000.00

CBET-0828724&lt;br/&gt;Ostermeier&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Engineered
protein switches hold great promise as biosensors, selective protein
therapeutics and tools for programming cells for biotechnological applications.
A lack of understanding switch structure and function limits the ability to
create them. Directed evolution approaches to switch construction have been
developed by the Principal Investigator (PI). However, for many applications
this approach is limited by the ability to screen/select for switches with
desired properties. An understanding of switch design principles would greatly
facilitate switch construction and enable these applications. The combinatorial
nature of directed evolution, when carefully applied, is ideally suited for
elucidating these design principles. A series of directed evolution experiments
will be performed that are designed to answer specific questions about switch
mechanisms and answer practical question on switch construction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lab of the PI is a multidisciplinary environment. The
PI mentors students from several departments and programs at Johns Hopkins
University including chemical and biomolecular engineering, biomedical
engineering, biology, the chemistry-biology interface program and the
computational and molecular biophysics program. Of the seven graduate students
the PI currently supervises, five are female and one is of Hispanic descent.