* 0828795
* Carbon Nanotubes in Soils: Transport, Filtration, and Impact on Soil Microbial Community
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Menachem Elimelech, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara Karn
* 08/31/2012
* USD 369,304.00

CBET-0828795&lt;br/&gt;Elimelech&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carbon nanotubes (CNTs)
are emerging in a variety of applications, including electronic, optical,
medical, and structural composite technologies. Because of their anticipated
role in large-scale industrial production, there is little doubt that CNTs will
ultimately find their way into our aquatic environment. The unusual
physicochemical characteristics of CNTs compared to other nanoparticles,
particularly the very large aspect ratio and highly bundled (aggregated) state
in aqueous solutions, preclude meaningful theoretical predictions of their
aggregation and transport behavior. Furthermore, because of the lack of
laboratory data on CNT transport in porous media, very little is known about
their potential mobility and fate in subsurface environments. Of particular
interest is the need to assess the potential contamination of groundwater
aquifers by CNTs. Contamination of groundwater with CNTs may originate from
landfill leachates, wastewater infiltration, and land applications. Therefore,
understanding the extent of CNT transport in soils will be the key to predicting
the risk of contamination of underlying groundwater aquifers. Furthermore,
because of CNT retention within the soil profile, its impact on soil microbial
ecology must be considered in light of recent studies indicating antibacterial
effects of CNTs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of the proposed
research is to assess the extent of transport and retention of CNTs in soils and
the impact of retained CNTs on the soil microbial community. Worst case
scenarios for CNT transport in soils will be established, which will then enable
them to predict the potential for contamination of underlying groundwater
aquifers. Furthermore, they will establish the conditions under which retained
CNTs influence the soil microbial ecology. Two hypotheses guide their research:
(i) the mobility of CNTs in soils will be relatively limited as the large aspect
ratio of the nanotubes and their highly aggregated (bundled) state will promote
extensive removal by physicochemical filtration and straining, and (ii) because
of their effective retention, particularly via straining, CNTs will accumulate
in soils and thus will influence the soil microbial community. To complete the
proposed work, they will: (1) select and characterize single-walled carbon
nanotubes (SWNTs) and multi-walled carbon nanotubes MWNTs, (2) select and
characterize soils and model porous media, (3) evaluate transport and retention
of CNTs in packed columns, (4) evaluate mobilization (release) of retained CNTs
by perturbations in solution chemistry, (5) assess the impact of retained CNTs
on soil microbiology, and (6) evaluate worst case scenarios and potential
effects on soil and groundwater. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research program will
include the training of a doctoral student and two undergraduate students.
Special modules on transport of nanomaterials in the environment and on the
potential implications of nanomaterials on the geomicrobiology of subsurface
environments will be added to undergraduate courses. They will work with the
Yale Peabody Museum to develop appropriate modules for the museum's School
Programs and Teacher's Workshops on environmental and societal impacts of
nanotechnology.