* 0828009
* Experimental and in silico investigation of mechanism of biological activity of amyloid forming proteins
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2013
* Theresa Good, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 09/30/2013
* USD 367,949.00

CBET-0828009&lt;br/&gt;Theresa A. Good&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of this project is in the use of biophysical and computational tools to
examine hypotheses about the mechanism of action of biological activity of
amyloid forming and aggregated proteins. The combination of modeling and
experiment, biophysical as well as biological characterization, and the use of
neuron-like and T cell lines provides one with a multifaceted and unique
approach to tackle this important problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of this work will enable one to identify key features of the
protein- cell interactions that are associated with biological activity and thus
pave the way for developing strategies to alter adverse biological responses. It
is believed that understanding the relationship between structure, stability,
and biological activity may be useful in a variety of applications such as:
treatment of disease, the design of biosensors for the detection of toxic
proteins, or in any application in which protein aggregation may occur. Results
from a previous NSF award have already been modified and used for two
consecutive years with great success for one of the laboratory courses in the
Bioengineering track at UMBC. Success of this project would lead to further
integration of research into both graduate and undergraduate education at UMBC.