* 0828733
* New Concepts in Fluidics and Cellular Mechanics for Controlled Microinjection
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2011
* Nejat Olgac, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Kaiming Ye
* 07/31/2011
* USD 200,000.00

CBET-0828733&lt;br/&gt;Fan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microinjection is a well-
accepted method to introduce matter such as sperm, nucleus, or solutes into
biological cells for infertility treatment, transgenic and therapeutic cloning,
or cryopreservation purposes. Millions of cellular microinjection operations for
such applications and relevant biomedical research are conducted in the United
States alone every year. The most utilized microinjection process is known as
intracytoplasmic sperm injection as a part of the in vitro fertilization
operation. The procedure consists of micropipette penetration through the egg
cell's periphery including the zona pellucida and the plasma membrane, followed
by the delivery of sperm for fertilization. To date, even with the help of
piezo-assisted cell piercing device, the yield of microinjection process is
undesirably low because the cells are easily damaged during the penetration and
substance delivery, and subsequently causing abnormal growth. Furthermore, the
success of the operation strongly depends on the operator's skill. Since the
operating conditions are selected in an ad-hoc fashion, the results are often
irreproducible at different laboratories or for different cells. To remedy these
shortfalls, the PiIs team has recently developed a technology called the
Rotationally Oscillating Drill which rotates the pipette via a micro-motor at
very small angular strokes (e.g., 0.2 degrees) and at high frequencies (e.g.,
500 Hz.). This operation is proven to be quite effective in the preliminary
studies of the PI's group. This overarching goal cannot be achieved, however,
without basic understanding of the complex microinjection process involving
small-scale interactions between micropipettes and the soft biological cells in
a fluid environment. The PI's objective is to resolve the transient micro-
mechanical interfacial dynamics of the microinjection process and to monitor the
rheological properties of the membrane of the oocytes. This fundamental
understanding will establish scientific basis in determining the ideal operating
conditions without lengthy trial-and-error studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research has two scientific thrusts: (i) Modeling the micro-dynamics while
biological cells are pierced by highly flexible micropipettes. (ii) Developing
optimal control protocols for our Ros-Drill microinjection process based on the
insight gained from (i). The PIs will emphasize the basic understanding of
small-scale and frequency-dependent material properties, fluid-pipette-membrane
interactions, and the integration of nanoscopic capacitive force sensing
devices. These crucial knowledge will potentially remove the dependence on human
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the proposed study will
introduce a revolutionary tool for cell biologists. This computer controlled
microinjection technology (Ros-Drill) will have great potential to reduce the
uncertainty and errors caused by human factors. It will increase the success
rate (in injection) and reduce the number of tests on various species involved
(in artificial insemination, cell surgery, and gene or drug delivery for
therapeutic cloning purposes). The system will also integrate microscale force
and position sensing devices, through which the experimental biologists will
directly benefit from the emerging microelectromechanical systems technology. In
addition to such fundamental scientific impact, the PIs plan on immediate
dissemination of the findings in professional journals and at conferences. The
PIs will also expand on a number of on-going outreach activities in K-12
education, in which we actively participate every year.