* 0828811
* Self-assembly of functional host-guest structures at interfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Stephen Martin, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 08/31/2011
* USD 206,194.00

&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Surface functionalization
the ability to alter the chemical or biological properties of a solid substrate
is now an important component in a number of technical fields, including
chemical separations, sensing, catalysis, and bioengineering. The simplest means
of adding functionality to a surface is the physical adsorption of functional
molecules with little or no control over the thickness of the resulting film or
the final orientation and position of the functional groups with respect to the
surface. In contrast, Langmuir-Blodgett (LB) film deposition allows precise
control over film thickness and also provides for consistent orientation and
positioning of the functional groups. Self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) also
result in the creation of a densely packed monolayer film with the added benefit
of stronger interactions between the monolayer and the solid substrate. The
disadvantage to both of these techniques is that they require the synthesis of
molecules with the desired functional group at one end and either a hydrophilic
headgroup (LB film) or reactive group (SAM) at the other end. This á&amp;#8722;ù
synthesis is time consuming and limits the number of functional surfaces that
can be created. These methods can be simplified and improved by borrowing
concepts from 3-D crystal engineering, specifically those of host guest
inclusion compounds. The PI has demonstrated the creation of ternary host-guest
monolayers at the air water interface based on hydrogen bonding between
alkanesulfonate amphiphiles and guanidinium ?spacer? counter-ions which form
cavities into which a variety of alkyl substituted functional guest molecules
can be inserted. These host-guest monolayers can be transferred to solid
substrates via LB deposition in order to form functionalized surfaces.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work has the capacity to transform current
methods of surface functionalization by opening up a large library of
functionalized surfaces that can be formed using a common host monolayer system
into which can be inserted a multitude of alkyl substituted guest
molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The nano-related project is broken down into
three sections: 1) characterization of host-guest LB films based on guanidinium
sulfonate host monolayers, including film stability, and the kinetics of
insertion and exchange of commercially available homologous guest molecules; 2)
synthesis and characterization of host-guest LB films based on sterically
hindered amphiphiles amphiphiles possessing an integral ?spacer? moiety; and 3)
synthesis and characterization of analogous sterically hindered host-guest SAM
films that are strongly bound to the solid substrate, providing greater
stability and allowing the functionalization of non-planar substrates such as 3D
scaffolds and nanoparticles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The nano-related project has the potential to
benefit society by enabling the production of materials and devices with
tailored surface functionality, with applications in
sensing,&lt;br/&gt;biocompatibility, separations, and catalysis. This research
will also advance discovery, while promoting teaching and learning at the high
school, undergraduate, and graduate levels by providing: (1) research
opportunities for undergraduate students, including underrepresented minorities
and women during both the regular academic year and in a summer research program
and their participation in outreach programs to encourage high school students,
particularly women, to pursue careers in engineering; (2) coordinated
recruitment of graduate students from under-represented groups with Virginia
Tech?s Office of Graduate Student Recruiting into an interdisciplinary research
program and their participation in outreach programs such as
C-Tech2&lt;br/&gt;and opportunity to mentor undergraduate researchers, and (3)
the inclusion of knowledge and examples drawn from this work in my elective
Self-Assembly course and our undergraduate Unit Operations laboratory course.
The results of this research will be widely disseminated to the scientific and
lay communities in peer-reviewed journals, in presentations at multi-
disciplinary conferences, in undergraduate symposia, and in course web
pages.&lt;br/&gt;