* 0828772
* GOALI: Active Knee Rehabilitation Orthotic Device with Variable-Damping Characteristics For Stroke Patient Rehabilitation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Constantinos Mavroidis, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Ted A. Conway
* 08/31/2011
* USD 334,970.00

PI: Mavroidis, Constantinos Proposal Number: 0828772

Stroke is the third leading cause of death in the United States; with
approximately 730,300 new cases and about 160,000 deaths in the United States
annually. Approximately 80% of stroke survivors present an early motor deficit,
with about 50% having chronic deficits. Loss of mobility due to muscle weakness
and spasticity and thus impaired gait is a major contributor to post-stroke
disability. Novel treatments are needed to serve as training aids for
reestablishing efficient gait patterns, and as assistive devices to address
residual motor impairments and functional limitations. During the last ten
years, robotics and mechatronics have emerged as new research areas of great
relevance to rehabilitation. Robotics and mechatronics offer the promise of
sensitive, objective measurements and mobility assistance by using novel
wearable and computer controlled active devices. The proposed project brings
together experts in robotics, precision manufacturing, biomechanics, and stroke
medicine with the goal of considerably improving the quality of life of stroke
patients.

The research goals of this project are to develop and test a novel, smart and
portable Active Knee Rehabilitation Orthotic Device (AKROD) designed to train
stroke patients to correct knee hyperextension during stance and stiff-legged
gait (defined as reduced knee flexion during swing). The knee brace will provide
variable damping and torque actuator capabilities controlled in ways that we
hypothesize foster motor recovery in stroke patients. Two different components
of the device will be developed: a resistive (variable damper) and an active
(torque actuator) component. The variable damper component of the brace will be
used to facilitate knee flexion during stance by providing resistance to knee
buckling. Furthermore, the knee brace will be used to assist in knee control
during swing, i.e. to allow patients to achieve adequate knee flexion for toe
clearance and adequate knee extension in preparation to heel strike. The torque
actuator component will be used to encourage patients to actively extend the
knee during midto-terminal stance, facilitate knee flexion during initial swing,
and again encourage knee extension during mid-to-terminal swing. Algorithms for
establishing appropriate control of the knee brace will be developed. Using data
from both normal volunteers and hemiplegic stroke survivors, we will create
training programs for the knee orthosis to assist patients in re-establishing a
natural gait pattern.

The intellectual merit of the proposed project is the major enhancement of gait
retraining in stroke patients and considerable improvement of orthotic
intervention in the home and community settings. A wearable and portable smart
training orthosis, as the one developed and tested in this project, could be
used by patients throughout daily activities, with constant reinforcement of the
targeted gait pattern. This constant reinforcement of gait retraining in a real-
world environment has the potential to provide more effective and faster gait
retraining, improving one's ability to ambulate.

The educational, broader impact and outreach activities of this project include:
the initiation of undergraduate students in research, the establishment of
collaborative projects in biomedical engineering and robotics with the science
and technology high schools of Massachusetts, the organization of a conference
special session, a seminar series and a webpage on portable and wearable
rehabilitation devices, the performance of graduate and undergraduate student
internships in industry, and, in partnership with NU's School of Technological
Entrepreneurship (STE), the organization of a one semester I-cubator
(student)project on market analysis and business planning for new technologies
on wearable active knee orthoses.

This 3-year GOALI project will be performed jointly by Northeastern University
(NU) of Boston, MA, Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospital (SRH) of Boston, MA (a
Harvard Medical School affiliated institution) and WGI Inc. of Southwick, MA.