* 0828213
* Collaborative Research:    Paleohydrology of the Illinois Basin--Effects of Glaciation on Fluid Flow, Solute Transport, and Microbial Methane Generation
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2008,02/28/2010
* Mark Person, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 02/28/2010
* USD 35,717.00

Melting of the Laurentide Ice Sheet profoundly altered the groundwater and
surface hydrology of North America over the last 2 million years. Subglacial
meltwaters infiltrated into saline aquifers along the margins of low-lying
Paleozoic basins, reversing groundwater flow directions and suppressing the
freshwater-saline water mixing zones to over 1 kilometer depth. Economic
accumulations of microbial methane in fractured organic-rich shales are located
in areas of freshwater recharge along the basin margins. We will assess the
impact of Pleistocene glacial loading and permafrost development on recharge
history and circulation of meteoric waters in the Illinois Basin, focusing on
two organic-rich zones that contain microbial methane (Late Devonian New Albany
Shale, Pennsylvanian coals), and adjacent regional aquifer systems. Results of
this study will greatly expand our understanding of ice sheet-aquifer
interactions, age distribution of confined groundwaters, and hydrogeochemical
controls on microbial activity in the deep
subsurface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Formation waters, gas, and microbial samples
will be collected from ~50 producing oil/gas and household wells in the New
Albany Shale, Pennsylvanian Coalbed Methane Play, and adjacent regional
aquifers, along a transect from the central Illinois Basin to the northeastern
basin margin. We will analyze the elemental and stable isotope (O,H,C)
chemistry, 14C, and noble gases of formation waters and gas. In addition,
microbial populations will be determined by DNA analyses, and archived shale and
coal materials will be analyzed for biodegradation of hydrocarbons. We have
recently developed a new hydrologic model, which solves equations for fluid
motion, heat, multi-species (salinity, stable/radiometric isotope, and noble
gas) solute transport, permafrost, and lithosphere flexure/mantle flow. This
model will be compared to observed salinity and isotope tracers to test the
hypothesis that ice sheet dynamics has substantially modified the plumbing of
the Illinois Basin during the Late Pleistocene.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite
numerous studies of the paleohydrology of the Illinois Basin the maintenance of
high salinity fluids of marine-origin in deep basin aquifers is still enigmatic.
This study will help to constrain the residence times of brines and freshwater
resources in sedimentary basins, and hydrodynamic forces required to drive
continental-scale fluid and solute transport against strong salinity gradients.
Results from this study will also help to constrain the hydrologic and
geochemical conditions necessary for economic gas accumulation in unconventional
reservoirs, such as fractured black shales and coalbeds. Importantly, this
multi-disciplinary project will be an integral part of a University of Arizona
Ph.D. student's thesis, and involve several undergraduate researchers.