* 0828269
* Production of Biocrude from Biomass using Supercritical Water
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2013
* Ram Gupta, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 09/30/2013
* USD 234,609.00

CBET-0828269&lt;br/&gt;R. Gupta&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biomass, the fourth largest
energy source worldwide, can fill in gaps in fuel supply created by the
depletion of petroleum. A key step in the utilization of biomass is its
liquefaction to biocrude. Once in liquid form, biocrude can utilize well
established pipeline transportation, refining and chemical processes that have
been perfected/optimized by the petrochemical industry. For example, biocrude
can be hydrogenated to produce gasoline or reformed to produce hydrogen.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of sub- and supercritical water (above 374 PoPC
and 220 bar) for liquefaction is advantageous as it can utilize biomass without
drying. Due to its special characteristics (e.g., non-polar nature, high
diffusivity, and low viscosity), supercritical water can solubilize organic
compounds including biomass. The high reaction rates allow for the design of a
compact reactor, needing typical reaction times of less than a minute. Rapid
depolymerization of cellulose, lignin, and hemicelluloses results in the
formation of the respective monomers and oligomers. This process, also termed as
hydrothermal liquefaction, is the subject of this project. During this process,
the oxygen content of the organic material is reduced from 40 wt% to between
10-15 wt%, with oxygen leaving as COB2B and HB2BO. The resulting cyclic
molecules (e.g., glucose, furans, and oligosaccharides) from hemicelluloses and
cellulose, and aromatic cyclic molecules (e.g, phenols) from lignin can be
hydrogenated to produce fuel similar to gasoline which is an approximate mixture
of cyclohexane, toluene, and iso-octane. Also the biocrude can be reformed in
supercritical water itself to produce high pressure HB2B and high pressure COB2B
(ready for sequestration). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit of the
project is in the fundamental study of the various steps involved including
depolymerization, hydrolysis, oxidation, dehydration, and decarboxylation so
that rational reactor/process design can be done. A novel reactor configuration
is to be used that makes use of the differences in the de-polymerization
kinetics of hemicelluloses, cellulose, and lignin components of the biomass. The
reaction temperature and time can be reduced by the use of inexpensive alkali
catalysts (e.g., KB2BCOB3B, NaB2BCOB3B, KOH). This project will utilize the
concept of supercritical antisolvent (note: alkali salts are insoluble in
supercritical water due to low dielectric) to in-situ produce catalyst
nanoparticles whose newly generated high surface is expected to be highly
catalytic. Biomass of interest for this study includes hemicelluloses,
cellulose, lignin, switch grass, corn stover, and southern pine. Impact of
various process parameters on the overall energy efficiency will be studied.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact of the project is in the utilization of
biomass to address critical fuel supply needs. In this project itself, the
biocrude will be hydrogenated to produce gasoline, and reformed to produce
hydrogen. If successful, the results can open up a novel solution to the liquid
fuels for conventional transportation use and hydrogen for future fuel cell
cars. Biomass derived liquid or gaseous fuels have potential to provide a cost-
effective and sustainable supply of energy, while meeting the greenhouse gas
reduction targets. The training of the graduate and undergraduate students
(including minority students) will help transfer technology to the US industry
enhancing its competitiveness. In addition, interaction with K-12 teachers will
help bring the concepts of sustainable fuel to their classrooms. The successful
completion of this project could have an impact on the profitability of farming,
forest product, and pulp industries in the United States.