* 0828386
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Immigration and  Racial Conceptions
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2009
* Sarah Burgard, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2009
* USD 7,500.00

SES-0828386&lt;br/&gt;Sarah Burgard&lt;br/&gt;Tiffany
Joseph&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years, there has been significant research
conducted on racial classification and inequality in Brazil and the United
States. Given Brazil?s myth of racial democracy, a society where Brazilians of
mixed racial origins co-existed in peace, Brazil was considered a racial utopia
when compared to the US, a country where legally sanctioned racism oppressed
non-whites for centuries. However, Brazil's racial democracy is now considered
outdated, as many racial disparities have been documented in various studies.
Due to a history of more socially accepted racial-mixing and the popularity of
the racial democracy ideology, racial classification and race-based group
identities have been difficult to ascertain. The elusiveness of Brazilian racial
classification creates special challenges for Brazilians who immigrate to the
US, where, by contrast, distinct racial groups are the social reality. While
some research has shed light on the racializing experiences of certain Latino
immigrant groups in the US, few studies have investigated how Brazilian
immigrants interpret race in the US. Through conducting in-depth interviews with
Brazilian immigrants who have returned to Brazil (return migrants), this project
examines how Brazilian immigrant experiences in the US influence how they think
about race while in the US and upon returning to Brazil. This project is being
conducted in Governador Valadares, Brazil's largest immigrant-sending city to
the US; 15 percent of the city's population is estimated to be living in the US.
Unlike other immigrant-sending cities in Latin America, Valadares is unique
since many of its inhabitants (Valadarenses) do return and live in the city
after the US migration. To properly examine how US migration influences return
migrants' racial conceptions, a comparison group of Valadarenses who never
migrated (a sibling or cousin of each return migrant) will be included in the
study. The co-investigator will conduct in-depth interviews with fifty return
migrants and fifty non-migrants (men and women between ages 25 and 50.), which
explore:1) self-perceived racial classification; 2) defining race in Brazil
and/or the US, and 3) experiences of racism in Brazil and/or the US. The co-PI
will use Brazilian and US Census data to provide demographic information about
Valadares and the US Brazilian immigrant population. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts resulting from this project are: (1) a stronger knowledge of how
race is a social construction that changes over time and from place to place,
(2) how race in the US may influence immigrants' racial/ethnic identity choices,
and (3) understanding how race in the US is changing as a result of immigrant
incorporation. Furthermore, this project will help sociological researchers
better understand the intricacies of racial classification, racial/ethnic
identity formation, and the effects of transnational migration on racial
conceptions for an understudied immigrant group in the US. These are very
important themes to explore given recent debates on immigration reform and the
assimilation of current immigrants into US society.