* 0828006
* Aqueous-Alkaline/Carbonate Biocarbon Fuel Cell Development
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Michael Antal, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/2012
* USD 273,709.00

CBET-0828006&lt;br/&gt;Antal&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this project is the
development of an aqueous-alkaline/carbonate biocarbon fuel cell which performs
well while realizing electrolyte invariance by exploiting electrochemical
reactions that are favored at temperatures near 300 °C.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. Very large quantities of lignocellulosic
residues (e.g. corncobs, coconut shells) accompany the production of bioethanol
and biodiesel fuels. These residues can be efficiently and quickly converted
into biocarbons. Carbon fuel cells can generate electricity from these
biocarbons -as well as from coal, and other fossil carbons-with a theoretical
thermodynamic efficiency of 100%. A recent EPRI study indicates that carbon fuel
cells have the potential to convert biocarbons into electrical power at a system
level efficiency of about 60%, which is over 20% higher than the efficiencies
realized by current state-of-the-art integrated gasification combined cycle
(IGCC) or advanced pulverized coal power generation systems. Thus the production
of biocarbon can complement the production of bioethanol and biodiesel in a
biomass refinery that also produces electricity at a very high efficiency. Other
impacts include the training of two BS and two MS students, the involvement of
Hawaii Pacific University (HPU) faculty, and the development and inclusion of
new electrochemical engineering course material in the UH and HPU curricula. In
view of the fact that a college degree in chemical engineering is not offered in
the State of Hawaii, these impacts have special significance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit. This project is based on two
hypotheses. 1) At temperatures approaching 300 °C the aqueous-alkaline/carbonate
biocarbon fuel cell will offer an open circuit voltage (OCV) of about 1 V and a
steady, maximum power density that exceeds 100 mW/cm2. 2) During operation the
composition of the electrolyte will evolve towards an equilibrium mixture of
hydroxide and carbonate ions that afterwards will be invariant (i.e. stable).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cathode of this cell resembles that of a Bacon fuel
cell, where oxygen in air is reduced to hydroxide ion over a silver catalyst.
Thermodynamic analyses indicate that the cathode should perform well at
temperatures approaching 300 °C. Likewise, thermodynamic analyses indicate that
at these temperatures both the hydroxide ion and the carbonate ion (formed by
the reaction of CO2 with hydroxide ion) should vigorously oxidize the carbon
anode and release electrons; thereby generating power at high efficiency.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has three objectives: 1) to characterize the
oxidation behavior of anodic char-coal in the aqueous-alkaline/carbonate
environment of the fuel cell at temperatures near 300 °C; 2) to characterize the
stability of the electrolyte, together with the catalytic effects of differing
electrolytes on the anodic and cathodic reactions at temperatures near 300 °C;
and 3) to characterize the performance of the biocarbon anode as a working
electrode in a setup that includes a counter electrode, and flow of the
electrolyte through a heat exchanger bridge to a reference electrode maintained
at system pressure but at a much lower temperature.