* 0828249
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Mexican-Americans and the College Attendance Gap
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2009
* Sarah Ovink, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2009
* USD 7,500.00

SES-0828249 Dina Okamoto Sarah Ovink University of California-Davis

Latinos are the fastest-growing segment of the U.S. population, and also have
the nation?s lowest high school graduation rate and the largest gender gap in
high school attainment. These realities severely restrict the group?s potential
for college attainment, though more so for males than females. In the current
?college for all? culture of educational attainment, what influences the
divergent post-high school pathways of Mexican-American students, a large
proportion of the Latino population? This dissertation research studies the
influences, motivations, aspirations and expectations of Mexican-American
students and their potential contribution to gender disparities in their
postsecondary pathways. The research addresses the following questions, with an
emphasis on understanding gender differences in processes, mechanisms, and
outcomes: 1) What are the educational motivations, aspirations and expectations
of Mexican-American high school seniors? 2) What factors (including incentives
and resources) lead Mexican-American high school seniors to choose a college-
bound path? 3) What mechanisms can account for the formation of college
aspirations? 4) What do Mexican Americans perceive as the returns to college
completion? Do differing perceptions lead to differing aspirations and
expectations? The co-PI will interview 50 Mexican-American students attending
high schools in the San Francisco Bay Area. Interviews will take place at three
time-points as the students progress through their senior year and transition to
their postsecondary educational or labor force careers. These qualitative
findings will build a more comprehensive model of Mexican Americans?
postsecondary pathways and evaluate the generalizability of the model using the
Education Longitudinal Study of 2002 (ELS).

Broader Impacts. The research has implications for academic and policy debates
on differential attainment and educational inequalities among race/ethnic
groups. The focus on the Mexican-American gender gap will help to develop
educational policy that can aid the group as a whole, and Mexican-American males
in particular. The project will also broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups by including Mexican-American students as research
participants.. The dissertation research will serve as a means to mentor these
students, while training them in empirical research methods. Finally, research
findings will be disseminated at various academic conferences, such as the
American Sociological Association and American Educational Research Association
annual meetings.