* 0828765
* Non-situ Investigations of Surface Chemistry in a Model Electric Double Layer
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Will Medlin, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 08/31/2012
* USD 114,000.00

CBET-0828765&lt;br/&gt;Medlin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major challenge for
development of better electrocatalysts for fuel cell and other applications is
improving the understanding of surface reaction mechanisms at electrochemical
interfaces. Whereas major strides have been made in describing surface
reactivity at a metal-vacuum interface, catalytic reactions on metal electrodes
are typically characterized by a polarized metal-electrolyte interface. In part
because of the complexity of this interface, little study has been devoted to
modeling the influence of the electric double layer (EDL) environment on surface
reactivity. In this work, the effects of two important facets of the EDL on
surface processes will be studied in detail. First, the role of solvent-
adsorbate interactions in altering surface reaction pathways will be
characterized. Second, the influence of near-surface electric fields on those
same reactions will be investigated to determine how interactions of adsorbate
dipoles with interfacial electric fields can affect reaction mechanisms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed studies will be carried out using a so-called
non-situ approach, in which effects of the EDL will be modeled on single
crystals in ultrahigh vacuum, where powerful spectroscopic techniques may be
employed to characterize surface intermediates in detail. This approach is not
designed to provide a highly accurate simulation of a working electrocatalyst.
Instead, the goal is to identify the fundamental mechanisms by which the EDL
environment affects surface reactions. Temperature programmed desorption (TPD),
high resolution electron energy loss spectroscopy (HREELS), and work function
measurements, among other methods, will be employed to characterize the surfaces
under study, and density functional methods will be used for the required
theoretical studies. To investigate the effects of solvation, controlled amounts
of water and other solvents will be added above an adsorbate-covered surface and
subjected to various thermal treatments. The interface polarization studies will
largely be conducted by adsorbing strong electron donors, especially alkali
metals, together with surface adsorbates. The effects of solvation and
polarization will be probed for several key processes, such as oxygen adsorption
and dissociation, proton formation, and proton transfer. Because this research
deals with a fundamental study of surface processes essential for many
electrocatalytic processes, its potential for broad impact across disciplines is
great. For example, the ability to account for trends in solvation environment
and electrode potential is important for first-principles development of
improved electrocatalysts. The proposed work is partly motivated by preliminary
theoretical studies, and an additional objective of this work is to provide
experimental spectroscopic information to help validate ongoing and future
theoretical modeling efforts. The proposed studies will also provide insights
into mechanisms important for reactions conducted in acidic media, including
those associated with biorefinery conversions, and surface processes conducted
in the presence of electric fields. The PI will work with the National Society
of Black Engineers (NSBE) and the Society of Hispanic Professional Engineers
(SHPE) to recruit undergraduate researcher assistants to promote diversity
efforts in energy education. Outreach efforts to a local area high school
focused on communicating the ability of students to impact renewable energy
research are also planned.