* 0828728
* Optimization of Heating Pattern in Magnetic Nanoparticle Hyperthermia: Compuational and in vivo Experimental Study
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Ronghui Ma, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 08/31/2012
* USD 295,805.00

CBET-0828728&lt;br/&gt;Ma&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among available therapeutic
methods in cancer treatment, magnetic nanoparticle hyperthermia emerges as a
highly promising approach due to its simple implementation, low cost, and few
complications. In this process, magnetic particles delivered to tissue or blood
vessels induce heating when exposed to alternating magnetic fields. This
localized heat generation leads to thermal damage to the tumor. The employment
of nano-sized particles enables adequate amount of heat to be generated within
tumor tissue without necessitating heat penetration through the skin surface,
thus eliminating the consequent side effects of excessive collateral thermal
damage. Although the versatility of magnetic nanoparticle hyperthermia in
treating deep-seated/irregular shaped tumors is unsurpassed by traditional non-
invasive heating approaches, this method is severely limited by the lack of
controlling the temperature elevations during the process. The non-homogeneous
temperature distribution and inadequate temperature elevation in tumor tissue
may lead to inadequacy in killing tumor cells and/or damage to healthy tissue.
Multiple-site injection of nanoparticles has great potential for achieving a
desired temperature elevation throughout the entire tumor region, but requires
optimized injection strategy including injection sites, injection amount, and
injection rate. Therefore, in the proposed study an in vivo experimental study
of magnetic nanoparticle hyperthermia on tumors implanted on mice and a multi-
scale computational study of nanoparticle transport in biological tissue will be
performed with the aims of advancing understanding of nanofluid transport in
tumor and quantifying the heating patterns induced by these nanoparticles under
various therapeutic conditions. The ultimate outcome of this project is the
development of a global methodology for designing individualized treatment
protocol for irregular shaped tumors. Intellectual Merit: The findings of this
study will (1) significantly advance understanding of nanoparticle transport in
tissue and magnetic nanoparticle-induced heating pattern in hyperthermia
treatment of cancer; (2) provide a platform on which the effect of particle
properties, tissue microstructures, and injection strategy on the migration of
particles and heating patterns in tumors can be tested; (3) establish a database
describing the dependence of thermally affected region on injection parameters;
and (4) develop of an optimized treatment strategy using multi-site injection.
The capability of quantifying the induced heating pattern by nanoparticles in
tumors is an important advance that moves the treatment planning from an almost
empirical trial-and-error approach to a science-based engineering methodology.
Broader Impact: The proposed study will be integrated into our seminar series
and curricula for disseminating bio-nanotechnology as well as educating and
training students in an interdisciplinary setting. Both PIs have established
track records of commitment for promoting underrepresented minority students in
STEM fields. The funding will provide our students from diverse backgrounds with
ample research opportunities to engage in experiential training. Transformative
essence: This study will lead to a global methodology for designing an
optimized, patient-specific treatment protocol for magnetic nanoparticle
hyperthermia with maximum treatment outcomes in clinical applications. The
success of magnetic nanoparticle hyperthermia will offer cancer patients a low
cost treatment method that has high tumor cell-killing potential and minimal
complications. In addition, the study of nanoparticle migration in tissue will
benefit the study of nanotoxicology and site-specific drug delivery using
nanomaterials.&lt;br/&gt; This project is jointly funded by the Thermal
Transport Processes (TTP) Program, the Biomedical Engineering (BME) Program, and
the Fluid Dynamics (FD) Program, all of the Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental, and Transport Systems (CBET) Division within the Directorate for
Engineering (ENG).