* 0828441
* Plant Uptake and Interaction with Nanoparticles
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2008,09/30/2011
* Lee Newman, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara Karn
* 09/30/2011
* USD 277,908.00

CBET- 0828441&lt;br/&gt;Newman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanomaterials can exhibit
multiple physiochemical properties, including high electric conduction, high
tensile strength, heat tolerance, UV blocking and antimicrobial activity. They
are proposed for biomedical purposes such as imaging wound treatment, targeting
disease-causing and cancer cells, and delivery of therapeutic agents. Consumer
use includes sun blocks, make-up, clothing and electronic devices. Industrially,
their potential uses appear to be growing exponentially. Environmentally, they
have been proposed for enhancing the breakdown of organic contaminants and the
immobilization of inorganics. As with any new technology, rapid and abundant use
has the potential to lead to introduction into the environment, through consumer
use, industrial mishaps or intentional release. However, there are limited
numbers of studies that have looked at the impact these particles will have in
an environmental setting. Recent work has addressed the potential toxicity of
nanoparticles to humans, animals and clinically important bacteria. The
collective results of these studies are mixed with some researchers reporting
limited toxicity, while others show significant cellular impacts with exposure
to even the smallest particles. There has been almost no work performed to date
investigating the impact of nanoparticle exposure on plants. As plants are a
primary producer in the food chain, negative impacts on plant growth could lead
to significant trophic impacts as well as plant transfer of the particles.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this study, they will look at how plants and
nanoparticles interact. They will decipher the impact of particle size and shape
on uptake and translocation within the plant tissue, specifically focusing on
gold, silver and palladium particles, which between them currently used in
multiple applications. They will we be using the tomato plant, Lycopersicon
esculentum L. for these studies. They will examine plant-nanoparticle
interactions using multiple methods including: brightfield and fluorescent
microscopy to determine uptake and distribution, scanning and transmission
electron microscopy to look at uptake and potential damage to cellular
membranes, and synchrotron x-ray microspectroscopy to look at movement of gold
particles throughout the plant. These parameters will be measured on plants
exposed to nanoparticles both in bare solution and soils. This will allow them
to determine the impact of soils on bioavailability of the particles to plant
roots and subsequent uptake. They will also examine the plants on a genetic
level to determine changes in gene expression, using both microarray analysis
and quantitative real time-PCR and quantify those changes. Finally, they will
perform preliminary feeding studies to determine how ingested nanoparticles that
are part of a plant matrix will be retained in the insects that feed on the
plants. This project will be done in collaboration with scientists in the field
who have extensive experience in looking at toxicity, detection and
quantification of nanoparticles in various eukaryotic systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A better understanding of the potential impacts can have
broader impacts through supplying data for the introduction of important
regulations regarding use, disposal and introduction of nanomaterials in the
environment. What they learn here will be synthesized and transmitted to the
next generation of students and researchers so they can fully appreciate not
only the potential, but also the concerns about the uses of nanotechnology.