* 0828244
* Engineering Improved Retroviral Stability
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Martin Yarmush, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Kaiming Ye
* 08/31/2012
* USD 282,159.00

CBET-0828244&lt;br/&gt;M. Yarmush, Rutgers University New
Brunswick&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the proposed research is to
develop effective strategies to increase the stability and titer of retroviral
vectors for gene therapy applications. Recently, considerable effort has been
dedicated toward utilizing these, and other viral, vectors in a number of
clinical trials. Although several publications have described various degrees of
success, the clinical success of retroviral vectors is limited by the rapid rate
of viral inactivation and limited viral titers. Thus, a retrovirus with enhanced
intrinsic stability and high titer would alleviate some of the practical
obstacles limiting the success of retroviral vectors in the clinic. It is likely
that these principles could also be extended to other viral vectors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research seeks to accomplish the following:
(1) To determine the mechanisms underlying the loss of retroviral bioactivity
and the relative stability of the immature / mature viral particles; (2) To
optimize culture conditions and methods, in order to allow the production of
high-titer viral vectors; and (3) To modify the viral reverse transcriptase to
achieve higher efficiency viral replication. To achieve these goals, physical,
chemical, and molecular manipulation techniques will be used with the objective
of slowing the rate of retroviral decay and increasing retroviral titer.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will provide excellent training for the
graduate fellows involved in the project, as well as to students exposed to it
through various courses and training programs conducted by the investigators. In
addition, the PI will provide an excellent educational environment for various
high school and university-wide undergraduate research programs. The scientific
approach was designed not only to establish an excellent scientific program, but
also to expose students to state of the art technology and methodology through
both classroom instruction and direct laboratory interaction. The research
itself will provide valuable new information regarding the mechanisms of
retroviral decay and methods to address them. The experimental results are
likely to have a broad impact on the scientific and clinical venues which
utilize or are developing viral vector delivery protocols. In summary, the
proposed work seeks to provide fundamental research and a human base of
personnel equipped to solve problems related to the implementation of techniques
to improve suitability of viral vectors for gene therapy applications.
&lt;br/&gt;