* 0828905
* Structure Formation, Rheology and Internal Stress Dynamics in Shear Thickening Attractive Colloidal System
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2011
* Chinedum Osuji, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
*  Ashok S. Sangani
* 06/30/2011
* USD 306,000.00

CBET-0828905&lt;br/&gt;Osuji&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal outlines a
3-year plan of integrated research, teaching and outreach centered on complex
fluid rheology. Much effort has been devoted to understanding the flow behavior
of particulate laden fluids, with the underlying ubiquity of these materials in
industry a strong motivator. The recent observation of shear thickening in gel
forming colloidal systems presents an opportunity to contribute to the
fundamental understanding of the rheology of this important class of
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A. Scientific objectives&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
work is directed towards answering key questions regarding the observed shear
thickening, and to exploring several qualitatively new phenomena displayed by
shear thickened gels. This proposal describes a detailed plan for (1) the
characterization of shear thickening in these materials, (2) the study of
internal stress dynamics in stationary states and (3) the study of the evolution
of ordered anisotropic microstructures on shear deformation of such colloidal
gels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;B. Intellectual merit&lt;br/&gt;Significant attention
has been given to shear thickening in repulsive and hard sphere systems. By
contrast, in flocculating systems, which constitute the majority of industrial
applications, shear thickening has neither been predicted nor explored. The
proposed study addresses this gap and will elucidate the origin of shear
thickening in attractive systems as well as the dependence on interaction
strength and volume fraction. It will constitute the first quantitative study of
short and long timescale dynamics of stresses that result on system quenches
from the liquid to the gel state in soft materials. Finally, it will provide a
new look, with unparalleled detail, at the formation of anisotropic vorticity-
aligned aggregates in a complex fluid under flow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;C.
Broader impact&lt;br/&gt;1. Technical impact&lt;br/&gt;Fumed particles are
commodity materials with sales measured in millions of tonnes and applications
in all manner of formulations and products. The rheology of filled Newtonian and
viscoelastic fluids is an active research area for exactly this reason, and
scientific exchange between industry and academia is common. The PI maintains a
relationship with Cabot Corp., and their personnel often attend meetings of the
local complex fluids community, facilitating further interactions. There are
also technical exchanges with industry concerning rheometer design and
operation.&lt;br/&gt;2. Education and Outreach&lt;br/&gt;The PI is a new faculty
member with a strong interest in education and outreach. This project will
actively seek the participation of underrepresented groups for three
undergraduate research projects. Graduate students will gain a broad
experimental background in complex fluids and be involved in education through
teaching, mentorships of undergraduates and local outreach events. As part of a
broader thrust in complex fluids/soft materials research at Yale, the PI will
develop coursework incorporating themes from the project in a module on complex
fluid rheology. Results will be published on an interactive website and will be
regularly presented at the quarterly meetings of the regional New England
Complex Fluids Workgroup (NECF) as well as at national meetings.