* 0828912
* GOALI: The Assessment of Stent Effectiveness using a Wearable MEMS Microphone Array System
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2008,03/31/2011
* Yasemin Akay, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 03/31/2011
* USD 318,001.00

CBET-0828912&lt;br/&gt;Akay&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coronary artery disease (CAD)
is one of the leading causes of death in the world with one third of all deaths
attributed to this disease. It was estimated that 6 million patients have
received drug eluting stents world wide which may pose the potential risk of sub
acute thrombosis. Restenosis can occur up to one year or more after implantation
of the stent device. A thrombosis that occurs this far after the stent has been
inserted is fatal in 45% of cases. Because late stent thrombosis is such a
serious complication after angioplasty it is important to be able to quantify
the progression of restenosis in follow-up visits. If occlusion can be
quantified by a simple auscultation instrument placed externally on the chest of
the patient then restenosis can be monitored and an intervention can be
scheduled before a fatal thrombosis occurs. This alternate instrumentation for
stent patient monitoring also offers a significant cost reduction as it takes
the place of performing an angiography or ultrasound to determine if there is an
occlusion in the artery. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this GOALI Project, the
research team will develop a wearable auscultation system to improve the
detection and localization of coronary occlusions using an approach based on the
recording and analysis of isolated diastolic heart sounds associated with
turbulent blood flow in occluded coronary arteries. The wearable system consists
of an intelligent, small-size, low noise and high dynamic range MEMS microphone
array for the recording, and a handheld system for preprocessing and wireless
transmission of turbulent heart sounds associated with coronary occlusions. Due
to their precisely matched response, the proposed microphone-array system will
enable high accuracy localization, and directionality of the acoustic source.
The system also incorporates advanced processing and visualization techniques
using a personal digital assistant (PDA) system for the analysis of sounds.
Given the risks associated with the stent placement within the coronary
arteries, the aim of this study is to investigate the ability of a highly
specialized auscultation system to detect the severity and location of coronary
artery stenoses before and after the stent placement. An additional long-term
clinical goal is to investigate the diagnostic ability of the system to assess
whether bare metal or drug eluting stents are related to higher incidence of
restenosis by collecting follow up data from patients enrolled in the study for
more than two years. Fundamental research on the development of MEMS microphone
array, micro electronics and wireless system will be performed in collaboration
with the industrial partner, Renegesis, Biomedical Inc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed system can also be used for the investigation of peripheral vascular
diseases including renal artery and carotid occlusions as well as lower
extremity occlusions. It can also be used in detection of valvular heart
disease. In addition, the project provides an interdisciplinary environment for
interactions between engineers, physicians, medical physicists and industry and
will further enhance the academic and research interactions between academic,
industry and clinics.