* 0828492
* RAPD: Eye-Hand Coordination Assessment/Therapy Using a Robotic Haptic System
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Norali Pernalete, Cal Poly Pomona Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Ted A. Conway
* 12/31/2011
* USD 220,002.00

CBET-0828492&lt;br/&gt;Pernalete&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Children with genetic
anomalies or neurological disorders often require treatment in order to improve
their eye-hand coordination and grip strength so that they may increase their
level of participation in classroom and daily living activities [15]. The goal
of this project is to develop a robotic haptic system that assesses and improves
the eye-hand coordination and strength of children with these challenges. To
attain this goal, the current thinking regarding the relationship between
coordination and grip strength will be assessed and the population of children
who could benefit the most from this research will be identified (Objective
One). Next, six tasks with distinguishable levels of difficulty will be
identified based upon a detailed analysis of patterns (Objective Two).
Algorithms that support the children?s use of the robotic devices, but which do
not override the commands made by the child, will be incorporated into the
system (Objective Three). A fuzzy logic-based intelligent decision support
system will be integrated into the proposed system which will facilitate the
selection of tests by the system based upon accuracy and time measurements
(Objective Four). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, handwriting serves as
the measurable outcome due to the broader implications of enhanced writing
skills on academic performance tasks such as reading, writing, and speaking.
Learning to write is an important and complex occupation of children [5, 10].
Further, writing is the primary way for students to communicate with and to
display what has been learned [14]. In a public school setting, problems with
handwriting or drawing typically result in referrals for occupational therapy
services [9]. Improvements in eye-hand coordination will also enhance the
ability of children to perform daily living tasks (dressing, feeding), which in
turn, may result in more opportunities for employment and other contributions to
society as they enter adulthood. The testbed to be used consists of a six-
degrees-of-freedom force-reflecting haptic interface device, PHANToM - with the
software development toolkits. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
this project is to provide innovative research to improve eye-hand coordination,
which in turn will allow children to increase their participation in various
occupational activities including those of daily living and in the classrooms
(i.e., handwriting). The system will use robotic mapping from a haptic user
interface to a virtual environment along with an intelligent decision support
system. In the case of the eye-hand coordination, we employ the sense of touch
because the individual does not possess a well-developed visual feedback to
control his/her movements. The principle investigator (PI) has conducted
extensive research in the application of haptics to the execution of various
occupational therapy tests by people with disabilities. In addition, the PI has
close working relationships with the Rehabilitation Robotics Laboratory at the
University of South Florida and with the Occupational Therapy Department at
Western Michigan University and is exploring local collaborations with Rancho
Los Amigos National Rehabilitation Center. Preliminary data [13] obtained from a
single subjects study of children diagnosed with eye-hand coordination problems
indicate an improvement in the ability of the children to execute and complete
the tasks. The results suggest that this proposed system could be used for
assessment and training purposes. Also, the data suggests that the introduction
of the haptic rendering capabilities, including the force feedback, offers
special benefit and measures the impact on eye-hand coordination and the
occupation of handwriting. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact is two-fold:
It provides innovative research in rehabilitation robotics to the engineering
and the health sciences community and its integration into the curriculum at the
undergraduate and graduate levels within the various departments in the College
of Engineering represents a new area of research for students. They will be able
to experience the interdisciplinary nature of Robotic Systems within the context
of Rehabilitation Engineering. Given the preliminary data, this system has the
potential for reducing the burden and costs associated with the use of a trained
professional to assess the disability and to conduct training sessions with the
individual. Furthermore, this design may enhance the type and amount of data
that clinicians use to assess and plan the respective treatment for improving
eye-hand coordination and grasp strength. Finally, an extension of this system
could include the identification of specific job tasks that could be accessed
through a computer desktop as a training tool for individuals with various forms
of disabilities in activities of daily living (ADL).