* 0828537
* Individual Nomination
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Benjamin Flores, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Richard A. Alo
* 08/31/2011
* USD 10,000.00

BENJAMIN C. FLORES University of Texas at El Paso

Dr. Benjamin Flores has, over the course of 18 years of service, sustained
effective mentoring and guidance efforts that have significantly enhanced the
participation of underrepresented groups in STEM disciplines. He serves as an
exemplary leader in the national effort to develop a fully diversified
workforce. Dr. Flores has been a dedicated counselor and guide for the local
student chapters of the Institute of Electrical and Computer Engineers, the
Electrical Engineering Honor Society, the Engineering Honor Society, the
National Society of Black Engineers, the American Society for Engineering
Education, the Society of Women in Engineers, and the Mexican Student
Association. In this capacity, he has worked tirelessly to organize and expose
scores of engineering student leaders to professional development activities.
Under Dr. Flores' leadership, Academic Center for Engineers and Scientists has
expanded to serve an average of 900 students per day and has provided employment
on campus to more than 200 students. Dr. Flores is also responsible for
implementing the Women in Science and Engineering (WiSE) program, which provided
support to 250 undergraduate female students. Through WiSE, Dr. Flores developed
activities that reached out and promoted STEM careers to more than 300 middle
school girls and their parents. In addition, Dr. Flores directed the first
centralized undergraduate STEM research program on campus which supported 303
undergraduate students between 1996 and 2003. The program is now recognized
nationwide as a highly successful model for Hispanic student retention,
graduation and recruiting into graduate school. Currently, Dr. Flores directs
the University of Texas System Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation

Dr. Flores has played a principal role in developing a robust mentoring and
support model for under-represented minority student success. He has published
numerous refereed conference articles that advance the understanding of student
mentoring and guidance and has offered dozens of key note speeches in the United
States, Mexico, and Chile, promoting access to education and student success
through role models. He has collaborated with institutions in Texas and with
several minority serving institutions throughout the United States on promoting
the transformation of STEM education.