* 0828950
* Collaborative Research: Soot Formation in Time-Varying Nonpremixed Flames
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2008,10/31/2012
* J. Houston Miller, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* William Olbricht
* 10/31/2012
* USD 257,626.00

CBET-0828950&lt;br/&gt;Miller&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Combustion-generated soot
particulates from land-based sources are now acknowledged to pose a significant
health risk and have been the subject of stringent new EPA regulations. From the
engine designer's standpoint, the concern about soot goes beyond these
regulatory issues. High soot concentrations in combustor primary zones
contribute to high thermal radiation loads on combustor liners. Soot coatings on
liner surfaces drastically increase underlying metal temperatures. These issues
are exacerbated by the high pressures at which new combustors are operated,
because soot production is very sensitive to pressure. If soot and the problems
associated with it are to be controlled, quantitative understanding of the soot
growth and oxidation mechanisms is essential.&lt;br/&gt;In this collaborative
research award, groups at Yale and George Washington University are studying
molecular-growth chemistry in forced, time-varying flames. Major species
concentrations, small radical concentrations, velocity, and temperature are
determined using a suite of laser-based techniques. Both major and trace
hydrocarbon species are sampled using a novel pulsed microprobe coupled to a
mass spectrometer. They are also performing new optical diagnostics to quantify
the concentration of acetylene in regions inaccessible to probe sampling and to
follow PAH molecular growth and aggregation. The experimental work will be
complemented by time-dependent computations of flame structure that include
molecular growth chemistry. The proposed work will provide critical insight into
the subtle interplay between molecular growth chemistry and the time-temperature
history experienced by a packet of fluid. The goal of the work is not only to
obtain experimental data for a rigorous test of competing soot growth models,
but also to guide the development of our intuitive understanding of the process.
&lt;br/&gt;Within the team, each PI leads specific project areas: Marshall Long
coordinates the optical diagnostics activities, J. Houston Miller supervises the
extractive sampling and line-of-sight optical diagnostic activities, and
Mitchell Smooke leads the computational efforts. Data "mining" and
interpretation proceed collaboratively.&lt;br/&gt;An essential component of the
proposed work is education of undergraduate and graduate students in chemistry
and mechanical engineering. Results of this work will feed into educational
outreach activities in their communities, including (1) the six-week Frontiers
of Science program, designed to expose high school juniors and seniors to
leading-edge scientific research, (2) the Yale-New Haven Futures in Science
Research Fellowship, which supports a summer research collaboration between a
New Haven high school student and a Yale graduate student or post-doc supervised
by a Yale faculty member, and (3) the Piedmont Environment and Education
Foundation, a newly-chartered nonprofit incorporated in the State of Maryland,
established to promote environmental science educational programs for middle and
secondary schools in the District of Columbia and suburban Maryland.