* 0828897
* New Strategies for Improved Molecuarly Imprinted Polymers
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2011
* Ken Shimizu, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 07/31/2011
* USD 250,000.00

CBET-0828897&lt;br/&gt;Shimizu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF award by the
Chemical and Biological Separations program supports work by Professor Ken D.
Shimizu at the University of South Carolina at Columbia to develop polymers with
recognition properties for use in chromatography and sensing applications. The
molecular imprinting approach will be utilized to quickly and efficiently
prepare polymers with desired affinities and selectivities. However, the
imprinting process is also a low fidelity process that generates binding sites
with a wide range of structures, affinities, and selectivities. This binding
site heterogeneity has hindered the wider adoption of molecularly imprinted
materials. Three new molecular imprinting strategies have been developed to
specifically address the problem of binding site heterogeneity in imprinted
polymers. These are: 1) development of multifunctional monomers, 2) site-
specific post-modification strategies, and 3) template activated monomers. An
advantage of these new strategies is that they can be used in tandem to optimize
and tailor the binding properties of the polymers for specific applications. To
demonstrate the utility of these new methods, imprinted polymers will be
developed for use in an enantiomeric excess (ee) assay and for use as a chiral
separation support in a HPLC column. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts
of the proposed research will be development of methods to rapidly and
inexpensively prepare polymers with tailored recognition properties. The
improved binding properties of the imprinted materials will be widely applicable
in analytical and biotechnical applications. These include catalysis, sensing,
solid-phase extraction, drug delivery, and chromatography. The students working
on this project will receive a highly multidisciplinary education, preparing
them for research careers in polymer, pharmaceutical, and analytical
chemistries. The award will also assist in supporting two outreach activities.
The first is an outreach program for K-12 schools. The students are give
chemical demonstrations in the areas schools with a focus on schools with a
predominantly minority population. The second educational program is the
development of a hands-on laboratory experience for high school students. The
program brings high school classes to the University of South Carolina for a
day. A molecular imprinted polymer laboratory has been designed, which exposes
the students to cutting edge research. Additional interactive activities and
tours are incorporated to introduce them to the scientific research environment.