* 0828165
* High-Resolution Laser Diagnostics and Modeling of Single-Walled Carbon Nanotube Synthesis by Plasma-Enhanced CVD
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Timothy Fisher, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 09/30/2012
* USD 327,444.00

CBET-0828165&lt;br/&gt;Lucht&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to develop
key science for developing controlled synthesis of single-wall carbon nanotubes
(SWCNTs) by plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD). Carbon nanotubes
have been shown to produce a wide range of outstanding physical properties with
important technical and societal implications. However, some crucial properties
depend strongly on material parameters that, to date, have been largely
uncontrollable in the synthesis process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Well controlled
fabrication of carbon nanotubes could enable breakthroughs across a vast range
of applications, including ultrafast field-effect transistors and nanoelectronic
circuits, direct energy-conversion processes, field-emission devices, high-
temperature superconductors, textile fibers, and high-thermal-conductivity
films. In addition, the microwave plasma has potentially very high
concentrations of species such as CH3 and C-atom. These species are very
important in combustion chemistry, but diagnostic techniques for these species
are not well developed. The H2/CH4 plasma is thus of great interest as a testbed
for the development of new optical diagnostic techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
technique pioneered by the research team aids synthesis by reducing
concentration of atomic hydrogen from the growth surface, where they etch SWCNTs
even at room temperature. The key is applying a positive electrical bias to the
growth surface to repel H+ ions from it. Although the role of atomic H appears
to be critical in these new processes, very little is known about the
composition of the plasma near the growth surface. Spatially resolved optical
measurements and complementary models, to be applied and developed in this work,
are critical to understanding the role of species such as atomic H and carbon-
containing precursors to CNT synthesis. The knowledge gained in this work is
expected to enable the creation of synthesis protocols and models that in turn
will aid the longer-term goal of controlled synthesis of CNT materials,
structures, and devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed program will expose
mechanical engineering graduate students to additional areas of science and
engineering, such as molecular electronics and plasma physics, through existing
collaborations with electrical engineers, material scientists, physicists, and
chemists. In addition, exciting new research on nanotechnology and laser
diagnostics will strongly attract domestic students into science and technology
research careers through participation in Purdue's Summer Undergraduate Research
Fellowship (SURF) program.