* 0828816
* Individual Nomination
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Richard Zare, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Philis S. Hauser
* 08/31/2011
* USD 10,000.00

RICHARD N. ZARE Stanford University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prof.
Richard N. Zare is the Marguerite Blake Wilbur Professor in Natural Science at
Stanford University. He is Chair of the Department of Chemistry at Stanford
University and a Howard Hughes Medical Institute (HHMI) Professor. Professor
Zare is renowned for his research in the area of laser chemistry, resulting in a
greater understanding of chemical reactions at the molecular level. By
experimental and theoretical studies he has made seminal contributions to our
knowledge of molecular collision processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Richard
Zare's mentoring interests are directed at improving opportunities for all
students, but he is passionate about gender and ethnic equity in STEM. He has
developed a stellar 40 year career as a scientist, educator, and leader in
public science. Some of his distinguished recognitions include receiving the
National Medal of Science, the National Academy of Sciences award in Chemistry
and serving as a member of the National Science Board. He has had a national
impact as a role model and author and his interests and career success place him
in the position to serve as a role model for effective mentoring of women and
minorities in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;He has mentored 49 postdocs and
graduate students who are women or minorities. Of these, 17 became faculty in
chemistry or physics. The addition of this number of minority faculty from a
tier one research institution could have a profound effect on the higher
education community. The minority students mentored by Dr. Zare are very
diverse, with African American, Hispanic, Pacific Islanders and Native American
being represented. These student outcomes represent a significant contribution
to the science and academe workforce as well as meaningful membership of women
and underrepresented minorities in the scientific
enterprise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Zare has recognized that gender
discrimination is embedded in our culture. Through presentations and articles,
he has endorsed the use of Title IX to address the lack of equity in science,
just as the federal law has been used to promote equity in athletics. Within two
months of becoming Chair of the Chemistry Department at Stanford University, Dr.
Zare announced what may have been the country's most generous maternity-leave
policy for graduate students in chemistry. Dr. Zare worked with the Stanford
University Clayman Institute for Gender Research and the Stanford Chemistry
Woman's Committee on Graduate Life (WCGL) to develop a questionnaire to examine
practices, attitudes and behaviors towards gender issues in science.