* 0828239
* Collaborative Research: Biologically Inspired Robotic Microswimmers
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Kenneth Breuer, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 08/31/2012
* USD 252,507.00

CBET-0828239 Breuer

Bacterial flagellar propulsion represents an extraordinary system in nature for
generating motion at the micrometer scale due to their unique molecular
polymeric structure adapting to different shapes, depending on the local
chemical and flow conditions. Their motion induces a local flow that can be used
to propel cells, as well as much larger structures through a fluid environment.
This collaborative research team plans to understand, to model and to exploit
the physics of flagellar propulsion for use in engineered microfluidic systems.
The objective of the program is to understand the fundamental scientific
principles that govern the assembly and operation of flagellar-propelled devices
(both single swimmers and collectively-powered devices), as well as to
demonstrate the enabling technologies necessary to harness polymeric protein
nanostructures such as bacterial flagellar filaments on microstructures for use
in micron-scale engineered propulsion systems. This collaborative proposal
between Drexel University and Brown University is the first to focus on the
specific characteristics associated with the polymorphic transformation of
bacterial flagellar filaments to demonstrate the ability to move larger
engineered elements through a microfluidic landscape in a controlled and
directed manner. Fundamental scientific merits addressed by this proposal
include using nanoscale flagellar filaments in engineered systems for micron-
scale propulsion. Basic questions are to be answered regarding the mechanisms
leading to self-coordination of flagellar filaments in responses to a variety of
external stimuli. Possible coordination of flagellar filaments to transport
microstructures in various microfluidic environments will be examined, thus
enabling an entirely new class of swimming robotic systems with applications to
bio-engineered actuators, drug delivery systems, and machines for micron-scale
transport and assembly. Demonstration of the control of bacterial flagellar
filaments at micro- and nanoscales and the ability to integration information
technology with bio and nanotechnology will have great impact. The program will
have an intensive outreach component, including active recruitment and training
of women and underrepresented minorities engineers leveraging and expanding
existing and proven programs already in place at Brown and Drexel and outreach
to inner-city high school student and teacher populations in both Providence and
Philadelphia through the BROWNOUT (Brown) and INSPIRE (Drexel) programs. These
enable in-classroom training and teacher-in-residence programs at the university
campuses.