* 0828114
* Collaborative Research: Adaptive Control and Functional Electrical Stimulation for the Control and Understanding of Muscle Dynamics.
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Alexander Leonessa, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Kaiming Ye
* 08/31/2012
* USD 208,003.00

CBET-0828114&lt;br/&gt;Leonessa&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Functional electrical
stimulation (FES) is a neuroprosthesis technique used to restore the motor
function of individuals with spinal cord injuries (SCI). For SCI patients, there
are some muscles below the injury level which are still innervated, though not
volitionally controllable. The principle of FES is to use surface or implantable
electrodes to generate pulses of current in intact motor neurons. This is done
to induce contraction of these muscles and corresponding joint movement.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several challenges hinder the application of closed-loop
FES outside of research labs, such as that muscles present highly nonlinear and
time-varying characteristics. Furthermore, a stimulated muscle changes when
fatigue occurs, and muscle models are different for each individual type of
muscle. Even more challenging is the fact that there is a significant delay
between stimulation and muscle contraction, adding to the processing and
transmission delays in the electrical stimulation system.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research efforts in this project will focus on the
development a Model Reference Adaptive Control approach which utilizes the
approximation capabilities of Neural Networks. This approach addresses several
open problems including uncertain and unmodeled dynamics, actuator dynamics,
actuator amplitude and rate saturations, delays, and discrete and real-time
implementation. The control algorithm is tested using a muscle-driven forward
dynamic model of the lower limb as implemented using OpenSim, a publicly-
available musculoskeletal modeling and simulation software environment. An
experimental setup is developed to test, understand, and compare muscle dynamics
in both open and closed-loop situations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The merit of this
effort includes the extension of current nonlinear control techniques, such as
backstepping, dynamic surfacing, and model reference adaptive control, to
account for time delays, actuator amplitude and rate saturation limitations, and
partial and noisy measurements, thereby substantially increasing the practical
applicability of such algorithms. The real-time implementation and the
requirement that the FES equipment is easy to setup and simple to use by
therapists and patients add additional constraints to the control structure,
which needs to be robust yet not overly complicated. Advanced control techniques
developed by control engineers have not previously been merged with the advanced
neuromusculoskeletal models and the biological understanding of clinicians and
biomechanists. Doing so will increase knowledge of muscle characteristics and
could lead to the development of an enhanced prosthetic system.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research effort offers many potential benefits to
society, including the possibility of improving the quality of life for patients
with paralysis, as well as individuals with other neuromuscular disability
including traumatic brain injury, multiple sclerosis, and cerebral palsy.
Development of a robust control strategy in cooperation with muscle-driven
simulations of movement will provide a framework for guiding rehabilitation
strategies for specific impairments. Through a potential future collaboration
with rehabilitation researchers and clinicians on the Wake Forest medical
campus, the techniques developed as part of this effort will be applied to
specific patient populations. From an educational point of view, students from
the Mechanical Engineering and Human Nutrition, Foods and Exercise Departments,
and Biomedical Engineering will work together to learn and experience in
lectures and labs the application of closed loop control techniques to
bioengineering problems, bolstering their interest in this field. The
interdisciplinary aspects of bioengineering will be covered and disseminated
through course development and outreach.