* 0828466
* Encapsulated phase change nanoparticles for heat transfer
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Louis Chow, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 07/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

CBET-0828466&lt;br/&gt;Su&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A several-fold increase in power
density is anticipated in future electronics and laser components. In order to
keep the temperature of devices such as semiconductors and lasers to be cooled
within a few degrees Celsius using microchannels, novel coolants with high heat
capacity are needed. This project proposes the use of novel high heat capacity
nanomaterials for active thermal management. For this purpose, fundamental
issues associated with the nanomaterials will be studied in intricate detail.
This research will focus on the synthesis and characterization of nanoparticles,
the compatibility of the nanoparticles with water, and the measurement of
thermophysical properties of the novel fluid. Special attention will be given to
the structure-property correlation, the size- and interface-dependent phase
change behavior of nanoparticles. The ultimate goal of the project is to
integrate the areas of nanomaterial chemistry, heat transfer and thermodynamics
in the form of nanoparticle synthesis, surface modification, thermophysical
property measurements and microchannel heat transfer to study the fundamentals
of next generation coolants with large heat capacity at a desired temperature
range. The concept to use nanoparticles to increase heat capacity is important,
and the realization of such a system in heat transport could potentially impact
the area. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: Most of the research in nanofluids
until now has focused only on improving the thermal conductivity; the concept of
using nanomaterial in a carrier fluid and thus increase the heat capacity of the
coolant is creative and original. This has the transformative potential to
significantly impact the field of heat transfer. If successful, this research
project will provide new knowledge on size- and interface-dependent
thermophysical properties of nanomaterials (i.e. melting temperature and latent
heat of fusion), which are indispensible for the rationale design of novel heat
transfer fluids. The synergistic efforts of the PIs combining the fundamental
aspects of surface and colloidal chemistry with those in thermodynamics and heat
transfer would pave the way for a novel multidisciplinary approach. As a result,
research especially in the areas of nanomaterial synthesis and novel cooling
solutions of high heat flux electronics would be intellectually impacted.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: The encapsulated nanoparticles are important for low
temperature heat removal in microelectronic devices. The outcome of this project
broadly helps in the advancement of the science of physical chemistry and the
technology of active thermal management of high power microelectronics and
lasers. The proposal also outlines plans on how to use this novel concept of
heat transfer to provide a broad impact on education at various levels. The
clear pathway to the exploratory concepts will be attractive to middle and high
school students, helping to ignite their interests in science and engineering.
The activities associated with the development and characterization of
encapsulated phase change nanoparticles are highly instructive for graduate
students in developing scientific habit of critical thinking, creative problem-
solving and building advanced engineering platforms on fundamental technologies
and advanced materials. The proposed research will form the cores of two PhD
dissertations.