* 0828479
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Media, Social Context and Public Discourse
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2009
* Peter Brinson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2009
* USD 7,499.00

Pamela E. Oliver (PI), Peter K. Brinson (Co-PI)

Institution: University of Wisconsin, Madison

Title: Doctoral Dissertation Research: Media, Social Context, and Public
Discourse

0828479

Abstract

This research project will examine the process by which different groups of
people draw from their cognitive beliefs, attitudes, feelings, and moral values
to develop specific opinions about same-sex marriage and civil unions. Data will
be gathered through focus group interviews of people living in the American
Midwest to analyze how people talk about, conceive, and understand same-sex
marriage and unions. One goal is to examine how people mobilize cultural
understandings as they construct opinions about contentious issues. This project
uses the case of same-sex marriage and civil unions to examine both how people
are constrained by the ?structure? of culture, and how people use culture
?pragmatically? in order to make sense of the debate. Focus group participants
will be drawn from a variety of already-existing groups in civil society to
ensure a diversity of perspectives between groups. The transcripts of the focus
group discussion will be coded and analyzed both qualitatively and
quantitatively. One level of analysis will identify the discursive similarities
and differences among group discussions, including the group dynamics, cultural
attitudes and beliefs, frames, points of agreement and disagreement, and
argumentative logics and resources. A second level of analysis will relate
discursive similarities and differences to differences between groups. Special
attention will be given to differences among the ideological and social context
of interaction in each group, including discursive differences between the
younger and older generations and those between the groups in civil society from
which focus groups are drawn (e.g. recreational, religious). The results of this
study will be publicized and disseminated broadly in order to shed light on
politics of same-sex unions, and provide a greater depth of knowledge about
where people?s attitudes about same-sex unions. This dissertation research will
contribute both to the specific debate about legalizing same-sex relationships
and to the more general understanding of the relationship between political
discourse and democracy. More broadly, this research will be relevant to debates
about the tenor of political discourse in the United States: whether political
discourse today is too extreme or too tepid, whether ideological differences
reflect irreconcilable ?culture wars,? or whether the political system
artificially constrains the terms of political debate to the ideological
?middle.? Finally, this study will contribute to this debate by examining how
people in different social contexts talk about one controversial issue in both
similar and different ways?how culture both facilitates and constrains public
discourse.