* 0828544
* High Efficiency Bio-electrolytic Hydrogen Production from Biomass Using Nanostructure-Decorated Electrodes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Jun Jiao, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul L. Bishop
* 08/31/2010
* USD 90,000.00

CBET-0828544 Liu

Hydrogen fuel cells show great potential in energy conversion systems due to
their high efficiencies in converting hydrogen to electricity. However,
currently over 95% of the hydrogen supply in the US is derived from non-
renewable materials, including coal, oil, and natural gas. Bio-electrolysis
demonstrates a completely new avenue for sustainable hydrogen production from
renewable biomass. It has great potential to become an economically feasible
approach for hydrogen production due to its high hydrogen yield compared to
fermentative hydrogen production and much lower energy requirement.

This research combines the strengths of microbes and nanoscale materials with a
focus on the development of novel electrode materials suitable for renewable
hydrogen production in bio-electrolyzers to yield a high production rate with
low energy consumption. The completion of this research will not only enable a
breakthrough in the development of highly efficient electrode materials, but
also enhance the understanding of the fundamental issues in hydrogen production
from biomass. The specific issues include how nanofibrils affect bacterial
adhesion, gene expression, and electron transfer at the bacteria/electrode
interface, and how choice of bacterial species and environmental factors affect
hydrogen production.

The proposed research will allow clean and renewable energy (hydrogen) to be
produced from biomass. The concomitant treatment of waste during the hydrogen
generation process will strengthen the environmental sustainability and benefit
human health. Generating energy from agricultural and industrial waste biomass
will bring economic benefit to farmers and industries. The knowledge obtained
from this research will lead to a better understanding of both the mechanisms of
biological electron transfer at microbe/electrode interface and the impact
nanomaterials have on the formation and physiology of biofilm, an impact that
will have significant implications for many environmental, biomedical, and
industrial applications, such as bioremediation and biosensors. Two graduate
students will be supported by this project; one of them will be from a minority
underrepresented in science. This research will also provide summer research
opportunities for two REU students participating in the NSF-REU site at PSU.
Additionally, the research results will be integrated into a graduate course at
OSU, "BEE 694: Nanotechnology in Biological Systems".