* 0828874
* Suppression of shear-induced blood damage in cardiovascular systems
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Ajit Yoganathan, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 07/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

CBET-0828874&lt;br/&gt;Yoganathan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program
focuses on developing an attractive way to mitigate the adverse effects of high
shear stress in cardiovascular hardware by investigating miniature, surface-
integrated passive flow control elements (e.g., vortex generators, riblets,
dimples, etc.). Blood damage caused by flow shear can cause thromboembolic
complications that seriously limit the performance of a broad range of
cardiovascular hardware including prosthetic valves, bypass pumps, and assist
device. In particular, recent work with bileaflet mechanical heart valves has
emphasized the significant risk of thromboembolic complications when blood
elements are subjected to non-physiological hemodynamic shear stresses.
Currently, patients with mechanical heart valves must undergo lifelong anti-
coagulant therapy as a preventive measure against thromboembolic complications,
but at an increased risk of hemorrhage and other secondary complications. An
attractive way to mitigate the adverse effects of high shear stress in
cardiovascular hardware is to use miniature, surface-integrated passive flow
control elements (e.g., vortex generators, riblets, dimples, etc.) to alter the
internal velocity distributions at known critical areas of high shear and
thereby directly minimize these stresses. These passive flow control elements
which in many cases have been bio-inspired, manipulate and manage secondary
vorticity concentrations within the flow and thereby enhance cross stream
mixing, momentum transfer, and alter local velocity and shear stress
distributions. Although preliminary work demonstrates the viability of the
approach, further exploration and optimization of various passive flow control
configurations is necessary to take the technology to the next level. The
broader impact of this research program is the development of a new design
paradigm or technology, applicable to any cardiovascular hardware, based on the
flow control principles developed here. The proposed work will focus on a simple
cardiovascular test-bed system comprised of an idealized heart valve fitted with
passive vortex generator arrays and other configurations. Different passive flow
control configurations (rigid, flexible, geometries) will be explored and
optimized. The effect of the secondary flow (streamwise vorticity) induced by
the passive vortex generators on the momentary turbulent jet that forms when the
leaflets close will be investigated in the pulsatile flow loop facility using
highresolution, phase-locked particle image velocimetry (PIV). In addition to
fluid mechanical evaluation, the pro-coagulant properties of optimized
configurations of passive flow control configurations will be characterized and
compared to a baseline flow in the absence of flow control. Similar to the
recent preliminary blood investigations at Georgia Tech, the proposed blood
studies will focus on measures of blood coagulation, platelet activation, and
hemolysis. The study will directly involve participating Georgia Tech graduate
and undergraduate students. Particular emphasis will be placed on collaboration
and testing in configuration of practical interest. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is jointly funded by the Thermal Transport Processes (TTP) Program, the
Biomedical Engineering (BME) Program, and the Fluid Dynamics (FD) Program, all
of the Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems (CBET)
Division within the Directorate for Engineering (ENG).