* 0828940
* COSEE New Collaborations: Toward broader Ocean Learning Communities through field research learning.
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Frederick Stahr, Ocean Inquiry Project
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 08/31/2012
* USD 133,396.00

Ocean Inquiry Project (OIP) will collaborate with COSEE Ocean Learning
Communities (COSEE-OLC) to create, promote, and study learning collaborations
among diverse communities that care about the oceanic environment, a specific
goal of COSEE-OLC. Both OIP and COSEE-OLC share the goal of making citizens more
knowledgeable about ocean science and informed by current research in order to
become better, more involved stewards of the marine
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;COSEE-OLC is currently developing an Ocean
Learning Community composed of the following communities: volunteer-based marine
conservation and environmental groups, ocean scientists, formal and informal
educators, local business leaders, and science-learning experts. To this end
COSEE-OLC provides speaker presentations, community gatherings, workshops, and
field experiences during which participants interact and learn from each other's
expertise and experiences. All events are designed to facilitate ocean sciences
learning and foster continued dialogue about related issues. OIP provides
inquiry-based, ship-board oceanographic field experiences to a diverse
population of primary and secondary students, community college groups, and
clubs serving inner-city disadvantaged groups. Collaborating with OIP will
provide research cruises as a vehicle for interaction between volunteer-based
organizations, local businesses groups, and ocean scientists. The cruises
facilitate two-way communication between volunteers and scientists in a non-
academic, real world setting. COSEE-OLC learning community members benefit
through acquisition of ocean science knowledge, better understanding of
oceanographic research and techniques, the impact of large-scale oceanographic
processes on their work, and new connections with ocean scientists.
Participating scientists will gain experience by delivering material to non-
scientific audiences, seeing new perspectives and questions to ponder, and
making new connections to local groups interested in science. Collaborating to
provide field learning experiences will augment the range of learning
experiences that COSEE-OLC is developing and testing. The two-way interaction
through a field experience furthers the overarching goal of the center to
cultivate functional, contributing and ocean-literate citizens who are aware of
the impact oceans have on their daily lives. With this approach, the center
progresses toward building a common language among diverse groups to promote
science-based ocean education and learning at the public
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By exposing volunteers from environmental
organizations, informal educators, and local business leaders to oceanographic
research during field learning experiences on Puget Sound, OIP complements and
enhances the work of COSEE-OLC. These groups, in turn, reach audiences that the
center would not directly affect: the general public engaged in casual
interaction with volunteers on a beach at low tide, a fellow corporate executive
chatting after a business meeting, or conservation activists during a wetlands
project. One significant means of expanding ocean literacy is through word of
mouth distribution to make ocean science principles part of common knowledge.
Further, oceanography graduate students who participate in these field
experiences will be exposed to a range of citizen-level activities they should
be knowledgeable about and appreciate for the beneficial effects on the marine
environment. Over all, this collaboration will reach a far more diverse and
widely distributed audience than that which it directly engages due the free-
choice learning character of the activities of these groups.