* 0828410
* Photoelectrochemical Films for Solar H2 Production: A Combinatorial CVD Approach
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Raymond Adomaitis, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 07/31/2012
* USD 324,999.00

CBET-0828410&lt;br/&gt;Adomaitis &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since the original
demonstration of photo-assisted water electrolysis by Fujishima and Honda in
1972, tremendous effort has gone into developing photoelectrochemical (PEC)
materials and systems. Numerous research programs have focused on improving the
efficiency of these devices, and of those that have been successful, few have
addressed the issue of whether such devices would be practical or
environmentally desirable to manufacture on the scale necessary to impact the
US's energy requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs plan to develop new
semiconductor materials and solar cell devices for the production of hydrogen by
the PEC decomposition of water with a manufacturing and product lifecycle
perspective. The PEC materials development program builds directly on the
complementary skills of the project PIs: the Adomaitis group's combinatorial
chemical vapor deposition (CVD) reactor designs for material property and
manufacturability optimization, and the Ehrman group's expertise in developing
nanostructured films of doped copper oxide for PEC applications by flame
synthesis and other manufacturing techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit is defined in terms of three
specific technological challenges to be addressed. The first consists of an
approach to semiconductor thin-film processing: the PIs plan to demonstrate
model-based combinatorial CVD for rapid development of semiconductor materials
of optimal efficiency for PEC applications. The second goal is to efficiently
investigate, by single-substrate design-of-experiment procedures, the complete
range of nanostructured CuO1 film performance, particularly as a function of
film morphology. Finally, they will apply the validated process simulators
developed in this experimental/computational proposal to investigate the
feasibility of using current commercial CVD reactor systems as a means of
shortening the path to commercialization of our PEC
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes
of this research program have the potential to broadly impact green
manufacturing and energy production technologies. The production of H2 from the
solar-powered splitting of water constitutes a sustainable energy supply in that
the solar devices are to be manufactured from abundant and benign precursors
with virtually no manufacturing waste products. This solar hydrogen production
approach will integrate naturally into solar energy systems that enable more
efficient use of the full solar spectrum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three
educational initiatives will bring new technological and economic aspects of
solar energy production into the classroom. A major capstone design project is
planned where senior chemical engineering students will evaluate the economic
potential of large-scale H2 production based on the semiconductor materials
developed in the research.