* 0828046
* Control of interfacial behavior through lipid domain formation, ligand-receptor binding and their synergetic effect
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Igal Szleifer, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Eddie Chang
* 07/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

CBET-0828046&lt;br/&gt;I. Szleifer, Northwestern
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cell membranes are known to form domains in
order to switch on and off cellular function. For example certain proteins
adsorb to membranes only in cholesterol rich domains. Inspired by the ability of
these biological environments to locally segregate in order to optimize function
this project aims to understand at the molecular level how to drive domain
formation in mixtures of amphiphilic molecules in order to design switch able
and selective binding environments. The proposed work involves the development
and applications of theoretical approaches that will enable the study of the
thermodynamics and kinetics of domain formation to optimize or inhibit ligand-
receptor binding. The theoretical methodologies will include atomistic molecular
dynamics simulations and the equilibrium and kinetic version of a molecular
theory that the PI and collaborators have been developing for more that 20
years. The proposed work is divided into three parts: 1) Prediction of the phase
behavior of amphiphilic mixtures, where the molecules will be considered with
and without polymer head-groups. 2) Systematic study of the equilibrium ligand-
receptor binding in the presence (and absence) of polymeric spacers. These
studies will be carried out for ligands attached to the surface of nanoparticles
of spherical and cylindrical geometries as well as to planar
surfaces/interfaces. 3) Selective kinetic studies on: i) the formation of
domains in amphiphilic systems driven by changes in the environment; ii) ligand-
receptor binding and iii) ligand-receptor binding upon domain formation. The
proposed systematic studies will enable to build general guidelines for the
optimal design of surfaces and interfaces that can find applications in
biomaterials, biosensors and drug carrier systems as well as the surface
modification on nanoparticles that can optimize binding for imaging or
separations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
molecular design of responsive interfaces for optimal binding combines
multidisciplinary expertise in engineering, physics, chemistry and biology. The
proposed work has the dual purpose of fundamental understanding that can then be
applied in the molecular design of materials with novel interfacial properties.
The work combines: 1) the fundamental understanding of the phase behavior,
kinetic and structural properties of complex mixtures of amphiphilic molecules
with polymers containing chemical moieties with specific binding capabilities.
This understanding may also shed light on the composition-function relationship
in cell membranes. 2) The findings from this work can be directly applied in the
rational design of biomaterials, biosensors and drug carriers. The study of
these complex mixtures requires the understanding of equilibrium and time
dependent properties. The time dependent behavior spans over many orders of
magnitude in time. The proposed work, thus, combines atomistic simulations that
are excellent for short time scales with time dependent molecular theory that
enables the study of very long times maintaining a molecular level description
of the mixtures. The collaboration with the experimental groups of Profs.
Thompson (Purdue), Genzer (NCSU) and Shull (Northwestern) will provide the
theoretical work with realistic checks at all stages of the
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
work will provide research educational experiences for graduate and
undergraduate students. The PI plans to use the resources available at
Northwestern University to attract women and underrepresented minorities to
participate in this project. These resources include the REU program
administered by Northwestern MRSEC and the Summer Research Opportunity Program.
The research outcomes of the proposed work will be integrated into the new
courses that the PI is developing since joining the engineering school at
Northwestern. The findings from the research will be published in peer-reviewed
journals and a popular version of the findings will be available in the PI's web
site. The proposed work also includes the development of software to apply the
molecular theory. The programs will be available for download from the PI's web
site and will be aimed for the use by non-expert due to the large
multidisciplinary application of the proposed work.