* 0828820
* Optical/Thermal Droplet Levitation and Transport for Lab-On-A-Chip
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2013
* G. Paul Neitzel, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 09/30/2013
* USD 270,000.00

CBET-0828820 Neitzel

This research seeks to apply knowledge gained through previous federal support
to lab-on-a-chip processing (Bousse, et al. 2000, Whitesides & Stroock 2001).
These miniaturized microfluidics devices transport minute liquid samples and
reagents from point to point for testing purposes. Typically, such a
microfluidics device consists of an array of micro-machined channels or
capillaries through which the liquids are forced in a variety of fashions
(Stone, et al. 2004). In many 'pumping' strategies, a large pressure difference
is created between the ends of an isolated droplet to simply push the droplet
through the capillary inversely proportional the capillary radius to the fourth
power. The intellectual merits of this work centers on developing and using a
novel optical/thermal strategy for droplet transport and mixing using 'permanent
nonwetting', using thermocapillary convection to keep liquid samples from
contacting solid surfaces, although they are in close proximity. These levitated
droplets translate above a solid surface with very low friction, enabling the
movement of liquid from point to point with little force, and in shorter time,
improving device throughput. Transport of aqueous droplets (of greatest interest
for bio-chip applications) will be facilitated by encapsulating the aqueous
droplet within immiscible oil. The vigorous internal convection driven by
thermocapillarity promotes merging of encapsulated samples as well as mixing of
the contents, otherwise difficult with most low-Reynolds-number schemes. The
proposed encapsulated-droplet-transport mechanism will also inhibit sample-to-
sample contamination. The broader impacts of this research include benefits to
the medical-device industry, among others. As part of this research, a
partnership has been established with the Fernbank Science Center, a division of
the Dekalb County (GA) Board of Education, to develop an ensemble of experiments
to stimulate interest in droplet dynamics and fluid physics in secondary school
students. These experiments, more than simple demonstrations, require students
to collect and analyze data as part of the exercise. The PI will endeavor to
promote this exciting research and stimulate minority students to consider
graduate study in engineering by giving lectures to undergraduate students in
schools of the Atlanta University Center (Morehouse & Spellman Colleges; Clark-
Atlanta University).