* 0828703
* Inorganic Distributed Nanocrystal Heterojuntion Solar Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* James Engstrom, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 07/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

CBET-0828703&lt;br/&gt;Hanrath&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With surging interest in the
development of cheaper and more efficient photovoltaic Materials semiconductor
nanocrystals have emerged as a promising candidate potentially offering major
benefits as light harvesting elements. These materials have a number of
desirable characteristics. The electronic and optical properties of nanocrystals
are size-tunable, which will allow optimal coverage of the solar spectrum by
structures with large cross-sections. Their compatibility with solution
environments and low-temperature processing are attractive for practical and
cost-effective production. Beyond their potential to transform low-cost solar
energy conversion technology, nanocrystal-based solar cells also have the
potential for substantially increased efficiency, based on the recently-
discovered process of efficient multi-exciton generation. In this process a
single incident photon can generate multiple electron-hole pairs and thereby
utilize the absorbed photon energy in excess of the band gap, which would
otherwise be lost as heat.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Progress in the development of
nanocrystal-based solar cells is currently limited by the lack of molecular-
level control over the electronic properties at the interface. Initial efforts
in this field have focused on hybrid organic-inorganic devices based on blends
of nanocrystals and conjugated polymers. This approach suffered from poor
extraction of photogenerated carriers and illustrated that improved
understanding and control over the interface properties are required to fully
harness the unique photon harvesting properties of these materials. The project
led by Engstrom and Hanrath leverages their expertise in surface science,
nanocrystal synthesis and device fabrication to study fundamental principles of
interface charge transfer and to integrate tailored nanocrystal interfaces into
novel all-inorganic distributed heterojunction solar cells. The goals of their
work are: (1) to understand and control the electronic structure and transport
properties at nanocrystal interfaces and (2) to apply that knowledge to engineer
optimized interfaces for the use of semiconductor nanocrystals in distributed
heterojunction solar cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond the scientific
activities, the project will engage a number of faculty and students involved in
solar energy research in a workshop on research ethics. Solar energy, being on
the frontier of research, is susceptible to practices that might lead to a
number of undesirable outcomes. Educating the community about the proper conduct
of research, ranging from the writing of and review of proposals to day-to-day
activities in the lab will better foster a productive research environment.
Finally, the project is closely integrated with a number of outreach and
educational activities. We have aligned with the Cornell Institute for Physics
Teachers to reach out to high school teachers and students and engage them in
the exciting advances being made in the field.