* 0828580
* Research Starter Grant-Understanding the relationship between housing density and forest structure on avian communities across forested landscapes
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2010
* Christopher Lepczyk, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 07/31/2010
* USD 50,000.00

Housing development within forests has reduced and modified bird habitat through
loss and alteration of the vegetation structure. Because measuring vegetation
structure is difficult and time consuming even at small scales (several
hectares), little is known about how houses alter forest structure at larger
scales, and in-turn how this affects birds. The goal of this study is to
understand the effects of houses on bird populations and communities in forests
by coupling information on housing density and forest structure. High
resolution, three-dimensional estimates of forest structure will be calculated
for North Carolina using laser altimetry (LiDAR), and analyzed with housing
density data from the U.S. Census to provide estimates of habitat quality. Bird
measures will be derived from the North American Breeding Bird Survey and
modeled against habitat quality. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will be the
first ever to integrate housing data and three-dimensional forest structure
information over multiple landscapes for the purpose of understanding their
relative effects on birds in order to benefit conservation and management. The
research will also result in creation of the largest three-dimensional forest
map ever produced at a fine resolution (10 meter) and this will be shared with
agencies and other organizations. The work is inherently interdisciplinary in
nature and bridges fields of ecology, sociology, and geography. There are also
education opportunities that will benefit undergraduate students, including
those from underrepresented groups, such as Native Hawaiians. &lt;br/&gt;