* 0828146
* Ceramic-Carbonate Dual-Phase Membranes for High Temperature Carbon Dioxide Separation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Jerry Y.S. Lin, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 08/31/2013
* USD 276,409.00

CBET-0828146&lt;br/&gt;Lin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carbon dioxide is produced in
large quantities in many industrial processes such as generation of electricity
by burning coal. In many cases, it is highly desirable to separate carbon
dioxide from industrial gas streams at high temperatures. A membrane process is
generally more energy efficient and easier to operate than other separation
processes. A large number of microporous inorganic membranes permselective for
carbon dioxide at low temperatures have been reported, but these membranes do
not offer high selectivity for carbon dioxide at high temperatures. This project
is focused on the synthesis and property study of a new non-porous ceramic-
carbonate dual-phase membrane fundamentally different from previous porous
inorganic membranes used for carbon dioxide separation. The membrane consists of
a carbonate ion conducting molten carbonate phase dispersed in an oxygen ion
conducting ceramic phase as the support. The ceramic phase provides a pathway
for oxygen ion conduction allowing permeation of carbon dioxide through the
dual-phase membrane. The ceramic phase also offers physical affinity for the
molten carbonate, ensuring good mechanical stability of the dual-phase membrane.
The research is aimed at understanding and optimizing the synthesis and
properties of the new carbon dioxide semi-permeable inorganic membrane for
effective separation of carbon dioxide from various gas streams at high
temperatures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Synthesis and characterization experiments
will be performed to optimize the support materials, synthesis conditions, and
structure of the dual-phase membranes in order to maximize membrane stability,
carbon dioxide permeance, and selectivity. Powders and membranes of four oxygen
ionic conducting metal oxides with different crystal structure and ionic
transference number will be synthesized, and their chemical stability, oxygen
permeability, partial electrical conductivity and surface properties with
respect to molten carbonate will be studied experimentally. Symmetrical, thick
dual-phase membranes with different supports will be synthesized and
characterized to identify the ionic conducting ceramic with the best properties
as the support for the dual-phase membranes. The main experimental efforts will
be focused on synthesis and characterization of an asymmetric membrane support
consisting of a thick, large pore base and a thin, small pore top-layer, both
being made of the same ionic conducting ceramic. The top-layer will be
subsequently filled with the molten carbonate by a direct infiltration method to
give an asymmetric dual-phase membrane with carbon dioxide permeance of about
10-6 mol/m2.s.Pa. Carbon dioxide permeation through the asymmetric dual phase
membranes will be studied both experimentally and by modeling to understand the
carbon dioxide transport mechanism through the new dual-phase membranes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ceramic-carbonate dual phase membrane represents a new
concept of inorganic membranes which can be extended to other materials for
dual-phase membranes perm-selective for other gases at high temperatures. The
work will have a significant impact on carbon dioxide sequestration and
inorganic membrane science. Undergraduate and graduate students working on the
research will receive broad education and training in membrane science,
separation processes, nanostructured materials, and environmental science. The
PI will strive to target the large ASU undergraduate minority and women talent
pool to join the project as research students. The results obtained in this
project will be disseminated to the scientific community through journal
publication and conference presentations and will be included in course
materials and workshop lectures to benefit graduates students and other
scientists and engineers with interest in membrane science. A workshop on carbon
dioxide capture technology for high school students will improve the awareness
of the young generation on global warming and environmental protection, and
motivate their interest in pursuing science and technology as a career path.