* 0828437
* Vapor Deposition Polymerization of Porous Polymers
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Mitchell Anthamatten, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 07/31/2012
* USD 258,207.00

CBET-0828437&lt;br/&gt;Anthamatten &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit.
Micro-, meso-, and macroporous polymers greatly benefit the fields of tissue
engineering, photovoltaics, microelectronics, hydrogen storage, and gas
separations. Porous polymers are often produced through polymerization-induced
phase separation (PIPS), thermal-induced phase separation (TIPS), or other
phase-inversion techniques. This study represents a departure from traditional
solution- or melt-phase methods. The goal is to develop vapor deposition
polymerization (VDP) as a controllable, environmentally sound technique to
producing porous and micro-structured polymers. Reactive monomers and non-
reactive species (porogens) will be co-deposited onto a cooled substrate to
force phase separation and arrest kinetically trapped micro- and nano-scale
microstructures. The concept will be studied via two avenues: i) radical chain-
growth polymerization of amorphous polymers and ii) condensation polymerization
of rigid-rod, high performance polymers. For both cases, reactant and porogen
concentrations will be systematically varied with time to create depth-dependent
morphologies and densities. This will enable new routes to custom-designing
asymmetric membranes. A second goal is to mechanistically relate observed
morphologies to process conditions and to models of phase behavior. To achieve
this, cross-sectional analysis of as-deposited films will be studied using
optical and electron microscopy techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Initial
experiments have focused on poly(methyl methacrylate) as a system to study free-
radical growth of polymers in the presence of a porogen. Results indicate that
films can be grown from the vapor phase in a controlled and repeatable manner.
When a low-molar mass porogen is introduced, phase separatio occurs. To study
condensation polymerization, a second low pressure (~10-6 Torr) VDP reactor has
been reconfigured for co-deposition of polyimide precursors with thermally-
degradable porogens. Similar experiments will be conducted using p-type
phthalocyanine dyes (instead of a porogen) to fabricate and test polymer-
stabilized photovoltaics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The research
has strong connections to potential applications. Specifically, VDP of
microporous rigid-rod polymers will provide new routes to 1) all-organic gas
separation membranes and hydrogen storage materials, 2) low-K dielectric
materials that are compatible with current trends in microelectronics
processing, and 3) to polymer-stabilized organic photovoltaics. It is expected
that future research programs in at least one of these directions will spawn
from this study. Research will also lead to an improved understanding of bulk
polymerization, phase separation, and vitrification occurring in micron-thick
polymer films. The study will ultimately improve the ability to control micron-
scale membrane features and their one dimensional spatial distribution. The
integration of research and education will be through curriculum development of
hands-on application projects and special topics in undergraduate and graduate-
level courses. Community outreach activities include organizing professional
development, Green Engineering, lectures for local high school teachers. These
lectures will highlight environmental issues and solutions, and provide new
teaching tools to bridge the gap between real-life problems and traditional
textbook learning.