* 0828701
* Investigation of Electromagnetic Metamaterials for Controlling Thermal Emission and Absorption
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Zhuomin Zhang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 07/31/2012
* USD 321,659.00

CBET-0828701&lt;br/&gt;Zhang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of metamaterials has
emerged as a new frontier in optics and photonics, along with plasmonics. While
theory has predicted unusual transmission, reflection, and emission with
negative index materials, little has been done on the design and fabrication of
metamaterials for tailoring thermal radiative properties. A new type of
metamaterial is proposed that consists of a layer of periodic grating coupled
with an opaque metallic film via a dielectric spacer. By realizing diamagnetic
response and by coupling a negative permeability material with a negative
permittivity material, this structure can tailor the emission and absorption
properties. Rigorous modeling as well as an effective medium theory will be
developed to study the interaction of thermal radiation with the fabricated
nanostructures. Infrared spectrometry and emissometry will be employed to verify
the theoretical predictions.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This transformative
research will result in novel material structures and a better understanding of
the electromagnetic wave interaction with complex materials. Moreover, this
project will provide an unprecedented way of designing radiation emitters for
thermophotovoltaic systems and absorbers for infrared radiation detectors.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Students involved in this multidisciplinary project
will gain fundamental knowledge of electromagnetic wave and thermal radiation,
as well as experience in micro/nanofabrication and spectroscopic experiments. By
encouraging underrepresented students to participate in research, this project
will increase the opportunity for women and minorities in engineering.
Undergraduate curriculum will be enhanced by the proposed Nanoscale Energy
Transport course. The PI will organize conferences and give seminars to serve
the community as well as to educate the public about nanoscale thermal
engineering.