* 0828852
* A Silicon Microreactor for Transient Spatially Resolved FTIR and Thermal Analysis of NOx Storage Reduction Catalysts and Reactors
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Chelsey Baertsch, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 07/31/2011
* USD 280,000.00

CBET-0828852&lt;br/&gt;Baertsch&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NOBXB storage reduction
(NSR) catalytic reactors are currently being developed as after treatment
systems to reduce NOBXB emissions from lean burn diesel engines to meet
stringent EPA regulations to be imposed in 2007 and 2010. Predictive models
based on fundamental reaction kinetics and detailed heat and mass transfer
within transient non-isothermal monolithic reactors will provide a mechanism for
engine manufacturers to rapidly develop, optimize, and ultimately control diesel
engine emission reduction systems to meet these demanding regulations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development of such models for complex, cyclic NSR systems
requires experimental investigation and validation of transient and spatially
variant kinetic and thermal behavior within a monolith after-treatment system.
However, methods for incorporating catalyst surface characterization techniques
and thermal measurement capabilities into monolith reactor geometries are not
available. Both the catalyst surface and the reactor temperature vary as a
function of time and position in the monolith during NSR cycles, and a rigorous
predictive model needs to capture these spatial and temporal phenomena. Thus,
such spatial and temporal reaction information must be available and measurable
experimentally for model validation and parameter estimation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI aims to
take advantage of opportunities emerging from silicon microfabrication
technologies developed for MEMS (micro-electro-mechanical systems) to develop a
novel microreactor for the characterization of dynamic NSR catalytic systems. An
integrated microsystem will be developed to enable combined Uspatially resolved
and transient FTIR analysis Uof high-surface area nanostructured supported
metallic and oxide catalysts during NSR catalytic cycles, simultaneously with
Uspatially resolved and transient temperature measurementsU of the non-
isothermal NSR process and Uwithin a geometry and at reaction conditions and
space times replicating after-treatment monolith reactorsU. This work will
directly impact a collaboration between faculty and students at Purdue
University and a research and development team at Cummins Inc. working to
develop improved engine/catalyst systems for reducing NOBXB from diesel engines
to meet impending EPA standards. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this work new capabilities for incorporating
catalyst surface characterization techniques (specifically in-situ FTIR at
elevated temperatures) and thermal measurement capabilities into monolith and
packed-bed reactor geometries for improved catalyst design and analysis will be
developed. Additionally, on-going efforts by the PI to recruit, retain, and
support women and minority students in engineering through the Women in
Engineering Program, mentoring relationships, and K-12 outreach programs
including the Purdue EDGE summer camp will continue. Engineering teaching
resources will be developed by undergraduate students in the form of MEMS
learning modules and disseminated on the NSF funded nanoHUB (HTUwww.nano.orgUTH)
as part of its on-line nanoelectronics curriculum.