* 0828401
* Biaxial Semiconductor Films on Amorphous Substrates for Solar Energy Conversion
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2008,10/31/2009
* Toh-Ming Lu, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 10/31/2009
* USD 90,000.00

CBET-0828401 Bhat

The objective of the research is to explore the growth of a new class of
biaxially oriented semiconductor films on amorphous substrates for application
in solar energy conversion. To date, the most efficient energy conversion
devices are made out of single crystal semiconductor films grown on single
crystal substrates. Unfortunately, single crystal substrates are too expensive
for large scale production of energy conversion devices such as solar cells.
Most low-cost commercial solar cell devices are either polycrystalline or
amorphous on amorphous substrate with less than ideal efficiency and with long
term stability problems. A key challenge is whether it is possible to grow a
single crystal film on an inexpensive amorphous substrate such as glass. An
amorphous substrate does not have a well ordered lattice to induce an epitaxial
growth. However, it is known that under an atomic shadowing configuration during
deposition such as in the oblique angle deposition, it is possible to grow
"quasi-single crystal" films, called biaxially oriented films, with both strong
out-of-plane and in-plane orientations. In this work, we will explore the use of
recently developed reflection high-energy electron diffraction (RHEED) surface
pole figure technique to probe the fundamental mechanics of biaxial texture
evolution on an amorphous surface and use the technique for optimizing the
growth conditions. We will grow a biaxially oriented CaF2 buffer layer on top of
an amorphous substrate such as glass, and follow this by the growth of epitaxial
CdTe-based solar cell device structures. Energy conversion efficiency and the
long-term reliability of the solar cells fabricated using these strong biaxial
CdTe-based device structures will be evaluated. We will correlate the result of
the quantitative surface pole figure analysis to the ultimate performance of the
solar cells made out of these biaxially oriented semiconductor films.

Understanding of the mechanisms of different thin-film texture formations by
shadowing will have a broader impact on many areas of research. In addition to
the use of high quality biaxial films in solar cells, the efficiency of
materials for catalytic reactions such as the electrodes in fuel cells also
depends very much on the texture orientation. The knowledge gained from the
proposed research can aid researchers to design and "functionalize" textures and
further improve the physical properties of thin films. The team members in this
proposal have strong track records of integrating research, education, and
outreach activities. In addition to training graduate students, they have
created over 100 undergraduate research projects and have co-authored more than
20 papers with undergraduates in the past 17 years through NSF REU and
Rensselaer-sponsored URP programs.