* 0829026
* Toward Integration of Industrial Ecology and Ecological Engineering
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2013
* Bhavik Bakshi, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

CBET-0829026&lt;br/&gt;B. Bakshi&lt;br/&gt;Ohio State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will integrate the Industrial
Ecology and Ecological Engineering frameworks. It will expand Life Cycle
Assessment (LCA) to include the role of ecosystems. The resulting Ecologically-
Based LCA (Eco-LCA) approach will be developed for use at multiple spatial
scales with process or economic models. An Eco-LCA model of the 2002 U.S.
economy will be developed by connecting the economic input-out model with
relevant data and models about ecosystem goods and services. Hierarchical
metrics for aggregating and interpreting the results will be developed based on
quantities used for analyzing industrial or ecological systems such as energy,
exergy, and emergy. The resulting insights about ecological implications of
industrial processes will enable comprehensive analysis of coupled industrial
and ecological systems. Collaboration with various industrial and academic
partners along with the proposed software tools will ensure broad dissemination
of the results. Applications to enhance campus sustainability will be completed
via multidisciplinary courses at Ohio State University. A new website and
teaching material about the role of ecosystems in industrial activities will be
developed.