* 0829752
* EMT/BSSE: A Controller for Autonomous Systems Based on Principles of Vertebrate Neuromodulation
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Jeffrey Krichmar, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 08/31/2012
* USD 299,998.00

EMT/BSSE: A Controller for Autonomous Systems&lt;br/&gt;Based on Principles of
Vertebrate Neuromodulation&lt;br/&gt;Robots and autonomous systems require some
level of supervision and tuning of&lt;br/&gt;parameters to fit a particular
domain. However, biological organisms have the ability to&lt;br/&gt;respond
quickly and appropriately in an ever-changing world. Because this
adaptability&lt;br/&gt;is so critical for survival, all vertebrates have sub-
cortical structures, which comprise the&lt;br/&gt;neuromodulatory systems. These
systems regulate fundamental behaviors and set the&lt;br/&gt;organism?s internal
and behavioral states. This research involves designing a
controller&lt;br/&gt;for autonomous systems that is modeled after the vertebrate
neuromodulatory system.&lt;br/&gt;This neurally inspired model enables robots to
approach the behavioral complexity and&lt;br/&gt;flexibility associated with
higher order animals, and would be a major improvement in the&lt;br/&gt;design
of autonomous systems.&lt;br/&gt;Neuromodulators in the nervous system signal
environmental changes to the nervous&lt;br/&gt;system that alter neuronal
responses in such a way that the organism can respond&lt;br/&gt;quickly and
accurately to these changes. There are separate neuromodulators
that&lt;br/&gt;respond to threats, reward anticipation, novelty, and attentional
effort. However, each of&lt;br/&gt;these neuromodulatory systems have a similar
effect, that is, to cause an organism to be&lt;br/&gt;decisive when
environmental conditions call for such actions, and allow an organism
to&lt;br/&gt;be more exploratory when there are no pressing events. A design
strategy, based on&lt;br/&gt;principles of the vertebrate neuromodulatory
system, is used to control the behavior of&lt;br/&gt;autonomous robot systems.
This research shows that such a system responds&lt;br/&gt;appropriately and
adapts to environmental changes without human intervention.&lt;br/&gt;Moreover,
this research shows that a controller, which is based on neuromodulation,
can&lt;br/&gt;be extended to any system in which an agent is situated in a
dynamic, unconstrained&lt;br/&gt;environment.