* 0829038
* A Fundamental Study on the Effect of Surface Roughness Structures on Fluid Flow and Heat Transfer at the Microscale Level
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Satish Kandlikar, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 07/31/2011
* USD 299,347.00

Proposal Title: A Fundamental Study on the Effect of Surface Roughness
Structures on Fluid Flow and Heat Transfer at the Microscale
Level&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Kandlikar, Satish
G.&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Rochester Institute of Tech&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No:
CBET-0829038&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This project aims at
transforming our conventional understanding of roughness in incompressible
laminar flow at both microscale and macroscale, and providing new insight in
controlling transport processes in microscale devices with designer roughness
structures. The work includes developing a theoretical model that is validated
through numerical simulation as well as pressure drop and heat transfer
experiments with structured roughness incorporated on the walls of rectangular
channels that are 10-mm wide with gaps ranging from 0.2 mm to 2 mm. The
roughness heights tested cover a relative roughness range (defined as the
roughness height to the channel hydraulic diameter) from 0 to 30
percent.&lt;br/&gt;Our conventional understanding of roughness was derived
mainly from the work of researchers such as Nikuradse and Moody several decades
ago on the basis of their studies on large diameter tubes. Fluid flow and
pressure drop were believed to be unaffected by the wall surface roughness in
the relative roughness range below 5 percent. The large uncertainties in
Nikuradse?s experiments are largely responsible for this discrepancy. Microscale
fluid flow experiments conducted in the last five years under carefully
controlled conditions showed that laminar flow is indeed affected by the wall
roughness. Regarding the roughness effects on heat transfer, there is very
little data available in the literature and a good understanding is lacking on
the roughness effects on this important transport phenomenon.&lt;br/&gt;Due to
the small hydraulic diameter, laminar and transition flows are often encountered
in microchannels and are of particular importance. The changes in the flow
structure and instabilities caused by roughness in such channels are not well
understood at the present time. Previous studies performed by others as well as
at RIT indicate an increase in pressure drop and heat transfer with an increase
in relative roughness. Presence of roughness leads to an increase in the surface
area to volume ratio, which is already larger at the microscale than in
conventional-sized channels. &lt;br/&gt;The effects of low relative roughness
have been previously modeled at RIT using lubrication theory. For a given
roughness profile, this model can predict the resulting effect on pressure drop.
Further wall modifications will be necessary in order to accurately model the
effects of larger relative roughness. Previous work indicates an earlier
transition from laminar to turbulent flow in rough microchannels, and these
effects also will be investigated for heat transfer characteristics. The
theoretical work will be complemented with numerical simulations and advanced
experimental techniques (using water) in the Thermal Analysis and Microfluidics
Laboratory at RIT.&lt;br/&gt;This work will provide basic characterization of
different types of rough surfaces (uniform roughness, cross-hatched, and
uniformly spaced ribs), and a fundamental understanding of how surface roughness
impacts the fluid flow, heat transfer and laminar/turbulent transition in
microchannels and minichannels in the laminar and transition regions.
&lt;br/&gt;The planned work on low Reynolds number flows with controlled
roughness elements will provide a fundamental design tool for microscale fluid
flow devices. For example, in electronics cooling applications, although the
heat transfer coefficients in microchannels are high, even higher values are
desired with lower pressure drop penalties for water as well as air flow (new
emphasis on air-cooling in aerospace field). Specially designed roughness
elements offer an effective way to improve the performance. Such ?designer?
surfaces will also enhance respective transport processes in other applications,
e.g. biological and chemical assay systems, micro-total system analysis, micro
propulsion systems, on-board microscale devices in space exploration, cooling
passages for PEM fuel cells, and micromixers. As a result of this work, an
exhaustive set of data will be available from carefully controlled microscale
experiments over a wide range of parameters. On the educational front, the work
will provide exciting undergraduate research opportunities in this emerging
field. It will consolidate microfluidics research infrastructure at RIT through
Ph.D. students working with the PI in the Microsystems Engineering program. The
results of this work will be presented in multidisciplinary meetings for cross-
fertilization of ideas. The project will be featured at the E3 Fair, an annual
event heralded by the PI for middle school students since 1991. The PI will
continue his strong commitment to diversity, with employment of two minority and
five female students (one with hearing disability) so far this year.&lt;br/&gt;