* 0829062
* A Molecular-Based Framework for Studying the Thermodynamic Properties of Ionic Liquids
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Clare McCabe, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 08/31/2011
* USD 105,976.00

CBET-0829062&lt;br/&gt;McCabe&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ionic liquids (ILs) are
liquids comprised entirely of ions that have melting points at or below room
temperature, distinguishing them from high temperature molten salts. ILs are at
the forefront in the use of alternative and greener solvents due to their
negligible volatility, which minimizes the risk of atmospheric contamination and
reduces associated health concerns in comparison with conventional organic
solvents. ILs show promise in a wide range of applications from catalysis and
biocatalysis, to separations, and photochemical cells. The interest in ILs stems
from their unique physical properties, that extend beyond the range of normal
molecular solvents, and can include (in addition to no or low volatility)
thermal stability, a wide range of temperature over which they are liquid, and
the ability to solubilize a wide variety of organic and inorganic materials,
including macromolecules. ILs generally consist of a large, organic cation with
a weakly coordinating inorganic or organic anion, which frustrates packing and
lowers the melting point. The cations and anions each impart different
physiochemical properties to the IL and can be substituted to obtain the
properties desired, and if needed, functionalized to provide further control.
While initial interest in ILs focused primarily on their solvent properties,
more recently the potential to use their novel, tunable, physical and chemical
properties in the design of new functional materials for a wide range of
applications has fueled the interest in ILs. As a result, there has been a great
deal of progress to date in IL design; however, much of that progress has been
achieved through an empirical approach to property modification. The vast number
of possible cation-anion combinations makes it vitally important to be able to
rationally predict IL properties based on their constituents. Thus, there is
considerable incentive to develop an accurate tool for designing task-specific
ILs based upon a physical understanding of the structure and interactions within
ILs. The goal of our work is to address this important need through the
development of a molecular-based theoretical framework with which to study the
thermodynamic properties of ILs. The complex nature of the interactions present
in ILs makes their study using computational tools a fundamentally challenging
subject. The overall goal is to develop a framework with which to accurately
model IL systems and their mixtures with other molecular species, and enable the
prediction of their thermodynamic properties. In this work we will focus on
developing a molecular-based model for pure ILs, which will lay the foundation
for future work on modeling mixtures of ILs and molecular solutes/solvents and
the predictive design of task-specific ILs. The approach developed will be
optimized against experimental data and ab initio calculations and will enable
the prediction of IL properties from the chemical composition, thus eliminating
guess work in determining the properties of a given combination of ions and,
ultimately, their mixture behavior with molecular species. Specifically, the
project e will create a theoretical tool to describe ILs built on the SAFT
framework for modeling fluid phase behavior. SAFT, in contrast to the various
engineering based equations of state available in the literature, provides a
molecular-based approach and is truly unparalleled in its ability to capture the
effects of molecular shape, size and interactions into an analytical equation of
state. In order to describe the thermodynamic properties of ILs with the
molecular-based model outlined above, the PI will develop a theoretical
framework for IL systems that combines analytical solutions from integral
equation theory (that accurately describe the structure of dipolar and ionic
fluids) with the molecular framework of the SAFT-VR approach. The centerpiece of
the proposed approach will be the hetero-segmented SAFT model developed by the
PI,12 which contrasts with SAFT models that are based on a homo-segmented
approach(i.e., each segment in the model chain has the same size and energy of
interaction&lt;br/&gt;parameters). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit of
the Proposed Research - The proposed work will lead to new methods to map
properties obtained from quantum chemistry calculations and molecular
simulations onto the parameters needed in statistical-mechanics-based models and
new developments in liquid state theory. The work will lay the foundation for a
significant advance in molecular thermodynamics by providing a predictive IL
design methodology based upon a deep physical understanding of IL structure and
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact of the Proposed Research - The
integration of the proposed research&lt;br/&gt;with the PIs educational
activities will ensure that students at Vanderbilt are exposed to, and
participate in, the frontiers of molecular modeling and molecular
thermodynamics. Participation of minorities will be sought through the NSF
TLSAMP4 program at Vanderbilt and high school teachers involved through the PIs
participation in a School of Engineering RET site
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Overall plan - &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AIM 1: A
molecular-based model for pure ILs&lt;br/&gt;AIM 2: A molecular-based model for
mixtures of ILs and molecular solvents/solutes&lt;br/&gt;AIM 3: Predictive
design of task-specific ILs&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will limit the scope of
this revised exploratory project to aim one, a molecular-based model for pure
ILs since it represents the most challenging and novel part of the work. The
work will focused on (1) the derivation and application of new developments in
liquid state theory to describe the combined effects of electrostatic
interactions, charge delocalization, and polarity in ILs; (2) the development of
new methods to map quantum chemistry calculations and molecular simulation
results onto the parameters in the underlying theoretical models; and (3)
application of these new developments to experimental IL systems.