* 0829865
* Code Representation and Performance of Graph-Based Decoding
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Paul Siegel, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2011
* USD 300,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;CCF-0829865&lt;br/&gt;Code Representation and Performance of Graph-
Based Decoding&lt;br/&gt;PI: Paul H. Siegel, UC San
Diego&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract: The discovery of channel codes that
approach information-theoretic performance limits when paired with iterative
graph-based decoding algorithms represents a major advance in coding theory and
practice. Prime examples include turbo codes, low-density parity-check (LDPC)
codes, and repeat-accumulate (RA) codes. These coding techniques and their
variants have had a profound impact on data transmission applications, including
deep space communications, digital video broadcasting, and mobile wireless
telephony. They are also poised for use in other settings, such as high density
digital data storage. What is common to these coding and decoding schemes is
that their performance and implementation complexity depend not only on the code
itself, but also on the choice of graphical representation of the code. This
research studies the characteristics of code representations that influence the
performance of iterative decoding algorithms, as well as methods for
constructing the best representations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has
two major thrusts. The first is the examination of combinatorial and graphical
properties of linear code representations that serve as figures of merit for
iterative decoder performance on several types of channels having theoretical
and practical significance. The understanding of these properties guides
improved code design as well as the development of new graph-based decoding
strategies. The second thrust is the analysis and enhancement of decoders based
upon linear programming. The research studies the adaptive introduction of
constraints to reduce decoder complexity and to improve performance. It also
considers new linear programming algorithms that exploit sparse code
representations. A dynamic interplay between these two research thrusts is
achieved by studying the relationship between iterative and linear programming
decoders, as well as their application to equalization and detection for
channels with memory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;