* 0829272
* URM: Environmental Biology in the Pacific Islands
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2008,04/30/2015
* Celia Smith, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2015
* USD 1,045,879.00

URM: Environmental Biology in the Pacific Islands&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
program, based at the University of Hawaii at Manoa, will significantly increase
the number of Pacific Islanders pursuing bachelors and advanced degrees by
recruiting and training promising students from the islands of Hawaii, American
Samoa, Guam, the Commonwealth of the Northern Marianna Islands, and the U.S.
Compact-of-Free-Association Micronesian states (Republic of Palau, Federated
States of Micronesia, and Republic of the Marshall Islands) in modern approaches
to environmental biology. Research areas include: field ecological studies on
marine ecosystems that are largely intact, as well as those that are badly
damaged by invasive alien species and pollution; studies of both coastal and
mountain biota, with emphases on invertebrate, vertebrate (esp. Hawaiian birds)
and plant communities; biodiversity investigations using classical and molecular
approaches; and species-focused research on island endemics. Thirteen students
will be trained each years, eight during summer-only research internships, plus
five, selected from the summer interns, who will remain in the program
throughout the year. Up to 45 students will be extensively trained throughout
five years of the program. Internships will be intimately tied to faculty-mentor
laboratories for training in scientific research and preparation for graduate
school, augmented by important cohort training in ?how to do science,?
scientific writing, and oral presentations. Emphasis will be on one-on-one
training by the mentor and others in her/his lab and student ?ownership? of a
research project. Interns will be guided to develop all aspects of an individual
research project that will contribute to the solution of globally felt problems.
Additionally, the program will introduce interns to activities in governmental
agencies and NGOs involved with environmental management and conservation. This
URM will contribute to understanding biodiversity and conservation problems,
with a particular focus on island ecosystems where impacts of modern society are
heavy and where, for many, global climate change is not just a concept but a
threat to the Islanders? way of life. The program will return to the islands a
group of native islanders exceptionally trained to recognize and resolve local
problems and to serve as role models and educators for other young residents.
For additional information, contact: Dr. Michael G. Hadfield,
hadfield@hawaii.edu or website,
http://www.kewalo.hawaii.edu/labs/hadfield/&lt;br/&gt;