* 0829907
* EMT/NANO: Comprehensive Modeling of Power Dissipation, Leakage, and Non-Equilibrium Transport in Low-Dimensional Transistors
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* ERIC POP, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 08/31/2012
* USD 156,326.00

EMT/NANO: Comprehensive Modeling of Power Dissipation, Leakage, and Non-
Equilibrium Transport in Low-Dimensional Transistors Eric Pop ? University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

Power dissipation and leakage are significant concerns of modern integrated
circuits, and increasingly important in the future. Leakage is a strong function
of temperature, and hence of the power dissipated. However, no detailed models
or data exist for nanoscale, low-dimensional devices, and little is known about
the microscopic behavior and role of interfaces for heat dissipation in
technologies of high interest such as carbon nanotubes or graphene. In addition,
fast switching times (of order 1 ps) are comparable to electron- or phonon-
scattering times, leading to non-equilibrium carriers and heating during device
operation. This research involves producing a comprehensive, microscopic
understanding of power dissipation and leakage in nanometer-scale integrated
circuits. More specifically it (1) extends an existing Monte Carlo approach to
investigate the role of non-equilibrium phonons on power dissipation and
leakage, (2) pursues a microscopic understanding of phonon coupling across
device interfaces with Molecular Dynamics simulations, and (3) wraps up the
advanced physical understanding into self-consistent electrical-thermal compact
models to be used in circuit modeling. The research is also incorporated into
classroom materials for the courses taught by the PI, including updating or
creating new Wikipedia articles in the context of a graduate class. Models and
computer codes are made freely available through the NSF/NCN computational
nanoHUB. A breakthrough in our understanding of nanoscale device power issues
can lead to a revolutionary approach to thermally efficient circuit and system
design, from a bottom-up, device and materials perspective.