* 0829250
* URM: Integrative Biology for Future Researchers
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2014
* Rodney Murphey, Florida Atlantic University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2014
* USD 700,570.00

URM:?Integrative Biology For Future Researchers?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF
funding will establish an Undergraduate Research and Mentoring Program in the
Department of Biological Sciences at Florida Atlantic University (FAU). The
objectives of the URM program are to attract, mentor, and prepare undergraduate
students historically underrepresented in scientific research for graduate
studies in life sciences. FAU is a minority institution as well as a Hispanic
serving university. The undergraduate scholars will participate in weekly
meetings with the PIs (academic mentoring) to discuss their projects and receive
feedback on their research experience and in activities aimed at strengthening
their science related skills. Each student will also be paired with a faculty
mentor (research mentoring) who will train and guide the student in the specific
area of research of the mentor. The areas of research include; a) Conservation
Biology, b) Marine Biology and Behavior, and c) Molecular, Cellular and
Developmental Biology. These areas will be linked together by judicious choice
of projects that will highlight the integrated nature of the program. The FAU-
URM program will train students in a variety of research areas that will
facilitate their movement into, graduate programs In addition; this URM will
enhance the workforce development for SE Florida in anticipation of growing
employment opportunities in life science institutions. For example, Scripps of
Florida, the Torrey Pines Institute the USGS are adding facilities on or
adjacent to FAU campuses as well as a variety of nearby state and federal
laboratories. PIs: Rodney Murphey, Florida Atlantic University, Chair of the
Department of Biological Sciences rmurphey@fau.edu ; Evelyn Frazier, Florida
Atlantic University, Department of Biological Sciences, efrazier@fau.edu. For
additional information, visit http://www.science.fau.edu/biology/&lt;br/&gt;