* 0829313
* ATOL: Collaborative Research: Assembling the Liverwort Tree of Life: A Window into the Evolution and Diversification of Early Land Plants
* BIO,DEB
* 01/30/2008,09/30/2011
* Nico Cellinese, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Charles Lydeard
* 09/30/2011
* USD 335,458.00

This project aims to resolve the liverwort Tree Of Life. There is mounting
evidence that liverworts (Phylum Marchantiophyta) were the first green plants to
diversify on land some 500,000 million years ago and as such they are the oldest
living lineage of terrestrial organisms. This species-rich group of small green
plants is remarkably diverse in structure, and includes extremely ancient
relictual lineages as well as more recent radiations of closely related species.
The antiquity of liverworts and the rich biodiversity at all taxonomic levels
provide an unparalleled window into early land plant diversification. This
collaborative effort brings together experts from around the world for a
multidisciplinary, highly integrated approach that combines anatomical and
developmental features with DNA sequence and genome structural characters to
resolve phylogenetic relationships across the entire spectrum of liverwort
diversity. Three general types of data will be compiled: 1) conservative
morphological and genome characters to resolve deep "backbone" relationships, 2)
anatomical/developmental data to resolve intermediate-depth lineages, and 3)
morphological and DNA sequence characters to resolve relationships among a
sample of 800 taxa representing all genera of liverworts. A second major goal of
the project is to integrate phylogenetic inferences and bionformatic efforts
between this and other on-going NSF-supported projects, including several funded
ATOL programs. These integrative activities include contributions to studies of
genome structure and evolution across land plants, expansions of novel
informatic tools to make methods, results, and implications widely accessible,
and continued development of DNA sequence utilities that will benefit a broad
range of scientists working on diverse organisms.&lt;br/&gt; This project relies
on the cooperation with and integration among research programs focused on
resolving the green plant Tree Of Life. Integrative activities are substantive
and consequential, and include expansions to phylogenetic databases and
methodological/conceptual aspects of work toward resolving the Tree Of Life. At
least six post-doctoral associates and as many graduate students will be
supported by the project, with substantial involvement of undergraduates as
well. An effort to involve and retain individuals from underrepresented groups
will be orchestrated through established federal programs that focus on such
initiatives, including the Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation and
the McNair Scholars Program. A solid mentoring infrastructure will be developed
within each research team to provide support and professional experiences that
ensure productivity and success of all participants. Outreach efforts include
web presentations on the morphology and identification of liverworts for
educators at all levels, development of web-based materials and a workshop
targeting secondary school teachers, and increasing public awareness through
weekend field excursions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;