* 0829928
* Collaborative Research:  EMT/QIS:  Quantum Algorithms and Post-Quantum Cryptography
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2010
* Umesh Vazirani, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 08/31/2010
* USD 100,000.00

Collaborative Research: EMT/QIS:&lt;br/&gt;Quantum Algorithms and Post-Quantum
Cryptography&lt;br/&gt;Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cryptography is the
basic infrastructural element enabling privacy and &lt;br/&gt;security for
electronic transactions. However, when a large-scale &lt;br/&gt;quantum computer
is finally built, it will force us to abandon &lt;br/&gt;established methods of
cryptography, such as RSA and Diffie-Hellman, &lt;br/&gt;which are in common use
today. The proposed research will further &lt;br/&gt;this line of disruptive
quantum algorithmic research; but it also aims &lt;br/&gt;to erect a new
framework of secure post-quantum cryptography, in order &lt;br/&gt;to maintain
this societally critical infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most
attractive approach for salvaging modern cryptography would &lt;br/&gt;be to
develop classical cryptosystems for which we have compelling &lt;br/&gt;evidence
of security even in the face of quantum adversaries. Recent &lt;br/&gt;work by
the PIs and their collaborators has shown that certain &lt;br/&gt;algebraic
problems possess hardness properties relevant even for &lt;br/&gt;quantum
algorithms. We propose to strengthen and leverage these &lt;br/&gt;results in
order to develop cryptographic schemes which can be carried &lt;br/&gt;out by
today's computers, but which will remain secure even against &lt;br/&gt;quantum
attack in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In tandem with this effort, we
propose to develop new quantum &lt;br/&gt;algorithms for breaking cryptosystems
based on conjugacy in the braid &lt;br/&gt;group. This is one of the few
remaining classical cryptosystems which &lt;br/&gt;has not already been shown to
be vulnerable to quantum attack.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our research program is
also directly integrated with graduate student &lt;br/&gt;training at all four
institutions, undergraduate educational &lt;br/&gt;innovation, educational
outreach, and broad scientific dissemination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;