* 0829986
* Collaborative Research:   AToL:  PorToL - The Porifera Tree of Life Project
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2014
* Robert Thacker, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 09/30/2014
* USD 1,695,750.00

A grant has been awarded to the University of Alabama at Birmingham under the
direction of Dr. Robert W. Thacker for assembling the phylogenetic tree of
sponges. Sponges are an ancient animal group with simple body construction. They
are extremely efficient at filtering bacteria and other small food particles
from the water in which they live, with thousands of different sponge species
found in the world's oceans and freshwater habitats. Along with their important
ecological roles, sponges can yield potential new medicines and host an
extraordinary diversity of microbial life. Despite their widespread presence in
aquatic habitats, the study of sponges has lagged behind that of other more
charismatic marine fauna. Sponges pose special difficulties for those interested
in deciphering their taxonomy, classification, and evolutionary relationships
because sponge bodies are quite plastic, varying from one individual to the
next. These difficulties hamper progress in basic studies of sponge biology and
biodiversity, including comparative studies aimed at understanding the evolution
of animals and efforts to conserve or economically exploit aquatic ecosystems.
Using molecular genetic data from 8,000 sponge specimens, this project will
provide a phylogenetic context that will improve the understanding of all
aspects of sponge biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proper Incorporation of sponges
in the Tree of Life is imperative, because there is wide consensus that sponges
comprise the primary trunk leading to more complex animals. Data from this
project will test this hypothesis and resolve many "branches" within the sponge
tree of life. This project will assist communication and collaboration within
the international sponge research community by creating an internet-accessible
database. This project will provide numerous outreach and educational
opportunities, including undergraduate and graduate student training, intensive
field courses, professional workshops, and conference symposia. This project
benefits society as a whole by helping to track the origin and distribution of
crucial genes (and chemical markers) that are useful in medicine and industry
and by establishing new model systems for the study of early animal
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;