* 0829174
* The Trials and Tribulations of Tenofovir:   Ethics, Political Economy, and Clinical Research in Africa
* SBE,SES
* 09/28/2007,08/31/2013
* Kristin Peterson, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 411,699.00

The clinical trial has long served as the primary medium for which clinical
molecules have the potential to be transformed into marketed pharmaceutical
products. As such, it is also a symbol of institutional and technological
assemblages that mediate between information and global markets. While scholarly
attention has been paid to social and cultural issues regarding informed consent
and trial ethics, new shifts in the financing and industrialization of clinical
trials, combined with new technologies and legal reform, have produced new
debates and dilemmas. This project, co-funded by Science and Society, Biology
and Society, and the Office of International Science and Engineering, examines
these crucial and emergent issues by analyzing a clinical trial that tested the
efficacy of a marketed anti-retroviral drug, tenofovir (brand name Viread), as a
pre-exposure prophylaxis (HIV prevention technology) in Nigeria, Malawi, Ghana,
Cameroon, and Cambodia. Funded by the Gates Foundation and carried out by Family
Health International (FHI), four of these five trial sites prematurely shut down
for different reasons. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is conducted in six
countries (the U.S., France, Nigeria, Cameroon, Ghana, and Malawi) representing
the transnational nature of the trial. Using ethnographic methods and archival
research, the research objectives include examining 1) how differing forms of
state privatization in both the US and African countries facilitate numerous and
more rapid transnational flows of clinical molecules that 2) sets new precedents
for the emergence of a science-humanitarian apparatus, which is subsidizing HIV
related clinical trials while harnessing new kinds of capital and human mobility
in the form of clinical molecules and human trial subjects; and 3) generates
emergent debates throughout Africa that reflect radically different sets of
ethics not simply at the level of researcher-human subject interactions but also
at the level of representation, where scientific rationales, informed consent
procedures, and study designs are consistent points of contention.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will produce conference presentations, journal
articles and a book. The broader impacts resulting from the proposed activity
include contributing to existing science and technology studies literature
focused on multiple forms of therapeutic and pharmaceutical development,
distribution, and ethics; on the co-evolution of scientific technologies and
privatization/neo-liberal reforms; and on international political economies and
drug geopolitics. It will especially impact a small body of research that
examines science and technology in post-colonial settings.