* 0829448
* Acquisition of a Research and Teaching Salt Water Flume at Priest Landing, GA
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Hermann Fritz, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 12/31/2011
* USD 233,695.00

The Georgia Tech Research Corporation - Georgia Institute of Technology is
awarded a grant to to build a flume at the Priest Landing Marine Laboratory,
located adjacent to Wassaw Sound (Skidaway Island). The proposed flume at Priest
Landing replaces an outdated flume located on the SkIO campus and fills a
critical gap in facilities infrastructure in the region. The flume is designed
to create flow conditions that mimic the tidal channels in the surrounding
coastal environment near the lab. The size will be sufficient to generate
realistic flow and boundary layer conditions and provide a large working section
for animal experiments and will incorporate features such as Plexiglas channel
walls, false bottom for a sediment section , and rails for an instrument
carriage. The capabilities of the facility will support a variety of fluid
physical, sediment transport, and behavioral or ecological studies including
ecological interactions mediated by chemosensation tracking, the ecology of
defensive chemical signaling, river/riverbed porewater contaminant exchange,
transport of consolidated, cohesive sediments abraded by non-cohesive sediments,
coherent structures in pulsatile flows, sediment erosion and bridge scour, and
turbulence modeling in tidal flows. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential users of the
versatile flume facility include faculty and students from Georgia Tech, Georgia
Tech Savannah, Savannah State University, Armstrong Atlantic State University,
Columbus State University, Georgia Southern University (affiliated with Tech
through the Georgia Tech Regional Engineering Program, GTREP), the Skidaway
Institute of Oceanography (SkIO), and other institutions. The flume also will be
used for graduate and undergraduate student training through laboratory and
capstone courses, individual research projects, and NSF REU-Site programs on
Aquatic Chemical Ecology and field ecology. Finally, use the facility will be
used for K-12 science education via affiliation with the Savannah Science
Seminar Series. Additional information about Priest Landing Marine Laboratory
may be found at http://www.biology.gatech.edu/Priest_Landing_Marine.html.