* 0829238
* Facility for the Study of Fine Scale Variability in Physical, Chemical, and Biological Oceanographic Features at the Shannon Point Marine Center
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Stephen Sulkin, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2011
* USD 169,908.00

The Shannon Point Marine Center of Western Washington university is awarded a
grant to purchase an instrument package consisting of 1) a water
sampler/profiler suitable for continuous profiling of fine scale physical and
chemical oceanographic variables, including depth, temperature, salinity,
subsurface photosynthetically active radiation, dissolved oxygen, and in vivo
chlorophyll a fluorescence, and 2) a flow cytometer capable of powerful analysis
of microbial communities associated with the physical and chemical phenomena
measured in the field.

Broader Impacts:

The broader impacts are strong. Many undergrads are publishing, many have gone
on to graduate school, and under-represented groups are engaged. The faculty at
SPML and WWU have an excellent track record in the development of undergraduate
research programs through a long term commitment to undergraduate teaching at
the laboratory as well as undergraduate research through an REU and a minority
serving undergraduate research program. The laboratory already has a strong data
base from 9 stations in near by waters and a very well developed and useful
website for visiting researchers and collaborators. Profiling CTD packages are
the standard in oceanographic research and familiarity with these instruments
and modes of data collection will be valuable for those seeking employment or
further education in the field. Similarly, flow cytometry is a fundamental
technology, not just for marine microbial ecology, but for immunology and other
medical research and diagnostic fields.

