* 0829166
* "Direct Write" Techniques to Create Submicron, Arbitrary Protein Structures within Hyaluronan Hydrogels
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,05/31/2012
* Christine Schmidt, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 05/31/2012
* USD 495,722.00

CBET-0829166&lt;br/&gt;Christine Schmidt, University of Texas at
Austin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project is to develop novel techniques for controlling sub-cellular level
biological cues in 3D. Other studies in this area have been unable to create
such intricate architecture, at the submicron scale, and within 3D hydrogel
systems. This project is truly unique and will provide an important platform for
developing scaffolds for regenerative medicine and for more physiological, 3D in
vitro culture systems. In addition, this research is particularly targeted for
guiding axonal growth, which has potential implications for promoting
regeneration in both the peripheral and central nervous
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
interdisciplinary research is at the intersection of chemical and biomedical
engineering, materials science, chemistry, optics/physics, and biology. Two
graduate students and several undergraduate students will conduct the proposed
research. The PI and Co-PI will work one-on-one with all students and each
undergraduate student will also be paired with a graduate student mentor who
will help guide research and oversee training. Furthermore, the PI and Co-PI's
research groups are active in K-12 outreach programs (e.g., women and minority-
based programs) as a means to educate young students about bioengineering, in
addition to other scientific mentoring programs such as the Beckman Scholars
Program and the Welch Summer Scholar Program.