* 0829324
* Ancient Hunters and the Lake Stanley Causeway: A Pilot Study
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2010
* John O'Shea, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2010
* USD 25,000.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. John M. O'Shea and a team of
colleagues will conduct an initial field season to investigate ancient
archaeological sites located beneath Lake Huron. The team brings together
students and faculty from Anthropology, Naval Engineering and Computer Science
in a collaborative effort to investigate camps, settlement and caribou ambush
sites that have been submerged and protected by the waters of Lake Huron. With
the retreat of the continental ice sheets, the early Great Lakes experienced a
series of rapid rises and drops of water level. Roughly ten thousand years ago,
the lakes reached an extremely low level, perhaps 100 meters lower than modern
lake levels, which is termed the Lake Stanley Phase. At that time, the basin of
modern Lake Huron held two lakes, separated by a large ridge of land running
northwest to southeast across the basin. The causeway was some ten miles wide
and presented a mix of sandy shorelines, rocky outcrops and open stands of
spruce. Given its orientation it seems likely that it would have provided an
important route for the annual migrations of the caribou herds, and natural
ambush points for early hunters. With the further withdrawal of the continental
ice sheets and changes in lake outlets, this unique landscape disappeared
beneath the waters of Lake Huron, preserving the traces of the early
hunters.&lt;br/&gt;The survey will employ a novel layered strategy to locate
ancient sites. This search strategy includes sophisticated environmental
modeling, acoustic survey with side scan sonar, acoustic and visual survey using
autonomous underwater vehicles (AUVs), site inspection and sampling using remote
operated vehicles (ROVs) and the potential direct examination of sites by
archaeologists trained in the use of SCUBA. &lt;br/&gt;The Lake Stanley survey
will provide important new information at both theoretical and substantive
levels. The intellectual merit of the research is the potential for recovering
intact sites from a time period that is very poorly known on land in the Great
Lakes region. It will be the first time that submerged occupation sites of Lake
Stanley age have been found in the deep waters of the Great Lakes and will allow
an entire range of current models for Late Paleo-Indian and Early Archaic
settlement and subsistence practices to be tested.&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts
of the study are that it will result in the creation of simulation models of
early communities and the ancient landscape that will provide an important tool
for both research and public education, and will test the utility of a search
approach that may be broadly applicable to underwater archaeological searches in
many parts of the world. Additionally, the research will almost certainly result
in the discovery of shipwrecks, aircraft and other items of historic importance
lost in the depths of Lake Huron. Finally, the research program will foster the
collaborative interaction of computer scientists, naval engineers and
archaeologists as they adapt existing capabilities, equipment and approaches to
a novel research problem. These interdisciplinary benefits will be spread among
faculty, graduate students and undergraduates in all three programs.