* 0829590
* US- Sub-Saharan Africa Workshop:    Enhancing Collaboration in Pollination Science, July 2008, South Africa
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/2008,04/30/2010
* Lucie Rogo, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* DeAndra Beck
* 04/30/2010
* USD 49,999.00

This award supports a July 2008 workshop on African bee diversity, taxonomy,
ecology and bioinformatics to be held in South Africa, preceding the 23rd
International Congress of Entomology in Durban, South Africa. Very little is
known about the bee fauna of Africa - even though bees are essential for
pollination of many crop plants as well as of many plants that are essential to
ecosystem health and the conservation of biodiversity. The dearth of information
about bee evolution and diversity in Africa, as well as declines in bee
populations around the globe, impending climate change, and chronic food
shortages in Africa, make this workshop particularly relevant and timely. The
workshop will bring together approximately forty scientists, postdoctoral
researchers, and graduate students from the U.S., Africa, and other countries.
The participants will come from natural history museums, universities and
research institutions and will represent a wide range of relevant initiatives,
including the African Pollinator Initiative, the Consortium of the Barcode of
Life, the GBIF Global Pollinator Species Campaign, the Integrated Taxonomic
Information System and the Global Pollination Project of the Food and
Agricultural Organization of the United Nations. These various initiatives have
different but complementary and overlapping goals, stemming from the central
role that taxonomy plays in each of them and from their common efforts to
conserve declining bee populations.

The workshop participants will discuss the current state of knowledge on bees
and other pollinators in Africa, as well as the potential challenges and
opportunities in advancing both applied and basic research in pollinator science
on the continent. Of central importance will be identifying strategies to
improve African bee collections, bolster pollinator conservation, forge
collaborative research partnerships and develop training programs in areas of
mutual interest. The workshop outputs will include a research agenda on African
pollinators and recommendations for African-specific actions that complement
global campaigns to create and make available taxonomic data on bees and other
pollinator species.

The workshop will yield a number of broader impacts. It will strengthen
collaborations among U.S. and African students, researchers and institutions
involved in entomology, and it will enhance African involvement in several
global biodiversity initiatives. It will also provide a framework for expanding
our knowledge of both basic and applied pollinator science in Africa. Given the
central role of pollinators in natural ecosystems and in food production, such a
framework should be invaluable in the face of declining bee populations, climate
change, and food shortages in Africa.