* 0829700
* Learning sparse representations for restoration and classification: Theory, Computations, and Applications in Image, Video, and Multimodal Analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Guillermo Sapiro, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 09/30/2012
* USD 305,553.00

Efficient signal representation is critical in virtually all
&lt;br/&gt;disciplines of science. Sparse representations have recently drawn
much &lt;br/&gt;attention from the signal processing community. The basic model
&lt;br/&gt;consists of considering that natural signals admit a sparse
&lt;br/&gt;decomposition as a combination of very few atoms in some redundant
&lt;br/&gt;dictionary. Recent results have shown that learning overcomplete
&lt;br/&gt;non-parametric dictionaries for image representation, instead of
using &lt;br/&gt;classical off-the-shelf ones, significantly improves numerous
image and &lt;br/&gt;video processing tasks. This research aims at developing a
&lt;br/&gt;comprehensive theoretical, computational, and practical framework for
&lt;br/&gt;learning sparse representations for numerous signal analysis
tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;First, the research concentrates on learning sparse
representations for &lt;br/&gt;global and local robust image classification
tasks, proposing &lt;br/&gt;formulations with both sparse reconstruction and
class discrimination &lt;br/&gt;components, jointly optimized during dictionary
learning. Multiscale &lt;br/&gt;dictionary learning and investigating a number
of critical optimization &lt;br/&gt;challenges are integral components of this
project as well. The &lt;br/&gt;framework of learning multiscale sparse
representations is then &lt;br/&gt;extended to multimodal data. As in the work
with images and video, the &lt;br/&gt;energies proposed for multimodality
consider both reconstructive and &lt;br/&gt;discriminative terms, learning the
optimal representations both for the &lt;br/&gt;given data and the given tasks.
In addition to image, video, and audio, &lt;br/&gt;other signal modalities
studied include tensors, which are critical in &lt;br/&gt;diffusion MRI, and
bring the additional challenge of developing sparse &lt;br/&gt;representations
for non-flat data. The proposed work is also extended &lt;br/&gt;to learning to
sense, where combined with the learning of the optimal &lt;br/&gt;dictionaries,
the learning of the best linear sensing procedures is
&lt;br/&gt;studied.&lt;br/&gt;