* 0829864
* EMT/BSSE: HIERARCHICAL REPRESENTATION AND SIMULATION OF MODULAR CELLULAR SYSTEMS
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,05/31/2011
* Gary An, Northwestern University at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 05/31/2011
* USD 196,735.00

Biological systems are the product of an evolutionary process of random
tinkering and selection that resulted in unexpected and non-intuitive
?engineering? solutions to dynamically varying conditions. Thus, biological
systems are robust, adaptive and evolvable information processing systems that
operate asynchronously and in parallel on multiple scales. The examination and
characterization of the design principles of biological circuits has the
potential to revolutionize biology, medicine and the way computing and
communication systems are built. This project is pioneering important advances
at the interface between biology and computation by pursuing two complementary
goals: (1) to develop a modular, parallel-ready simulator to replicate the
multi-scalar architecture of complex biological systems; (2) to discover key
design principles relevant to information processing systems in general by
reproducing biological design in silico.

Information processing by cells encompasses multiple scales connecting molecular
events to phenotypes. Current simulation techniques have limited multi-scale and
modular capabilities, resulting in models that describe only a single feature of
a given system and miss the relationships between architecture, function and
behavior. This research effort addresses these limitations by representing
biological systems as a hierarchy of functional executable modules. The design
of the platform obeys four basic principles: 1) components are objects; 2)
objects are governed by rules; 3) rules include some degree of stochasticity;
and 4) objects and rules are organized in functional and spatial modules that
compose a hierarchy. The development of the new platform is driven by the
construction of simulations of key biological model systems with an
unprecedented scope and precision, such as bacterial chemotaxis, epidermal
growth factor receptor signaling, the acute inflammatory response, and parallel
processing by bacterial colonies. The reproduction of these biological systems
in silico is providing insights into their design principles, which in turn
advances the future design and implementation of distributed technological
systems.