* 0829694
* Topologically Fault-Tolerant Distributed Quantum Computer Architecture
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Yoshihisa Yamamoto, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 08/31/2011
* USD 400,000.00

Quantum computers, if built, will have great impact on defense
and&lt;br/&gt;commerce in the area of secure communication. They will also
allow&lt;br/&gt;simulation of complex quantum systems, providing an important
tool&lt;br/&gt;for nanotechnology. The principal challenge in actually
building&lt;br/&gt;quantum computers is finding a way to tolerate imperfections.
In&lt;br/&gt;fault-tolerant quantum computing (FTQC), the faulty operations
that&lt;br/&gt;cause computational errors must be used to detect and correct
those&lt;br/&gt;errors. A radical approach to FTQC is to base the
computational&lt;br/&gt;scheme on topology. Computation is performed by
braiding&lt;br/&gt;topological structures; fault-tolerance arises naturally due
to the&lt;br/&gt;invariance of large-scale topology to small, local
distortions&lt;br/&gt;caused by random errors. Until recently, implementation of
this&lt;br/&gt;rather abstract idea has demanded exotic, unobserved
physical&lt;br/&gt;particles or unrealistically high-dimensional structures.
However,&lt;br/&gt;it was recently shown that topological FTQC may be achieved
in a&lt;br/&gt;two-dimensional lattice of quantum bits in a scheme relying on
a&lt;br/&gt;novel form of quantum entanglement called a cluster
state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research investigates the conversion of
topological&lt;br/&gt;cluster-state-based FTQC into a realistic, scalable,
solid-state&lt;br/&gt;hardware architecture. The particular hardware studied
relies&lt;br/&gt;critically on computation via communication, enabling
reasonably&lt;br/&gt;sized quantum processors to be connected to form
quantum&lt;br/&gt;communication networks or large quantum multicomputers.
The&lt;br/&gt;investigators experimentally develop semiconductor-based
quantum&lt;br/&gt;memories in optical microcavities, optimized for quantum
logic&lt;br/&gt;mediated by light in integrated optical waveguides. The
research&lt;br/&gt;includes the development of experimental methods to fabricate
and&lt;br/&gt;characterize large arrays of these qubits, while detecting
and&lt;br/&gt;compensating for fabrication defects. These experimental
efforts&lt;br/&gt;are supported by theoretical development of scalable,
topologically&lt;br/&gt;fault-tolerant architectures designed around the
observed hardware&lt;br/&gt;limitations.&lt;br/&gt;