* 0829500
* FSML: Climate Change Facility at Bodega Marine Laboratory, UC Davis
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/2008,10/31/2011
* Gary Cherr, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Peter H. McCartney
* 10/31/2011
* USD 235,060.00

The University of California-Davis has been awarded a grant to enhance
experimental facilities to study climate change at the Bodega Marine Lab. The
Bodega Marine Lab is one of the worlds premier field facilities for marine
research and education. For more than 45 years, the Bodega Marine Lab has served
as a gateway for research and educational activities from San Francisco Bay to
Point Arena. The Bodega Lab is poised to respond quickly to pressing societal
problems plaguing the coastal zone. With recent national report cards on the
state of ocean ecosystems calling for climate change research, a new tri-state
agreement (California, Oregon and Washington) coordinating coastal conservation
efforts, and new sources of national and state funding anticipated, Bodega
Marine Lab proposes to construct new facilities that can easily generate and
control complex multi-variable environments needed by researchers and students
to study the effects of climate change.

The climate change facility at Bodega Marine Lab provides an outstanding and
unparalleled opportunity as an ocean observing network that provides long-term
data on a complex suite of real-world coastal environmental variables needed for
the creation of realistic scenarios in controlled environments. The award will
provide funds for a facility that is designed for work with marine, estuarine,
and freshwater species, including non-native and larval organisms. A modular
arrangement of the facility allows flexibility needed for experimental
replicates, and easily accommodates static, semi-controlled, closed, and flow-
through experimental systems. The climate facility will provide co-located
utilities needed to easily manipulate environmental variables typical of climate
change that can be controlled and monitored on-site or remotely via a computer-
interface.

The highly interdisciplinary and collaborative user base and experiments enabled
by the infrastructure will provide an in-depth understanding of the complex
multi-level ecosystem responses to climate change and climate effects on larval
biology, marine physiology, environmental toxicology, molecular genetics, marine
ecology, fish and invertebrate behavior, marine botany, conservation biology,
and invasive species biology. The project will attract new interdisciplinary
collaborations, increase facility capacity to address climate change issues,
enhance training of new scientists, and advance marine lab facility design and
performance.