* 0829259
* URM: The RIT Undergraduate Research Diversity Initiative: Increasing Participation of Deaf and AALANA Students in the Research Scholars Program
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Hyla Sweet, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 08/31/2013
* USD 330,645.00

The goals of NSF URM program at Rochester Institute of Technology (RIT) are to
increase the number of deaf and hard of hearing students performing
undergraduate research and prepare them for graduate school in biology. Strong
emphasis will be placed on early identification of potential students and their
recruitment and retention in undergraduate research. A mentoring network
consisting of Research Mentors, Peer Mentors, Facilitators and Alumni will
provide regular contacts, provide academic support and promote the feelings of
inclusion in the research community. Deaf and hard of hearing students who show
the most promise for graduate school will be selected as URM Fellows and will
participate in a two-year research project, receive an annual stipend for part
time research during the academic year and full time research for one summer,
funds for summer housing, travel and research supplies. Students will be able to
choose from a wide variety of research projects in areas such as Evolutionary
Biology, Cell Biology, Molecular Biology, Virology, Immunology, Ecology,
Biochemistry, Population Genetics, Bioinformatics, Biophotonics, Plant/Microbe
Interactions, and Developmental Biology. The program will support the
development of scientific communication skills that are necessary for success in
graduate school through writing a research proposal, quarterly progress reports,
preparing and presenting seminars and posters, presenting work at professional
meetings and writing a final paper in journal format. URM Fellows will serve as
Peer Mentors for younger students and participate in outreach activities. The
program will support preparation for graduate school applications through
individual faculty advising sessions and an Introduction to Graduate Studies
course. For more information, contact Dr. Hyla Sweet at hxssbi@rit.edu or Dr.
Dina Newman at dlnsbi@rit.edu. For additional information, visit
http://www.rit.edu/cos/biology/urm.html