* 0829656
* Collaborative Research:   CPATH TI:   Project EXCE2L (Excellence in Computer Education with Entrepreneurship and Leadership Skills)
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* K. Wendy Tang, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 08/31/2012
* USD 485,612.00

This CPATH award funds a collaborative Transformative Implementation project
between SUNY Stony Brook and Hofstra University to integrate entrepreneurship
and leadership components into the undergraduate curricula at both institutions.
The project includes development of modules about innovation, entrepreneurship,
and global aspects in several required courses and development of an
entrepreneurial computer science minor. In addition students work in global
entrepreneurial teams with students at targeted universities in Germany,
Romania, and Korea. The project includes community building activities with
faculty in the greater New York area to promote adaptation and adoption of the
curricula models and resources developed. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of the project lies in the importance and currency of the
topic and clear need for such changes in computing education to prepare the
upcoming generation of computing professionals. The project has a strong
collaborative team with entrepreneurial and educational experience and an
enhanced evaluation component that should clearly demonstrate the impact of this
innovative approach to the research and education community. The project also
includes testing of methodologies for handling associated intellectual property
issues that could be of value to many other researchers in the future.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the project lie in the potential to
prepare a diverse student and faculty population to pursue entrepreneurial
activities in high-technology. The project includes dissemination to a broad
community and opportunities for sharing of resources. There is potential for
national models that can help to develop a technology-savvy workforce which is
vital to the nation?s continued prosperity and security.