* 0829459
* Collaborative Research: Tectonics and Topography in the Transverse Ranges: Landscape Response to Rock Uplift Rate across the Transition from Soil-Mantled to Rocky Slopes
* GEO,EAR
* 08/31/2007,08/31/2010
* Arjun Heimsath, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 08/31/2010
* USD 153,106.00

This study is a three-year collaborative research effort in the San Gabriel
Mountains to systematically study both hillslope and channel response to
increasing rock uplift rate across the critical transition from soil-mantled,
creep- and ravel-dominated hillslopes to rocky, bedrock landslide-dominated
hillslopes. Published data and preliminary topographic analyses coupled with
measurements of cosmogenic 10Be in river sediments demonstrate that (1) erosion
rates vary systematically throughout the range from &lt;0.1 to &gt;= 1 km/Ma,
and (2) detrital cosmogenic 10Be is an effective erosion-rate monitor in this
landscape. The systematic west-to-east variation in erosion rate with relatively
uniform lithologic and climatic conditions (with a known orographic rainfall
pattern) in the San Gabriel Mountains affords an unprecedented opportunity to
answer several key questions in landscape evolution. Six specific testable
hypotheses that are critical to further development of a quantitative
understanding of the relationship between tectonics and topography will be
tested, and a specific suite of field sites and methods are identified that
should yield definitive tests of these hypotheses as well as quantification of
the underlying processes. Broader impacts of this work span the five general NSF
criteria used to promote extending the reach of the research. Fundamentally,
this project fits into our main educational objective: to integrate field
studies into the education of diverse audiences, furthering their understanding
of Earth surface processes and helping to bridge the gaps between theory and
application as well as science and policy.