* 0829402
* Tectonic and Climatic Controls on Rapid Exhumation Along the Altiplano-Eastern Cordillera Boundary, Bolivia
* GEO,EAR
* 10/16/2007,06/30/2008
* Brian Horton, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 06/30/2008
* USD 43,512.00

Researchers from the University of California Los Angeles (UCLA) are
investigating the role of tectonics and climate in driving rapid erosional
exhumation in the central Andes Mountains of South America. In northern Bolivia,
the central Andes are host to some of the highest topography, most rapid rates
of exhumation, and greatest concentration of isotopic age data
(thermochronological results) in the entire Andean mountain belt. The region
also displays one of the most dramatic climatic gradients on Earth, from the
extremely humid conditions of the Amazon watershed in the north to the arid
conditions of the Parana watershed in the south. The focus of this
multidisciplinary study is the evolution of a 4.5-6-kilometer-high narrow
mountain range that defines the main physiographic divide between the Altiplano
plateau and Amazon drainage system. Cenozoic uplift of this 30 by 250 kilometer
range in the Eastern Cordillera had far-reaching effects, arguably (1)
triggering growth of the 4-kilometer-high central Andean plateau, (2) inducing
closed drainage in the Altiplano, (3) modifying regional climate by orographic
effects, and (4) setting up a dynamic interplay between erosion and tectonics in
a possible steady-state orogen. Previous isotopic ages from thermochronological
studies generate conflicting interpretations which alternately invoke heating or
cooling during either brief pulses (less than several million years) or
prolonged episodes (several tens of millions of years) of deformation, erosion,
and magmatism. The UCLA researchers are analyzing geologic structures,
sedimentation, and thermal histories along two short (~30-kilometer-long)
transects in northern Bolivia in order to understand erosional exhumation of the
narrow mountain range in relationship to deformation and sedimentary basin
development. Ongoing thermochronological analyses of the range and
sedimentological studies of an adjacent basin are determining the function of
individual structures in the range's cooling history as well as the timing of
deformation and basin genesis. The project includes collaboration with Bolivian
scientists and involves undergraduate and graduate students from the United
States and Bolivia in field and laboratory
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Support for the project is provide by the
Tectonics Program and by the Americas Group of the Office of International
Science and Engineering.