* 0829480
* Enhancing Physical and  Vrtual Access to Research and Education at the HJ Andrews Experimental Forest
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Barbara Bond, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2012
* USD 307,562.00

Oregon State University has been awarded a grant to enhance access to research
and education at the H.J. Andrews Experimental Forest. The H.J. Andrews
Experimental Forest (Andrews Forest) is one of the world?s premier field
facilities for forest ecology research and education. For more than 50 years,
research from the site has helped shape fundamental concepts about forest
ecology and has had significant impact on forest management strategies and
policies. However, the Andrews Forest is in a remote, mountainous location. The
remote location makes it difficult for researchers to access study sites on a
routine basis and for others (such as university classes or K-12 students) to
visit the site. In the winter, the upper elevations are often snow-bound, which
limits access to the high-elevation research sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
award will improve access to research and education at the Andrews Forest in two
ways. First, it will allow purchase of a vehicle that can travel through snow ?
a snowcat. With the snowcat, researchers, instructors, students and technicians
will be able to travel safely to study sites that are snowbound. One of the most
important ecological impacts due to climate change at the Andrews Forest is
likely to be a change in the duration and location of snowpack. The snowcat will
greatly enhance access to research that focuses on these changes in the
snowpack. The second improvement from this award will be a ?blanket? of internet
coverage to field locations at the Andrews Forest. This internet coverage will
eventually allow teachers to conduct field courses that can be ?attended?
virtually by students who are located anywhere in the world, as long as they
have a computer with an internet connection. It will also allow researchers to
access real time data from their field sites and to communicate with instruments
without actually having to travel to the remote study site. &lt;br/&gt;