* 0829052
* A Lipobead Based Microarray Platform for the Label-Free Detection of Bacterial Exotoxins
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Charles Maldarelli, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 06/30/2011
* USD 174,595.00

CBET-0829052&lt;br/&gt;Maldarelli&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a
ultra-miniaturized microarray platform for the detection of bacterial exotoxins.
Bacterial exotoxins are the primary virulence factors for many human diseases.
As they are easily carried through food and water borne pathways, they pose a
significant threat to public health, especially in underdeveloped countries
where food and water sources are not secure. Their use as an instrument of
bioterrorism cannot be overlooked. The first line of defense against these
pathogens is a rapid detection, but this has become more difficult over the past
several years as the number of pathogens has
proliferated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The microarray platform used in this project
specifically addresses the needs for detection systems which are rapid and can
identify a toxin from among hundreds of possibilities. The microarray displays
an assembly of capture molecules, each of which selectively binds to a different
toxin. The capture molecules used by the array are the natural membrane
receptors which the exotoxins use to target and attach to cells before infecting
them. As such, these receptors bind the toxins with high selectivity and
affinity. The receptors are displayed in the array by first sequestering them in
supported&lt;br/&gt;phospholipids bilayers which are formed around polystyrene
particles of the order of ten microns in size. Batches of lipobeads are prepared
separately, with each batch displaying a single receptor whose identity is
encoded by a spectral barcode composed of the emission spectrum of luminescent
nanocrystals (quantum dots or Qds)encapsulated in the bead. Lipobeads, each with
a different receptor and identifying barcode, are then arrayed on a surface by
attaching them to microwells pre-patterned on the surface. This research will
develop a fluorescence detection system for identifying the binding of a toxin
to a particular capture molecule in the array without having tolabel the toxin
or perform subsequent assays on the bound toxin. The label free system is based
on measuring the changes in the resonance energy transfer between donor and
acceptor fluorescence pairs pre-labeled in the bilayer. This as is assaying will
allow a much shorter screening time compared to present approaches which usually
require further analytical steps. The miniaturized design also allows for the
display of receptors at different concentrations in the bilayers which will
allows the binding affinity to be measured. This additional information allows
toxins to be identified with greater accuracy, particularly in the case where
two bind to the same receptor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultra-miniaturized, label-free microarray for toxin
detection developed in this proposal allows for the rapid screening of analyte
samples for the detection of a particular toxin from a potential list of
hundreds. The design can be adopted to the general display of membrane receptors
for understanding binding interactions in drug discovery, and the lipobeads used
as array elements can alo be used in flow
cytometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will support two graduate students and undergraduates, each of which
will be educated in interfacial and biological sciences. Their research will
also be in collaboration with the Soft Material IGERT Program in the Department
of Chemical Engineering at City College whose focus it is to educate students in
the various disciplines of soft matter physics.