* 0829805
* Collaborative Research: EMT/MISC: Behavior Based Molecular Robotics
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Erik Winfree, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 08/31/2011
* USD 315,000.00

Behavior-based robotics was established around the idea that robots could be
constructed by connecting elementary sensor and actuator modules, without the
need to form any internal representation of the world in which they operate.
When designed appropriately, such robots, both as individuals and as groups,
exhibit complex and seemingly ?intelligent? behaviors, solving challenging tasks
in real time, while reacting only to their local environment and obeying sets of
local rules. In part, this approach to robotics was inspired by considering
natural systems, such as self-organization and adaptability of social insects in
their colonies. An analogous approach to initiate the development of the field
of behavior-based molecular robotics will be performed over the next three
years, leading to groups of molecules that would appear to an observer to show a
variety of task-oriented behaviors or some form of purposeful and dynamic self-
organization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Individual behavior-based molecular robots
are single molecules displaying multiple sensors-actuators. When exposed to
artificial landscapes displaying substrates keyed to their sensors-actuators,
the molecules start executing elementary steps, determined, in a stochastic
sense, by their constantly changing local environments. On some landscapes,
called prescriptive, individual molecular robots and their collectives will
execute algorithms mimicking wound-up automata with sequence control mechanisms.
In contrast, on non-deterministic landscapes, the robots and their collectives
will demonstrate properties emerging from internal organization of individual
sensors and actuators and through local interactions between molecules and their
environments. Importantly, these new interpretations of molecular behaviors will
allow radically different experiments from all previous approaches to molecular
robotics, while keeping experimental designs realistic, leading to embodiment in
the physical world. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;