* 0829915
* 3D-Integrated Intra-Chip Free-Space Optical Interconnect for Future Multi-Core SoCs
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Duncan Moore, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2012
* USD 900,000.00

Moore?s Law continues to drive higher levels of system integration. Shrinking
transistor size and increasing circuit complexity make it very difficult to
transmit signals fast and reliably. In other words, the performance of these
systems has become increasingly limited by communications between their building
blocks. Future high performance multi-core microprocessors demand a fundamental
change in intra- and inter-chip interconnect technologies. Optical interconnect
is widely accepted as the long-term solution and significant progress has been
made in recent years. However, on-chip optical interconnect, which is the focus
of previous research efforts, presents some significant challenges. Pure-optical
switching and storage devices in silicon technologies remain far from practical,
and hence an optical interconnect network requires significant overhead of
repeated optical-to-electrical and then electrical-to-optical conversions.
Simultaneously, efficient silicon electro-optic modulators remain challenging
due to either large size or small bandwidth, not to mention that both approaches
require significant and expensive changes in standard silicon technologies. Both
limitations will result in unacceptable delay, circuit complexity, cost, and
energy consumption.&lt;br/&gt;This project will use free-space optics and
supporting device, circuit, packaging, and architecture level techniques to
create a CMOS-compatible, high-performance intra-chip interconnect technology.
Integrated lasers, optical phase shifters. photodetectors and focusing
microlens, will be implemented in GaAs or SiGe technologies, and 3-D integrated
with CMOS circuits underneath, which will also include the transmitter and
receiver electronics. This architecture allows point-to-point direct
communication between any two nodes, bypassing the need for routing through
intermediate nodes while managing packet collisions. This project will lead to a
general technology and design framework applicable to a large variety of new
applications in future high performance computing and other systems-on-
chip.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;