* 0829961
* 12th International Conference on Martensitic Transformations: An Integrated Synthesis, Characterization and Modeling Approach; Santa Fe, CA; June 29-July 5, 2008
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2008,04/30/2009
* Gregory Olson, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Ardell
* 04/30/2009
* USD 20,000.00

TECHNICAL: An integrated approach to synthesis, characterization and modeling of
martensitic transformations planned. To further this goal PI will help organize
the 12th International Conference on Martensitic Transformations (ICOMAT-08)
during June 29 - July 05, 2008 in Santa Fe, NM. This conference is held every
three years and moves from one continent to another. The main focus is on
fundamental science as well as on the technological applications of martensitic
(diffusionless, first order) phase transitions and microstructure in shape
memory and related alloys. The intellectual merit of this important topic
encompass science and technology of martensitic transformations across all
classes of materials, diverse displacive transformations including coupled
displacive/diffusional transformations, aging and tempering of martensitic
materials, shape-memory, ferroic and multiferroic materials with aspects
relevant to magnetoelastics, ferroelectrics and magnetic shape memory alloys.
Participants will also address topics ranging from fundamentals of kinematics,
structure, thermodynamics, mechanisms and kinetics. Novel theoretical approaches
of multiscale modeling and emerging experimental methods such as three
dimensional imaging and characterization of microstructure will be addressed. In
many of these materials strain may couple to other degrees of freedom such as
polarization, magnetization and shuffle modes. Thus, common features of ferroic
materials with martensites will be highlighted in this conference. NON-
TECHNICAL: There will be over 300 researchers participating in the conference
from around the world. Importantly, many students, postdocs and young faculty
(including women and minorities) from the US will attend the conference. This
will also serve as a forum for educational outreach and multidisciplinary
research training. There will be about 30 invited talks, 150 contributed talks
and about 100 poster presentations. The proceedings will be published by TMS as
two volumes (books) which will be given to participants from around the world.
Other details can be found at the web-site: http://cnls.lanl.gov/ICOMAT/