* 0829683
* CPATH CDP: An Integrated, Multidisciplinary and Cross-Fertilizing Model for Computing Education
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* Vanessa Lougheed, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2014
* USD 211,563.00

The United States continues to face a crisis in the development of highly-
skilled workers in science, engineering, and technology. Computing has deeply
permeated every aspect of our society, and every field has been transformed by
the recent arrival of affordable high-performance computing. Despite this
pervasive growth of computation throughout engineering and science, university
level computing education is still largely separated from other disciplines. It
is crucial to develop a scientific and engineering workforce with a thorough
understanding of the fundamental conceptual ideas from computer science and
software engineering that pertain to a specific domain and the skills necessary
to apply them to their field of expertise. The University of Texas at El Paso
proposes a Conceptual and Development Planning (CDP) project that will support
the institutional groundwork to develop synergistic multidisciplinary curricula
combinations across the departments of Computer Science, Biological Sciences and
Economics and Finance that will provide students with substantive content in
domains not typically provided by traditional academic degrees. The overarching
goal of this project is to support the conceptual design and planning for the
creation of a computing-centric, interdisciplinary, and cross-fertilizing model
that spans the institution?s academic structures. This proposal addresses these
needs by developing a comprehensive approach to developing skills in relevant
aspects of computation and algorithm design in students in a wide variety of
scientific disciplines. The team will develop a new computational curriculum
suitable for students whose careers will overlap. The principal focus is the
development of multidisciplinary academic programs, built from collaborative
work between the involved constituents, rather than the creation of new academic
units. These multidisciplinary academic programs will convey sufficient depth to
prepare students to make significant contributions in their respective fields.
This project will permit the investigation of the assertion that collaborative
work between computer science, and disciplines where the participation of women
is more reflective of the population, e.g., biology and social sciences, can
help reverse the trend of a small proportion of women graduating with a
computing related degree or an engineering degree.