* 0829003
* Collaborative Research: A Diagnostic and Modeling Investigation of Pulsed PECVD
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Laxminarayan Raja, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Arvind Atreya
* 07/31/2011
* USD 226,697.00

CBET-0829003&lt;br/&gt;Raja&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this collaborative
research project is to develop a fundamental understanding of pulsed plasma-
enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD) through a synergistic combination of
advanced diagnostics and high-performance computer simulations. Low-frequency
modulation of plasma power is critical to processes such as pulsed PECVD and
plasma-enhanced atomic layer deposition (PE-ALD). These advanced deposition
techniques impart nm-level control over thickness and composition that is
critical to advancing nanotechnology. In particular, pulsed PECVD is being
applied to oxide structures that have numerous applications as high-performance
dielectrics, optical components, and diffusion barriers. However, process
development is completely empirical at present. &lt;br/&gt;Time-resolved
Langmuir probe, impedance spectroscopy, and emission spectroscopy will be
coupled to state-of-the-art modeling in order to provide fundamental insights
into the dynamics controlling the plasma chemistry in these systems. In pulsed
PECVD the role of both neutrals (fluid flow, transport phenomena, gas- and
surface chemistry) and activated species (ion, electrons, metastables) are of
comparable importance. Coupled to the transient nature of the process, this
challenging problem will require the development of novel techniques to both
ensure high-fidelity measurements and to design tractable computational models.
&lt;br/&gt;The modeling challenges will be addressed through transformative
approaches to accelerate computations for plasma simulations with large number
of species and chemical reactions. A shared-memory, data-parallel computing
approach will be used to address plasma-simulation problems that typically have
moderate-sized meshes but large degrees of freedom resulting from the large
number of species and reactions. The systematic approach used to address this
complex problem posed by pulsed PECVD will provide fundamental insight into both
PE-ALD and conventional PECVD. &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this work will
also include the training of two PhD candidates and the engagement of
undergraduate researchers in areas of great technological importance in a unique
interdisciplinary environment. One student will focus on plasma modeling and
simulation, while the second develops expertise in plasma diagnostics and
deposition. These students, along with undergraduate REU participants, will work
together in developing an integrated platform for the analysis of pulsed PECVD.
The co-PIs will participate in established faculty outreach programs directed at
underrepresented groups at the University of Texas Austin and Colorado School of
Mines, working together to develop K-12 educational modules. They will also
collaborate to develop and improve a graduate elective course on plasma
processing.