* 0829171
* Nonlinear Harmonic Techniques for Studies of Solid Oxide Fuel Cell Electrodes
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2013
* Guozhong Cao, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 09/30/2013
* USD 299,999.00

CBET-0829171&lt;br/&gt;Adler&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances in ceramic
manufacturing have revitalized interest in the solid oxide fuel cell (SOFC) as
an efficient means to recover electricity from fossil and renewable
hydrocarbons, including biomass. Developers have successfully lowered operating
temperatures of SOFCs below 600Â°C, leading to improved reliability and reduced
capital cost. One factor leading to these successes has been the use of
alternate electrode materials based on mixed-conducting ceramics (materials
which carry both oxygen ions and electrons), often called mixed conductors.
Although promising, the reason mixed-conductors improve performance remains
unclear, and they also suffer from poorly-understood degradation problems.
&lt;br/&gt;In order to develop a better understanding of how mixed-conductors
work as electrodes, Adler and his coworkers at the University of Washington have
been developing a new electrochemical measurement technique called "nonlinear
electrochemical impedance spectroscopy" (NLEIS). This technique relies on small
(almost immeasurable) harmonic signals generated when an oscillating current is
passed through the electrode. A relevant analogy is music. The reason you can
tell the difference between different instruments playing the same note is that
each instrument also generates harmonic and anharmonic tones in conjunction with
the primary tone being played. These small extra signals are detected by your
ear, and act like a fingerprint for the physical process generating them
(vibrating string of a guitar, resonating wooden cavity of a violin, etc). In
the same way NLEIS helps the Adler group figure of what physical of chemical
process is limiting or degrading electrode performance. In this renewal, Adler's
group will use NLEIS to study an array of materials (SOFC cathodes and anodes)
having well-defined microstructure made by pulsed-laser deposition and
nanofabrication. They will also further develop the technique, including methods
for improved acquisition and interpretation of NLEIS
data.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit of the Proposed Activity - The proposed work
forms part of a broader effort to better understand high-temperature solid-state
electrode reactions, of critical importance to several technologies including
solid oxide fuel cells, oxide sensors, and oxygen separation devices. This
project involves original and transformative concepts in both experimental
techniques and theory/modeling, and will complement more applied projects
involving fuel cell electrode development (DOE/SECA), and understanding the
electrocatalytic role of 3-D microstructure using FIB-SEM (NSF collaborative
research grant with Northwestern University). The principal investigator has 19
years of academic and industrial experience in this field, while the proposing
institution is a world leader in electrochemical engineering and
electrocatalysis. The proposed work would also advance a burgeoning
international collaboration between the University of Washington and Tohoku
University, one of the world's leading institutes for high-temperature
electrochemical materials. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts of the Proposed Work - In
addition to gaining knowledge of direct interest to SOFC's, this work will
develop transformative techniques of general interest in other areas of
electrochemical engineering, including membrane fuel cells (of all types),
solid-state and thin-film batteries, electrochemical materials processing,
electrochemical sensors, coatings and thin films, and other solid-state
interfacial devices. This work will support the education of individual
scientists and engineers (including at least one women), and involve
opportunities for students to participate in both national and international
collaborative research. Results and knowledge will be disseminated widely
through the literature, while strong ties of the PI to industry and more applied
programs will aid direct impact on commercial development. This research program
will also directly enhance the PI's educational program, which includes
internet-based UW courses on fuel cells, and an Electrochemical Society short
course.