* 0829486
* FSML Laboratory and Field Mesocosms for Ocean Acidification Research
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2009,02/29/2012
* James Murray, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 02/29/2012
* USD 275,000.00

The University of Washington is awarded a grant to build a new facility at
Friday Harbor Laboratories (http://depts.washington.edu/fhl/)for experimental
study of ocean acidification and its influence on temperate marine organisms and
ecosystems. The proposed facility will include in-water mesocosms for large-
scale experimental manipulations, laboratory aquarium systems, and an analytical
laboratory for essential carbon parameters to support experimentation. The
facility will serve as a national center for the study of ocean acidification in
temperate environments, allowing investigators and students from across the
country (and international collaborators) to test the response of marine
organisms to changes in pH and carbonate saturation in an environmentally-
relevant setting. The facility will catalyze significant new collaborations in
research and teaching focused on the interactions between biogeochemistry and
near-shore temperate ecosystems in a changing ocean. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ocean
acidification is of strong national and international interest. The European
Community has just approved a new 5-year program of research on ocean
acidification, and the U.S. agencies have made this a priority for new research
funding. FHL is located in an area that is likely to be among the first and
hardest hit by acidification impacts, with implications for commercial
fisheries. This will be one of a few sheltered sites with oceanic waters that
could host such a capability, and the only one at a U.S. institution. This U.S.
mesocosm facility will enable research that links individual organism responses
to full ecosystem responses and impact assessments for fisheries. The proposed
facility will contribute directly to FHL's undergraduate research apprenticeship
program, graduate student research and graduate research courses. The project
also includes a K-12 component, with outreach to regional schools at all levels,
including a new NSF GK-12 Program beginning summer 2008. Finally, this facility
will contribute to the activities of citizen-driven marine resource committees
organized in seven Washington counties surrounding the Straits of Juan de Fuca,
Georgia Strait, and Admiralty Inlet to the Canadian border.