* 0829025
* An Innovative Optimal Integration of Wind and Solar Resources for Reliable and Sustainable Power Generation
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Venkataramana Ajjarapu, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2012
* USD 293,185.00

OBJECTIVE:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental goal of this project is to
develop a procedural tool that will facilitate the augmentation of fossil fuel
based generation with the integration of utility scale solar-wind hybrid plants.
The scope of this work addresses the development of optimal planning and
operation procedures for scheduling generation from wind, solar, and stored
thermal energy facilities. Historical solar irradiance and wind energy density
information will be analyzed to provide suitable hybrid locations. Models will
be developed for wind, solar, and storage technologies for power system
simulation studies. Metrological data will be used to determine the optimal
requirements of thermal, wind, and storage units. Power system stability shall
be evaluated iteratively through system fault studies and contingency analysis.
Finally, using forecasting techniques a strategy will be developed for optimal
scheduling of generation and storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL
MERIT:&lt;br/&gt;The completion of the proposed work will result in a
methodology for calculating suitable hybrid plant locations and an optimized
plant sizing and energy storage control strategy. The objective of the control
strategy will allow for reliable power injection and storage that is capable of
meeting the demand of a variable load. The project will lead to: &lt;br/&gt;-
The identification of grid connectable locations within the United States for
the placement of solar-wind hybrid plants.&lt;br/&gt;- The development of
optimal plant size and energy storage methodology for reliable grid
interconnection of hybrid plants. &lt;br/&gt;- An optimal control strategy to
maximize the reliability of the hybrid plant to meet variable load and renewable
input power patterns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS:&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed technique is sufficiently versatile such that it can be extended to any
emerging hybrid energy production and storage technologies. This combines higher
efficiency with greater reliability as compared to other conventional renewable
generation. From an economic standpoint hybrid facilities will not only reduce
generation costs, but will prove to be schedulable on demand which decrease
customer costs thereby maximizing social welfare. This energy production
strategy will help stimulate investment in renewable energy through competitive
advantages over stand alone renewables. Additionally, an interdisciplinary
renewable energy course will be introduced at Iowa State University based on the
project work.