* 0829860
* Quantum Entanglement in Novel Macroscopic Systems &amp; Applications to Quantum Sensors
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* girish agarwal, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 08/31/2009
* USD 100,000.00

PROJECT SUMMARY( Revised August 6, 2008) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The quantum
entanglement and ways to entangle qubits and continues variables have been
extensively developed and continue to be at the heart of quantum information
processing. While entanglement of atoms and photons is relatively well
understood; one still has to go long way in understanding and achieving
entanglement of macroscopic systems like Bose Einstein condensates and system of
quantum dots. Besides now one has to think of important applications of the new
resource that we have at our disposal. We thus propose to develop and study
entangled source of matter waves we propose schemes to produce entanglement of
two Bose condensates. Each condensate could be either single component or multi
component. This involves multi particle entanglement as we deal with collective
coordinates. We further propose to use entanglement for Heisenberg limited
interferometry. Note that a recent conference
[http://portale.unitn.it/events/interf08/] organized by Aspect, Phillips and
others discussed how quantum optics of Bose condensates is a new direction of
research. Another novel system that we propose to study is the system of quantum
dots which act like super atoms. It is possible to produce a system with two
dots where the relative separation between dots could be in the range of few
nano meters leading to prominent d-d interaction. We propose to study the
quantum entanglement in a double dot system which results from d-d interactions
and consider its manipulation by a coherent drive. &lt;br/&gt; Intellectual
Merit of Research. We propose fundamental studies. Theoretical models for
producing entanglement between two quantum dots or two Bose condensates would be
developed. In such systems it is also possible to entangle matter and photonic
degrees of freedom. Further newer aspects of such systems emerge by applying the
ideas from quantum optics such as squeezing and photon-photon correlations.
&lt;br/&gt; Broader Impact of the Research. Here we propose to continue our
earlier collaboration involving the fields of quantum optics and condensed
matter physics . We propose to use ideas and techniques from different fields.
For example, the master equation techniques from quantum optics should be useful
for the study of photon photon correlations in emission from system of quantum
dots and in studying decoherence. The idea of collective excitations and
projective measurements are appropriate for the study of entanglement of
independent Bose condensates. We have active collaboration with our cold atom
group. All this would be supplemented by the international collaboration that we
have built up during the period of the recent NSF support (CCF-0524673) which
ended in June 2008. An important element of our proposal is to train graduate
students in the emerging interdisciplinary area of quantum information science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;