* 0829142
* Modular Construction of Nanostructured Catalysts for Solar Hydrogen Generation from Water
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Frank Osterloh, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 08/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

CBET-0829142 Osterloh

The sunlight that strikes the earth over one hour provides enough energy to
satisfy all human energy needs for an entire year. However, efficient methods of
conversion of this energy into usable fuels have yet to be found. Of particular
interest in this regard are materials that use light to photochemically split
water into oxygen and hydrogen. The hydrogen then serves as an environmentally
friendly energy carrier. Many inorganic materials are known to catalyze this
"water splitting reaction", but their efficiency remains too low for commercial
applications.

The purpose of this project is twofold. First, a new class of water splitting
catalysts will be developed that can be assembled in a modular fashion from
inorganic nanoparticles. Here, the nanoparticles function as separate components
for light absorption and water conversion. The advantage of this building block
approach is that light absorption, charge transfer, and chemical properties can
be independently optimized. The final catalysts are powders that can be mixed in
water to produce clean hydrogen from abundant solar energy. The second goal of
the project is to learn more about the mechanism of photochemical water
splitting with nanoparticle catalysts. A first step here will be to measure the
amount of evolved hydrogen and oxygen under ultraviolet or visible light
illumination, and to correlate gas production with the structure of the
catalysts. Secondly, time-resolved absorption spectroscopy will be employed to
determine how effectively light is converted into charge and how quickly the
charge travels to the surface of the catalysts, where water conversion takes
place. The effectiveness of the nanoparticle surfaces to split water will be
studied separately using electrochemical methods. Similar methods will also be
used to determine the electronic structure of the nanoparticle components, which
control the flow of charge within the catalysts. The results from these studies
will improve the understanding of the catalytic activity of inorganic
nanostructures, and help to raise their efficiency.

The research portion of this project will be accompanied with several
educational and outreach activities, including a new graduate class "Chemistry
of Nanoparticles" and science exhibits and chemistry shows for the public. New
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate student research will also be
created. These activities are designed to recruit and educate a new generation
of scientists and engineers who can help to develop more effective ways to
utilize sunlight as a renewable energy source.