* 0829537
* Quantum and Classical Complexity of Continuous Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Joseph Traub, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Balasubramanian Kalyanasundaram
* 08/31/2011
* USD 299,991.00

QUANTUM AND CLASSICAL COMPLEXITY OF CONTINUOUS PROBLEMS

ABSTRACT

The investigators are studying the following general question: If physicists
and chemists succeed in building quantum computers, which continuous problems
arising in science and engineering can be solved much faster on a quantum
computer than on a classical computer? Examples of continuous problems are path
integration, the Schrödinger equation, high-dimensional approximation,
continuous optimization, and integral equations. To obtain the power of quantum
computation for continuous problems one must know the computational complexity
of these problems on a classical computer. This is exactly what the
investigators have studied for decades in the field of information-based
complexity.

The classical complexity of many continuous problems is known due to
information theoretic arguments. This may be contrasted with discrete problems
such as integer factorization where one has to settle for conjectures about the
complexity hierarchy. Among the issues the investigators will study are the
following:

1. For the foreseeable future the number of qubits will be a crucial
computational resource. The investigators have shown that modifying the standard
definition of quantum algorithms to permit randomized queries leads to an
exponential improvement in the qubit complexity of path integration. The
investigators propose to exploit the power of the randomized query setting. For
example, are there exponential improvements in the query complexity for other
important problems?

2. A basic problem in physics and chemistry is to compute the ground state
energy of a system. The ground state energy is given by the smallest eigenvalue
of the time-independent Schrödinger equation. If the number of particles in the
system is p, the number of variables is d = 3p. In the worst case classical
setting, the problem we study suffers the curse of dimensionality. The curse is
broken in the quantum setting. The investigators want to determine if the
randomized classical setting suffers the curse of dimensionality. If it does, a
quantum computer enjoys exponential speedup for this problem. This would mark
the first example of proven exponential quantum speedup for an important
problem.

3. The Schrödinger equation is fundamental to quantum physics and quantum
chemistry. Solving this equation for quantum systems with a large number of
variables would have a huge payoff for many applications. The investigators
propose to study algorithms and initiate the study of the computational
complexity of the Schrödinger equation in the worst case and randomized settings
on a classical computer and in the quantum setting