* 0829473
* FSML Increasing Capacity for Research and Education at Archbold Biological Station
* BIO,DBI
* 12/15/2008,11/30/2011
* Hilary Swain, Archbold Expeditions, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 11/30/2011
* USD 299,000.00

The Archbold Biological Station is awarded a grant to assist in construction of
a new lodge with 14-bedrooms (40 beds) and shared bathroom facilities to
increase capacity for visiting scientists, particularly large groups, with
increased privacy and comfort. The Lodge will house visitors for Archbold
Biological Station, the MacArthur Agro-ecology Research Center, and Archbold
Reserve, solving current limitations to research use by complementing existing
accommodations.&lt;br/&gt;The new Lodge will facilitate increased use of
existing research laboratory and classroom space by students and visiting
investigators; allow more workshops and conferences; stimulate growth and
expansion of research programs at MAERC and the Archbold Reserve; and improve
housekeeping and maintenance by having large groups consolidated in one
building.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Archbold Expeditions (Archbold Biological
Station, Archbold Reserve and the MacArthur Agro-ecology Research Center),
established in 1941, is a not-for-profit institution dedicated to long-term
ecological research and education. Archbold owns and manages a 3,653-ha globally
significant scrub preserve, which is located in one of the most distinctive
natural ecosystems in the USA, and the adjacent Archbold Reserve, a 1,476-ha
restoration site. Archbold also has a long-term lease for the MacArthur Agro-
ecology Research Center, a 4,168-ha working cattle ranch near the Station.
Staff, visiting investigators, and students conduct research focused on the
environments of the Lake Wales Ridge, and surrounding areas. Research strengths
are population and conservation biology, emphasizing ecological changes over
local and regional scales, fire ecology, demographic shifts in rare and endemic
species, and agro-ecology.&lt;br/&gt;