* 0829830
* Workshop on Mathematics for Petascale Data, June 3-5, 2008, Rockville, MD
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2008,04/30/2009
* Nagiza Samatova, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 04/30/2009
* USD 20,000.00

The investigator and her colleagues propose to organize a workshop to identify
opportunities for future mathematical advances required for enabling scientific
discoveries from petascale scientific data. The workshop will embrace scientists
from academia, national laboratories, and industry. Application scientists,
mathematicians, statisticians, high performance data miners will define a
research agenda for developing the next-generation mathematical techniques
needed to meet the challenges posed by petascale data sets. They will produce a
workshop report that will: * Articulate the requirements of various scientific
domains such as global carbon cycle modeling, fusion energy production,
nationally security, etc. * Delineate appropriate mathematical approaches and
techniques, * Determine the current state-of-the-art in these approaches and
techniques, and * Identify the gaps that must be addressed to enable the
effective analysis of large, complex data sets in the next five to ten years.

Renewable energy production, carbon sequestration, national security, and human
health protection are the urgent issues in today's society. Major incentives-
economic, geopolitical, and environmental-drive a scientific mandate to research
and develop cost-effective and beneficial solutions. It is imperative to truly
synthesize the three pillars of scientific discovery-experimentation, theory,
and ultra-scale computation-to address these challenges effectively and
comprehensively. Advances in each have been already revolutionizing the way
science is conducted. With this promise, however, comes a problem - the massive
quantities of data so produced by national high-throughput experimental
faculties, observatories and ultrascale computing facilities. Those data hold
the answers to fundamental questions about the nature of the universe. However,
the answers will be subtly hidden in the raw data. Those data need to be
analyzed to extract knowledge - to understand the science. Discovering such new
knowledge will require the next-generation mathematical techniques from several
fields, including but not restricted to statistics, machine learning, image
analysis, and pattern recognition. Advances in these areas will also enable
iteratively validating ultra-scale simulations with experimental and
observational data. As a result, these technologies will bring revolutionary and
unconventional solutions to some of our most pressing and expensive challenges
in health, energy, environment, and national security.