* 0829444
* US/India Workshop:  Enhancing the Resilience of Built Infrastructure; Chennai, India; December 2008
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2008,03/31/2011
* Venkatesh Kodur, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 03/31/2011
* USD 37,163.00

This project will support the travel of researchers to participate in the US-
India Workshop on ?Enhancing the Resilience of Built Infrastructure? to be held
in India in 2009. The workshop will be organized around the four theme topics
of: (1) extreme load definitions and combinations, (2) material performance, (3)
retrofitting strategies, and (4) long-term strategies and plans for continuing
US-India collaboration in these areas. The objectives of the workshop are to
assess the state of the art in the three areas in the two countries and then
identify future research agenda and research and educational cooperative
opportunities in these areas. The proposed activity will bring together
international researchers working in the areas of the workshop theme topics for
the exchange of scientific information and ideas. The workshop topic is of
strong research interest to both countries currently. USA has a strong research
base and expertise in these areas and India is now aggressively pursuing
research in these areas. However, we certainly can learn more from each other
about the problems of common research interest, and benefit from a
synergistically formulated collaborative research plan. This workshop will
provide an excellent opportunity to the participants, especially the young
researchers, for mutual appreciation of the cultural synergies that now exist
between the scientific communities of the two countries for further advancement
of science through joint research, faculty exchange opportunities, sabbatical
opportunities, student exchange opportunities, and information technology and
web-based collaborations.