* 0829293
* FSML:  Acquisition of Controlled Environmental Spaces for  Skidaway Institute of Oceanography
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* James Sanders, Skidaway Institute of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2011
* USD 145,500.00

The Skidaway Institute of Oceanography is awarded a grant to improve the
capacity of Skidaway Institute of Oceanography (SkIO) to provide
environmentally-controlled conditions for experimental studies in the marine
sciences. The additional infrastructure improvements are an essential complement
to the analytical facilities, and will allow researchers to perform controlled
microcosm experiments or maintain sensitive organisms on campus while using the
laboratories and instrumentation. The upgrades to infrastructure have two
components: (1) funds are requested for the construction of two flowing seawater
laboratories in which air temperature, seawater temperature, and light can be
controlled to modest tolerances, and (2) funds are requested for the purchase
and installation of two walk-in environmental rooms that will provide tightly
regulated environments for more demanding experimental work. The new facilities
will be housed within an existing structure on campus that is convenient to
laboratories. The proposed facilities will significantly improve SkIO?s capacity
to do experimental biological research and ecological research on
campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Skidaway
serves a very diverse population of students and is a hub for graduate education
at a large number of other parts of the Univ. of Georgia system. They have good
outreach to K-12 students and teachers, as well as to the local community. They
have strong collaborations with several nearby HBCU institutions. The
Environmental Entrepreneurship Program in collaboration with Clark Atlanta
University will directly benefit from the infrastructure improvements. In
addition, the Institute hosts a Marine Science Day for the local community which
was attended by over 3000 people in 2007 and informs them of local marine
research and environmental issues. The Institute maintains a speaker's bureau
which provides more than 50 lectures/year to local communities. The Institute
has a bi-directional teleconferencing system that permits lectures at SkIO to be
transmitted to some 300 locations around Georgia and this increase exposure to
the land-locked areas of Georgia has increased interest in research and training
opportunities at the lab. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;