* 0829553
* ITR: Very Efficient Network Simulation Methods for Auctioning and Collaborative Models of Air Traffic Management
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2008,07/31/2009
* Abhijit Deshmukh, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2009
* USD 258,568.00

The objective of the project is to develop new efficient simulation methods
using a hybrid simulation/analytic queueing model for large and complex
networks, and efficiently run the simulation portion of the model using a new
dynamic computing budget allocation technique. This project will extend the use
of the newly developed simulation methods to the national air traffic network
including runway slot auctioning and agent-based modeling (ABM) of air traffic
management. Airlines and airports play the roles of agents engaged in a dynamic
competition to maximize their individual profits with the use of information.
Alternative agent-based rules will be experimented to determine optimal decision
policies. Good auction rules to better regulate the use of airport runways will
be investigated and designed using the fast simulation engine and ABM modeling
approach. Using auctions to allocate runway slots has the potential to
economically induce airline carriers to more efficiently use the capacity of the
entire system - thus, decreasing congestion and increasing the safety level.
While the proposed simulation tool is tailored for the air transportation
network in the U.S., the newly developed methods will be applicable to other
complex, dynamic networks, such as communication networks, manufacturing
systems, and logistics networks.