* 0829226
* Diffusing Colloidal Probe Measurements of Protein and Synthetic Macromolecule Interactions
* NONE,NONE
* 01/02/2008,07/31/2009
* Michael Bevan, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 07/31/2009
* USD 74,008.00

ABSTRACT Diffusing Colloidal Probe Measurements of Protein and Synthetic
Macromolecule Interactions This proposal is concerned with the application of a
conceptually new method, Diffusing Colloidal Probe Microscopy (DCPM), to
directly and nonintrusively measure kT interactions of surface immobilized
proteins and synthetic macromolecules. Ensembles of freely diffusing colloids
will be employed as ultra-sensitive probes to measure energy vs. separation
dependent potentials between proteins covalently attached to colloids and planar
surfaces. By combining evanescent wave and video microscopy techniques, DCPM
will monitor three dimensional Brownian excursions of protein decorated colloids
as they sample positions normal and parallel to homogeneous, heterogeneous, and
patterned substrates also bearing covalently attached and oriented proteins.
Because diffusing probes sample spatial positions according to their relative
energies, time and ensemble averaged excursions of probes can be interpreted
using statistical mechanical analyses in terms of net potentials of
superimposable non-specific (colloidal, macromolecular) and specific (residues,
geometry) contributions. Consistent with the nanotechnology paradigm, DCPM will
interrogate protein and synthetic macromolecule interactions by exploiting
natural gauges for time (a2/D), energy (kT), force (fN), and length (nm)
associated with diffusing colloidal probes. The broad aim of the proposed
research is to gain fundamental insights into protein-protein and protein-
synthetic macromolecule interactions important to non-specific adsorption of
proteins on synthetic surfaces and for interpreting specific binding events
measured on protein arrays. Specific experimental and modeling objectives are
focused on using DCPM to measure interactions of proteins attached and oriented
on sub-micron colloids and micron scale surface patterns. The first task of the
proposed work is to covalently attach/orient proteins onto gold colloids and
either gold or silica surfaces (purified and characterized proteins provided by
collaborator). Building on preliminary DCPM results for physisorbed proteins and
synthetic macromolecules, the second task is to measure interactions of
covalently attached/oriented proteins with various mutations and conformations
to allow for deconvolution of non-specific and specific contributions to net
potentials. The last task is to measure non-specific and specific interactions
on a model array consisting of patterned regions with covalently
attached/oriented proteins and regions of physisorbed synthetic macromolecules.
Successful completion of proposed objectives will provide new fundamental
insights into applications including biofouling and protein array diagnostics,
and in the process, will demonstrate a new technology (DCPM) to directly and
sensitively quantify weak interactions controlling non-covalent, equilibrium
binding of proteins and their non-specific interactions with synthetic
macromolecules. The intellectual merit of the proposed research is broadly
related to the fundamental knowledge that will be gained in integrating
nanoscale synthetic systems and materials of biological origin. Experimental
objectives will produce unique, direct measurements of non-specific and specific
protein-protein and protein-synthetic macromolecule interactions on energy (kT)
and length (nm) scales relevant to equilibrium binding and adsorption. Modeling
objectives will interpret/predict multi-scale non-specific and specific
contributions to the net interaction of protein conjugated diffusing colloidal
probes and surfaces bearing proteins and synthetic macromolecules. Educational
objectives will involve using visual content generated in the proposed research
in courses and outreach activities. In terms of classroom teaching, research
images and videos will be incorporated into undergraduate and graduate
colloid/polymer elective courses and an undergraduate thermodynamics core
course. In terms of outreach, content involving optical microscopy of colloids
will be adapted for use in programs for 7-12 grade teachers and students
primarily through the PI's participation in an existing NSF center for learning
and teaching. The broader impacts of this proposal involve exploiting visual
research content to provide immersive educational experiences for students at
all levels that minimizes boundaries between authentic and guided inquiry.

