* 0829854
* EMT/QIS: Quantum Control of Impurity States in a Semiconductor
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Mark Dykman, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 08/31/2013
* USD 450,000.00

Quantum Control of Impurity States in a Semiconductor&lt;br/&gt;Brage Golding
and Mark Dykman&lt;br/&gt;Michigan State University&lt;br/&gt;E. Lansing, MI
48824&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Quantum information is a new and rapidly
developing interdisciplinary area of research&lt;br/&gt;that resides at the
interface between quantum physics and information science.
It&lt;br/&gt;addresses some of the most challenging fundamental problems in
science and technology&lt;br/&gt;while seeking to advance our understanding of
the unique properties of the quantum&lt;br/&gt;world. Among the predictions in
this field is that of an exponential speedup of computers&lt;br/&gt;that operate
on purely quantum principles. If quantum properties are to be exploited
for&lt;br/&gt;qualitatively new capabilities, it is necessary to build systems
that exhibit long-lived,&lt;br/&gt;controllable quantum states. In addition, the
devices should be compatible with&lt;br/&gt;conventional electronics and
photonics. The devices based on controlled impurity states&lt;br/&gt;in
semiconductors stand out as particularly attractive, since they should be
scalable,&lt;br/&gt;operate at high speed, and take advantage of existing
semiconductor technology.&lt;br/&gt;The quantum systems studied in this
experimental and theoretical research are based on&lt;br/&gt;acceptors in a
semiconductor such as silicon. These are substitutional dopants,
whose&lt;br/&gt;atomic-like properties are well-known and invariant. The two
states of a qubit are the&lt;br/&gt;lowest orbital states of the acceptor, a
result of splitting of the ground state by strain and&lt;br/&gt;electric field.
The distance between the energy levels is in the range of a few GHz
and&lt;br/&gt;each qubit is individually controlled by a gate electrode. Single-
qubit operations can be&lt;br/&gt;performed with short microwave pulses whereas
two-qubit operations are enabled by the&lt;br/&gt;long-range dipolar interaction
between the acceptors, which allows the qubit-qubit&lt;br/&gt;distance to be
more than 100 nm. The readout of the final state of the system is based
on&lt;br/&gt;quantum nondemolition optical measurement of light scattering by an
exciton bound to&lt;br/&gt;the acceptor.