* 0829421
* EMT/QIS:   Physics Based Approaches to Quantum Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Peter Shor, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 08/31/2012
* USD 600,000.00

Quantum computation lies at the intersection of computer science and physics and
is a promising emerging technology. Quantum algorithms take advantage of quantum
effects not available to conventional computers. &lt;br/&gt;There are striking
examples where a quantum algorithm, running on a quantum computer, would
outperform any classical computer attempting the same task. These include
finding the prime factors of a number, searching an unordered list and
determining who wins a game. The discovery of new algorithms is key to the
growth of this field. The investigators hope to develop new algorithms as well
as study the performance of certain known algorithms whose run time is not yet
established. The hope is to continue to develop a fruitful synergy between
techniques used in physics and conventional algorithm design. &lt;br/&gt;The
research here would bridge the fields of computer science and physics looking
for new algorithms as well as deepening our understanding of the physics which
underlies the quantum speedups. The development of a large scale functioning
quantum computer would change the world of computation and this research
attempts to aid the effort to develop such a machine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The
topics to be investigated include quantum walk algorithms, algorithms for
evaluating the Jones polynomial and other related quantities, as well as
cryptographic protocols for unforgeable identification. The adiabatic algorithm
will be studied using a Matrix Product State ansatz as well as by large scale
numerical simulation and the fault tolerance of this algorithm will also be
investigated.&lt;br/&gt;