* 0829023
* Biofuels and the Hydrologic Cycle
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2008,05/31/2011
* Philip Gassman, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 05/31/2011
* USD 307,903.00

CBET-0829023&lt;br/&gt;R. Anex, Iowa State University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As
the U.S is embarking on a dramatic increase in biofuel production, a series of
studies have raised questions about the environmental impacts and sustainability
of biomass feedstock production due to concerns about water use, soil erosion,
nutrient transport, and greenhouse gas emissions. The focus of this
interdisciplinary project is on modeling the interplay of land use, climate
change, and the environment in future biofuel production systems. Understanding
the role of biofuels in the water cycle is key to understanding many of the
environmental impacts of biofuels. This research will address impacts of
alterations in the hydrologic cycle driven by biomass feedstock production, such
as changes in yield reliability, soil erosion, stream flow, and stream flow
reliability. Water-driven environmental impacts of biofuel production scenarios
will be assessed using a set of interconnected models. The MM5 climate
simulation and Noah land surface model will be used to predict interactions
between weather patterns and biofuel feedstock cropping patterns. The Soil and
Water Assessment Tool (SWAT) will be used to analyze impacts on nutrient and
sediment transport and surface water quality in the Upper Mississippi River
Basin using weather scenarios produced by the MM5/Noah system. The Iowa Daily
Erosion Project (IDEP) model will also use MM5 outputs to predict erosion across
Iowa at the field scale. The integration of these highly developed models will
provide new insight into dynamic interactions through the hydrologic cycle as
influenced by human manipulation of the landscape and climate-soil-vegetation
dynamics of the system. The project includes four activities designed to
increase diversity and learning at different levels of education. These
activities are: mentoring undergraduate summer interns from the Iowa AGEP
program for underrepresented minorities; mentoring of undergraduate research
associates recruited through the Program for Women in Science and Engineering;
developing and implementing an inquiry-based learning activity based on biofuels
and the hydrologic cycle; and mentoring graduate students.