* 0829211
* Globally Optimal Process Network Synthesis
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Vasilios Manousiouthakis, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 09/30/2012
* USD 308,203.00

CBET-0829211 Manousiouthakis

Intellectual Merit The goal of this project is to advance the state of the art
in globally optimal synthesis of process networks using the Infinite DimEnsionAl
State-space (IDEAS) method developed by the PI. He plans the following research:
1. Conceptual and Computational Advancement of IDEAS 2. Batch Reactor Network
Synthesis - Identification of the Attainable Region 3. Globally Optimal Fuel
Cell Network Synthesis 4. Automatic Generation of Globally Optimal Cryogenic
Liquefaction Networks

In carrying out this research, he will: A. Seek new solution methods for the
IDEAS Infinite Linear Program (ILP) that yield lower bounds that are guaranteed
to converge to the global minimum. B. Seek a novel IDEAS formulation for batch
process networks. This is the first time that application of IDEAS will be
pursued for a network of dynamic processes such as batch reactors. Issues
related to network causality will also be addressed. C. Either develop a new or
use existing fuel cell models to establish whether these models satisfy the
properties for incorporation into the IDEAS framework, including any assumptions
that must be made on the model properties to make this the case.

The application of IDEAS to cryogenic liquefaction networks will yield novel
cryogenic cycles. Synthesis of such cycles will be pursued using software
packages which include a user-friendly GUI. This software package will be
incorporated into classroom work for students, along with documentation
explaining the power of the method and its limitations.

Broader Impact The IDEAS methodology has been shown to advance the state of the
art in process network synthesis and to provide a designer with a synthesis
methodology that does not restrict a priori the network structure. The method
applies just as well to chemical engineering process design as it does to
electrical engineering (fuel cells, hybrid electrical systems, etc.), operations
research (mathematical developments in infinite dimensional linear programming,
parallelized solution of large scale linear programs, etc.), and cryogenic
engineering.

The research activity will provide training for K-12, undergraduate, and
graduate students by exposing them to high level mathematics and cluster
computing technology. This work will also contribute to diversity by
facilitating more research projects for K-12 students like those provided by the
UCLA Center for Excellence in Engineering and Diversity (CEED). This past summer
(2007) the PI had a minority high school student do a summer research project
using the IDEAS method through the Science Mathematics Achievement and Research
Technology for Students (SMARTS) program run by UCLA CEED. The PI plans on
involving more students of all levels in order to foster their interest in
engineering and higher education. The conceptual advancement of IDEAS could
impact several research areas (mathematical programming, cryogenics, reaction
engineering, fuel cell systems engineering) and several industries (power
production, hydrogen production, refrigeration, and others).