* 0829158
* C60 Biotransformation and Bioaccumulation: Environmental Impact Implications
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Pedro Alvarez, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Karn
* 07/31/2012
* USD 240,000.00

CBET- 0829158 &lt;br/&gt;Alvarez&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rapid industrial scale
production, coupled with unique material properties, underpin rising concerns of
engineered nano-scale materials inadvertently impacting the health and function
of natural systems. Carbon based nano-scale materials such as fullerenes and
nanotubes in particular have been proposed for a variety of applications and are
on track to be produced at industrial scales. Building a fundamental,
quantitative understanding of material behavior in natural and engineered
systems allows for accurate predictive behavior models which are critical for
material life cycle assessment(s) necessary for risk mitigation and
sustainability. Of particular interest is the biological interface at which
these materials may interact as biologically mediated transformations of
fullerenes could significantly influence their mobility, bioavailability,
reactivity, toxicity and overall environmental impact. Yet, to date, no
systematic evaluations of fullerene biotransformation has been conducted. They
will seek to evaluate the susceptibility of aqueous available fullerene species
to biochemical transformations and their biological significance. Specifically,
they will: (1) characterize the rates and byproducts of biotransformation
through, in part, the use of radio labeled P14PCB60B, (2) determine how
biotransformation affects the toxicity of CB60B, and (3) quantify the
bioavailability and bioaccumulation potential of P14PCB60B and its byproducts
through model earthworm systems. They will test the hypotheses that: 1) CB60B
can be oxidized by non-specific enzyme systems such as manganese peroxidase,
which is involved in complex carbon macromolecules degradation via radical (OH)
attack, and/or by other enzymes produced by cellulytic fungi or bacteria that
degrade recalcitrant compounds; and (2) such biotransformations will decrease
the toxicity and bioaccumulation potential of CB60B, but may increase its
solubility and bioavailability. Using chemically unique CB60B with differential
isotopic signatures, biotransformation investigations will be conducted with
cell free (e.g. purified manganese peroxidase which catalyzes non-specific
radical (OH) oxidation), and with whole cell, in vivo cultures of cellulytic
fungi, PAH-degrading mixed cultures, and PAH-degrading pure cultures. Reaction
kinetics and products will be characterized by a battery of analyses
(Radiochromatography (HPLC), P13PC-NMR, MALDI-MS, UV/Vis, Scintillation
Counting, among others). Corresponding toxicity studies will measure microbial
heterotrophic activity before and after exposure to water available CB60B and
bio-transformed derivatives. Bioaccumulation and availability of both C60 and
corresponding derivatives will be evaluated through whole organism (model
earthworm systems) and biomimetic sorbent experiments similar to previous
studies done with polyaromatic hydrocarbons. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work
responds to calls for reliable data on nanoparticle behavior in the environment
that have come from environmental advocacy groups, the emerging nanotechnology
industry and the regulatory community. Understanding how biotransformation
affects the behavior of engineered nanomaterials in the environment is important
to ensure that nanotechnology improves material and social conditions without
exceeding the ecological capabilities that support them. Furthermore, students
on this project will gain valuable interdisciplinary and collaborative
experience with applications of nanochemistry and environmental engineering.
This project will strengthen the nation?s research and human resource base in an
emerging need area where qualified researchers are in short supply, and will
contribute to the development of nanotechnology as a tool for sustainability
rather than as an environmental liability.