* 0829609
* CPATH CDP: ProjectMT -- A Real-World, Project-Based Computer Science Curriculum
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2008,12/31/2011
* Cen Li, Middle Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 12/31/2011
* USD 190,777.00

Traditional computer science curriculums emphasize lecture-based classroom
teaching, with limited exposure to real-world problems and projects. Often,
instructor-crafted "toy" projects provide little resemblance to those that arise
in the real-world. Students find it difficult to relate what they are studying
to the fast-changing computing world, frequently resulting in them becoming
discouraged with computer science. A CS graduate is often faced with poor
preparation for professional software development and a steep learning curve
upon beginning work in a real-world computing environment. On the other hand, it
has been shown that in real-world project-based courses, student motivation for
learning is much higher. Students are more willing to learn project related
material on their own, and the knowledge learned lasts longer. The goal in
ProjectMT is to enhance the CS teaching and learning experience with real-world
projects woven into the entire CS curriculum. The process is further enriched
with a stable and consistent local industrial connection that brings in
innovative computing ideas, technologies, and real-world experiences.
Bachelor's-level students will participate in the development of real-world
applications, and engage in active learning of project and class-related
materials. The proposed innovation in the CS curriculum will prepare each
graduate to be ready to work competitively and successfully in the industry from
day one. Through pilot course development, it will add to the body of knowledge
on project-based teaching and learning additional findings for designing and
teaching real-world project-based courses, strategies for encouraging student
active learning, and challenges facing curriculum wide transformation. The
project brings together faculties at MTSU's CS department, other departments at
MTSU, local stakeholders and educators at area institutions. It establishes a
framework that supports project-centric curriculum development. This framework
includes specific components to interact with local stakeholders for project
collection, evaluation, and report communication; a Project Management Course
structure to maintain a database of projects, assign projects to courses, and
track project development; and mechanisms to include local educators in
collaborative course development and project implementation. Students in the
project-based curriculum are expected to be more motivated to study in CS
courses, learn the course material better, have better training for their future
jobs, and be more committed to work in the CS discipline.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;