* 0829292
* Organizational Youth Development and Science Mentoring Initiatives
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2010,12/31/2011
* Laura Jansen, Project Exploration
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 12/31/2011
* USD 10,000.00

Project Exploration Chicago, Illinois&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Exploration
has created a model for community-based organizations to follow in regards to
mentoring middle and high school students in science. A Chicago-based nonprofit
science education organization, Project Exploration's mission is to make science
accessible to the public "especially minority youth and girls" through
personalized experiences with science and scientists. At the heart of this work
is youth programming, aimed at getting inner-city kids to think about science as
a career option. Project Exploration targets students who may not already be
academically successful, but are curious, open-minded, and passionate. In doing
so, students are enabled to explore science, increase their scientific literacy,
develop leadership skills, and expand their life and career options to include
science. &lt;br/&gt;The science programs offered by Project Exploration, Junior
Paleontologists, Services for Girls, and Dinosaur Giants, are starting points
for long-term programming. After getting students interested in science, Project
Exploration focuses on keeping them interested and building their capacity to
continue that interest. Most students are involved with Project Exploration for
at least two years, and a majority has stayed involved for five or more,
beginning in middle school and continuing beyond high school graduation. Such
long-term mentoring relationships have had significant impact in supporting
students through high school and towards STEM careers: 96% of Project
Exploration students have graduated high school; 61% have gone onto a four-year
college; and 34% of all students and 43% of all women are majoring in science.
Overall, Project Exploration students, most of whom are first-generation college
bound and are not academically successful at the outset of their experience with
Project Exploration, are ten times more likely to graduate from high school, go
to college, and major in science than a typical Chicago Public School student
from the same school. &lt;br/&gt;Project Exploration specifically recruits
students who are historically underrepresented in science professions. These
include women and minority groups, in particular those from low-income
backgrounds; 81% of program participants are female, and 19% are male; 73% are
African American, 25% Latino, 1% Caucasian, and 1% Other. By focusing on, and
showing success with, these populations. Project Exploration is addressing
critical issues facing STEM education today: inequality of opportunity, lack of
diversity, and workforce development.