* 0829882
* EMT: Computational methods for mapping genealogy of unrelated individuals from high throughput genetic data
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Itshack Pe'er, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 08/31/2012
* USD 247,694.00

Recent genetic evidence shows that the human species is a smaller family than
previously thought: arbitrary groups of people include many pairs of hidden
relatives, that unknown to them share a recent ancestor a few generations back.
The investigators develop novel computational methods to reveal these remote
family ties, from large scale datasets that contains billions of snippets of
genetic information. This research effort will use this information to compile a
genealogy of thousands of otherwise-unrelated individuals.

Individuals with a common ancestor have a chance to share one or more long
fragments of DNA, that are identical-by-descent (IBD) over several megabases.
High throughput genetic data from commercial arrays of 300,000-1,000,000 Single
Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) can therefore detect IBD with certainty. The
computational challenge in large scale data of tens of thousands of individuals
typed for these array is making all the quadratic number of pairwise comparisons
in search for IBD. The investigators develop a per-locus hashing algorithm, that
detects identical haplotypes across all O(n2) sample pairs, but operates in
linear time. They are using this methodology to map hidden relatedness across
publicly available samples, creating a useful tool for population-based linkage
analysis in unrelateds, as well as inferences on population genetics of recent
generations.