* 0829580
* Negotiation Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Jose Vidal, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2011
* USD 266,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;This research involves the development of automated negotiation
protocols &lt;br/&gt;for autonomous agents in negotiation networks, where each
agent can only &lt;br/&gt;negotiate with few selected neighbors. That is, we
develop agents that can &lt;br/&gt;carry out any number of simultaneous
negotiations with other selfish agents. &lt;br/&gt;For example, they could be
routers in the Internet negotiating over which &lt;br/&gt;packets to route and
which to drop, or purchasing agents in a supply chain &lt;br/&gt;deciding what
to buy and at what price, or web services deciding who to &lt;br/&gt;provide
services for and at what price, or sensors in a sensor network
&lt;br/&gt;deciding which measurements to make and who to forward the results.
Our &lt;br/&gt;research involves building the negotiation strategies for selfish
rational &lt;br/&gt;agents that individuals and companies will want to use,
along with the &lt;br/&gt;negotiation protocols that ensure the
agents'&lt;br/&gt;interactions result in efficient global resource
allocations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The problem of negotiation networks
combines features of characteristic &lt;br/&gt;form games and bargaining games
from game theory, combinatorial auctions &lt;br/&gt;and distributed mechanism
design from Economics, network exchange theory &lt;br/&gt;from Sociology, and
distributed algorithm design from computer science. &lt;br/&gt;Our research
brings together results from these disparate fields into &lt;br/&gt;one
framework and provides algorithmic solutions for the dynamic,
&lt;br/&gt;distributed problem of resource allocation among self-interested
parties, &lt;br/&gt;in contrast with game theory and Economics' solutions which
are typically &lt;br/&gt;steady-state axiomatic solutions. Success in this
research is potentially &lt;br/&gt;transformative as it will provide the
foundation for the engineering of &lt;br/&gt;protocols and efficient algorithms
for distributed resource allocation, &lt;br/&gt;which is a pervasive problem in
our ever-growing highly-interconnected &lt;br/&gt;society.