* 0829392
* Selman Living Laboratory Biological Field Station Multi-Purpose Building
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2009,04/30/2012
* William Caire, University of Central Oklahoma
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 04/30/2012
* USD 239,538.00

The University of Central Oklahoma is awarded a grant for the construction of a
multi-use building at the 334-acre Selman Living Laboratory (SLL) in
northwestern Oklahoma. Since 1998, the University of Central Oklahoma has
developed the SLL into a significant research and education facility. Demand by
users has exceeded the station's capacity to accommodate groups larger than 20
at a time for research activities, presentations, seminars, or other events.The
proposed 36x25 ft multi-use building will function as a classroom/laboratory, as
a dining/kitchen facility, will contain restrooms and be available as a saferoom
for 50 to 75 individuals.The SLL is the only field station in North America with
a combination of mixed-grass prairies, gypsum outcrops, extensive gypsum caves,
microbiotic crusts, and associated springs, wetlands and wildlife. Such unusual
locales attract researchers, educators and the public. Therefore, the SLL with
its unique habitats is an excellent site for phylogenetic and systematic
studies, for investigations of biogeographic, historic and current distributions
of organisms, for studies of seasonal phenology of plants and fungi, for
conducting population and genetic studies, for preserving DNA tissue samples,
and for analyzing land use and stewardship of natural systems.

The new structure will contribute to integrating and actively engaging students
at various levels in science. UCO is a provider of NSF's SURE-STEP Program, and
the multi-use building will be available to UCO students and mentors to promote
critical thinking and to attract generations of conservationists and research
scientists. It will help recruit students into STEM disciplines, and
underrepresented groups into college. The building will allow Alabaster Caverns
State Park and the SLL to offer science, research and ecotourism experiences
through regularly scheduled interpretive and summer camp programs in ecology and
natural history. The facility will support cross-disciplinary activities that
dovetail with biology, e.g., geography, environmental chemistry, environmental
politics, western history, art, archaeology, geology, forensic science, and
meteorology.