* 0829412
* The Lifelong Learning Imperative (LLI) Workshop
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2010
* Norman Fortenberry, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Carol Stoel
* 08/31/2010
* USD 98,287.00

In today's global knowledge-based economy, organizations and workers are coping
with an ever-increasing pace of knowledge creation, particularly in the sciences
and engineering. This exponential growth is gradually reducing the length of the
"half-life" value of S&amp;E degrees. In response to this challenging
environment, both developed nations and the developing world are seeking to
increase and sustain technical competencies and preparedness of their workforce.
The U.S. makes substantial investments in higher education from the
undergraduate through the postdoctoral level. But once in the workforce,
opportunities available to scientists and engineers for learning experiences
that would keep them at the leading edge of knowledge in their field diminish.
Further, these opportunities may be falling over time due to a shortening of
employment duration with a single employer with an attendant reduction in the
willingness of many organizations to invest in continuing education of their
employees. The consequence of this situation is to shift the burden of
maintaining human capital to individual workers. While many studies from the
National Academies, the Council on Competitiveness and other think-tanks have
commented on the need for the U.S. to invest in lifelong learning opportunities
for working professionals, an in-depth study on the topic has not been conducted
since the National Academies report on continuing education was published in
1985. In the last 23 years, dramatic changes have occurred in the global
economy. The purpose of this project is to begin a careful assessment of current
practices in lifelong learning available to working professional scientists and
engineers. In particular, it will explore for possible unmet needs in certain
economic sectors or geographic regions. Our nation's technological pre-eminence
has benefited from industry-university-government cooperation in determining
needs for government-supported basic and applied research and investments in
higher education, particularly the education of scientists and engineers. This
project is exploring the extent of need and value for greater investments in
lifelong learning. The Lifelong Learning Imperative (LLI) workshop is the first
step. It will synthesize information gathered from in-depth interviews of
thought leaders in lifelong learning from the corporate work, academia and
government. This knowledge is fundamental to the development of a framework that
enables our nation to sustain the intellectual capital and hence the
competitiveness and of its science and engineering workforce.