* 0829323
* FSML: Improving the Chemistry Laboratory Capabilities at the University of Wisconsin Trout Lake Station
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* James Kitchell, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2011
* USD 87,293.00

The University of Wisconsin-Madison is awarded a grant to upgrade the analytical
capacity of the Trout Lake Station, a year-round biological field station
operated by the Center for Limnology at the University of Wisconsin-Madison,
with respect to water chemistry and radioisotope analysis by acquiring a gas
chromatograph and a liquid scintillation counter. Discoveries of the past decade
have substantially changed our views of lakes in landscape carbon cycles and
fluxes of greenhouse gases. The equipment provided under this award will
contribute to research in biogeochemistry, food web dynamics and microbial
ecology leading to an understanding the roles of freshwater systems in landscape
carbon cycles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Located in the Northern Highland Lake
District in northern Wisconsin, the station provides access to a wide variety of
aquatic ecosystems and their surrounding landscapes. More than 2500 lakes are
within 50km of the station. The station has a long history of aquatic research
that has produced over 1000 publications to date, with 166 peer-reviewed
publications and 21 graduate student theses in the past five years. In addition
to fostering research, the Trout Lake Station is used regularly for field trips
by undergraduate and graduate courses from universities throughout the Midwest.
&lt;br/&gt;