* 0829385
* Developing a Strategic Plan for Macalester College's Field Station, the Katharine Ordway Natural History Study Area
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Jerald Dosch, Macalester College
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2012
* USD 24,575.00

Macalester College is awarded a grant to develop a new strategic plan for the
college?s biological field station at the Katharine Ordway Natural History Study
Area (KONHSA). Established over 40 years ago, KONHSA contains at least ten major
plant communities, several seasonal and permanent ponds and springs, and abuts a
backwater lake adjacent to the Mississippi River. KONHSA?s location within a
rapidly expanding major metropolitan area provides unique opportunities to study
the impacts of human activities on ecological and geological processes and makes
it a valuable component of larger educational, research and conservation
networks. This project will consist of a series of conferences, workshops,
meetings, and site visits focused on educational programming, research
opportunities, facilities needs, and operational sustainability for the field
station. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A comprehensive, 18-month planning process will
engage researchers in biology, geology, environmental science, and geography to
stimulate curriculum development and expansion of research opportunities for
students and faculty at Macalester and other local colleges. The project will
also investigate possible participation in collaborative ecological research
networks such as the Great Lakes and Central States Ecological Observatory
(GLACEO), a member of the National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON), and/or
other collaborative networks. The planning process will also engage area
schools, the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources, the Minnesota Pollution
Control Agency, the National Park Service, the Science Museum of Minnesota, and
municipal governments to strengthen the station?s relationship with off-campus
agencies, educators, and policy professionals.&lt;br/&gt;