* 0829720
* SGER: Content Validation Study for an Analytic Framework to Identify Strategies Employed in Promising K-12 Science and Mathematics Teacher Preparation Programs
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2009
* Howard Gobstein, Association of Public and Land-Grant Universities
* Standard Grant
* James Hamos
* 08/31/2009
* USD 197,000.00

The National Association of State Universities &amp; Land-Grant Colleges
(NASULGC) is developing an Analytic Framework that can assess STEM teacher
preparation programs throughout the 218 member institutions of the association.
The development process includes: (1) a review of the research literature on the
key attributes and elements teacher preparation programs employ that are
generally recognized in the literature and within the professional community to
be effective; (2) eliciting the professional judgments of multiple review panels
representing deans of education and natural sciences, professors of science and
mathematics who engage in research on teacher preparation, professional
organizations, and other key stakeholder groups to help validate the goals,
objectives and strategies that will make up the key elements and structure of
the Analytic Framework; (3) field testing of the Analytic Framework on four to
five teacher preparation programs to assess feasibility and utility, and (4)
application of the Analytic Framework by ten additional higher education
institutions to further NASULGC's effort to seek greater understanding of the
usefulness of specific elements in each model and perhaps an understanding of
which attributes the models hold in common and where they differ.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultimately, the Analytic Framework will be useful for
institutions of higher education by serving as a tool for describing existing
teacher preparation programs notable for their early success in improving the
quantity and quality of science and mathematics teachers; by providing a
structure to systematically identify and compare leading practices and specific
program attributes employed by universities and their partnering school systems;
and by being used as a structure for documenting the systemic nature of teacher
preparation which includes recruitment into the profession, pedagogical and
content-knowledge instruction, clinical/field experiences, induction, and
professional development.