* 0829244
* Individual Nomination
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Suzzette Chopin, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 08/31/2012
* USD 10,000.00

SUZZETTE F. CHOPIN Texas A&amp;M University, Corpus
Christi&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Suzzette Chopin is a professor of
biomedical sciences, director of the Office of Special Programs and the Office
of Research Development and a Texas A&amp;M System Regents Professor at Texas
A&amp;M University-Corpus Christi (TAMUCC). Dr. Chopin has been instrumental in
the transition of TAMUCC from a two year institution toward Research I status
with an increased emphasis on faculty research. She has demonstrated
extraordinary mentoring of students and faculty at TAMUCC, a Hispanic Serving
Institution. Her mentoring activities have impacted hundreds of students and
dozens of faculty members. Her leadership has been a major driver in changing
the TAMUCC culture to one that embraces and promotes undergraduate research,
mentoring, and outreach to foster diversity in science and provide students with
opportunities that would not have existed without her passion, energy and
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Dr. Chopin has received seven awards for advising
and mentoring students. Through her efforts, TAMUCC received the 2001 Role Model
Institution Award from Minority Access Inc.; the 2003 Star Award from the Texas
Higher Education Coordinating Board; and the 2004 Diversity Award from Sigma Xi.
These awards recognized TAMUCC's success in fostering diversity in science. With
a colleague, she recently devised a strategic plan to establish a Center for
Undergraduate Excellence and Engagement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Chopin has
personally mentored 45 undergraduates in research (69% minority), 89% of who
have matriculated into graduate or professional schools or are currently
employed in science careers. Her undergraduates have presented at numerous
scientific meetings and have won nine awards. For seven years, she was research
coordinator for 56 minority students involved in the TAMUCC LSAMP program; of
the 50 students who have graduated. Her Research Experiences for Undergraduates
program has had 62 participants (58% minority) in the last six years. Of the 48
students whose status is known, 33 (69%) have graduated and have either
completed graduate or professional school or are still in graduate or
professional school or are employed in science. Dr. Chopin has established
additional programs that focus on mentoring underrepresented and economically
disadvantaged students. Dr. Chopin has shared her work with others through
publications and presentations on mentoring and undergraduate research.