* 0829661
* CPATH CDP: Piloting Pathways for Computational Thinking in a General Education Curriculum
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Charles Dierbach, Towson University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2011
* USD 164,981.00

The goal of this project is to provide a model for incorporating computational
thinking into the undergraduate general education curriculum, and to demonstrate
the intrinsic importance of computational thinking as a part of the general
education of all undergraduate students. The vision is that "Computational
Thinking becomes a standard general education category in the undergraduate
curriculum at all academic institutions nationwide. To meet this goal, the main
objective of this CPATH-CDP grant is to develop and assess a particular model
for developing pathways of computational thinking throughout the general
education (GenEd) curriculum at Towson University. Such pathways would be
realized through the development of discipline-specific computational thinking
courses by faculty members from various departments across all colleges on
campus, supported by a common "Everyday Computational Thinking" freshman-level
course. As the second-largest university in the state of Maryland with a broad
range of academic programs and faculty dedicated to teaching, Towson is an ideal
test bed for the proposed model. One of the outcomes of the recent revision of
the Towson General Education curriculum is the addition of a three-credit
freshman seminar category that all students would need to satisfy. This new
category is a perfect place for an introductory computational thinking course.
In addition, the committee will also be proposing a junior seminar GenEd
category, which will also be perfect placement of the more advanced discipline-
specific computational thinking courses. The model that this project will
investigate, for infusing general education curricula with concepts of
"computational thinking", has the potential to dramatically advance the
understanding of computing by all undergraduate students, not just those in a
computing major. Such understanding not only enables use of computing technology
and methods, but is an important intellectual asset for all types of problem
solving.