* 0829536
* EMT/BSSE: RNA switches and logic gates for biomolecular computation in vitro
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Yohei Yokobayashi, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 08/31/2012
* USD 449,898.00

Living cells constantly monitor their surroundings for physical and chemical
changes and respond by controlling genetic and biochemical processes inside the
cell. These processes involve sophisticated sensing and information processing
that are very different from the conventional silicon-based counterparts. The
investigators will develop novel biologically-inspired systems capable of
sophisticated molecular sensing and elementary computations in cell-free
conditions. The cell-fee gene switches and circuits could be used as a part of
larger systems or devices that use biological elements to achieve complex
functions, such as biosensors and diagnostic devices. Additionally, the project
will enable deeper understanding of how RNAs control gene expression in living
cells, which will further enhance our ability to engineer synthetic gene
circuits with complex functions.

The research will focus on the development of RNA-based molecular sensors and
gene circuits that function in cell-free conditions. The investigators will
develop new techniques to isolate RNA switches and circuits from a large pool of
mutants in the laboratory. Complex circuits will be built using the simpler
parts generated by the techniques. The gene switches and logic gates that will
be developed during the project period will be reusable as parts in other
biomolecular devices and systems, thus they will be deposited in a public
database. The proposed educational component of the project will provide an
exceptional opportunity for undergraduate students to engage in real problem
solving activities in small teams, both in the classroom and in the laboratory
at University of California, Davis.

