* 0829742
* EMT/BSSE:  A Computational Framework for Inferring Self-Regulatory Properties from High-Dimensional Dynamic Models of Biological Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Robert Clewley, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 08/31/2012
* USD 100,000.00

Biological forms of computation present some of the most promising?yet
challenging?examples of adaptive mechanisms that we would like to understand
well enough to engineer ourselves. However, models for biological processes are
becoming increasingly detailed and unwieldy in an effort to reproduce ever-more
detailed experimental observations. This research involves the development of
mathematical theory, algorithms, and software for efficiently constraining
models to data and to analyze their properties mathematically. A sufficiently
detailed understanding through mathematical analysis permits the generalization
of operating principles that provide biological insights and a basis for
engineering similar mechanisms. In particular, the investigators apply these
methods to infer adaptive and self-governing properties from detailed dynamical
models of excitable neural and cardiac tissue. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although
detailed models of physical systems may involve many variables and parameters,
mathematical analysis often demonstrates effective lower dimensionality in their
operating principles. A decomposition of a complex model to approximate lower-
dimensional sub-regimes facilitates analysis by standard techniques from
dynamical systems and optimization theory. In contrast to a priori reductions to
?toy? models, software tools monitor and control the sources of error in the
approximations, in particular the assumptions underlying the decomposition are
validated against global constraints to ensure consistency with the behavior of
the full physical system. To study abstract properties of the system such as
adaptiveness, decompositions can be made in terms of measurements of qualitative
features in the dynamics. These features may be simple or complex according to
the needs of the problem. Their formalized definition in software structures
enables existing techniques for model optimization and inference to be applied
more intelligently, particularly in the context of model behavior that may
resemble experimental data only in qualitative terms.&lt;br/&gt;