* 0829881
* Collaborative Research:   EMT/MISC:   Making Molecular Computation Practical for Biodetection Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Darko Stefanovic, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 08/31/2012
* USD 252,000.00

Researchers are developing computational elements and systems based on nucleic
acids for use in biodetection applications. The elements are based on
oligonucleotides (short single-strands of DNA) and deoxyribozymes
(oligonucleotides that enzymatically act on other oligonucleotides). These
elements are organized into information-processing systems as gates, cascades,
amplifiers, and larger application-specific circuits.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biodetection applications of the elements and systems
being developed include gene expression profiling (in basic molecular biology
research), human genetic screening (in public health), pathogen detection (in
containment of infectious diseases in the field), and civil defense (in rapid
detection of bioterrorism). The direct display devices the researchers are
developing provide a read-out that is easy to interpret without specialist
training and allows immediate practical decisions to be made; for instance, in
the field, health care providers can select individual patient treatment, and
public health professionals can select options for containment of infectious
disease outbreaks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers are solving four practical
problems. To reduce the expense of laboratory implementation procedures, they
are studying oligonucleotide interaction models and devising libraries for
modular circuit construction. To make the information-processing components
interface to the relevant biodetection applications, they are building robust
and selective biosensor modules. To make the visual display of biodetection
results easy to use, they are experimenting with different display designs, with
encoding schemes based on colors and patterns, including alphanumerics. Finally,
to make the deployment of devices practical, they are establishing clear and
easy to follow procedures for integrating with specific biological applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a prototype, researchers are developing a biodetector
for the class of mosquito-borne flaviviruses. The prototype allows
identification of at least 11 different flavivirus species, among them the
Yellow Fever virus and the West Nile virus, using equipment that is readily
deployable in the field. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;