* 0829978
* NEESR-SG: Performance-Based Design of Squat Reinforced Concrete Shear Walls
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2013
* Abraham Lynn, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,000,000.00

This award is an outcome of the NSF 08-519 program solicitation George E. Brown,
Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES) Research (NEESR)
competition and includes the University at Buffalo-SUNY (lead institution),
University of California, Berkeley (subaward), University of Washington
(subaward), California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo (subaward),
and the Consortium of Universities for Research in Earthquake Engineering
(subaward). This project will utilize the NEES equipment sites at the University
at Buffalo and the University of California, Berkeley. Structural walls are
widely used as seismic lateral-force-resisting components in buildings and
nuclear facilities. Since most building structures are low-rise with columns
spaced at approximately 30 feet on center and walls cast between columns, most
structural walls are squat with aspect ratios of 1.0 or less. Conventional walls
are constructed of reinforced concrete (RC). Currently, the design of these
walls is based on demand/capacity equations addressing shear strength and
prescriptive detailing requirements, which were developed for tall (high aspect
ratio) walls, to ensure ductility. However, analysis of squat wall test data
shows that current design equations result in a significant bias and scatter in
the ratios of estimated to measured strength. As such, squat walls stand out
among RC structural elements because of the large uncertainties in
characterizing their behavior. Such bias and uncertainties are unacceptable for
modern performance assessment methodologies for which unbiased estimates of
strength and stiffness are needed as a function of deformation and load history.
The goal of this project is to fill the substantial gaps in knowledge noted
above by developing curated numerical and visual experimental data on the
seismic response of large-scale squat reinforced concrete wall specimens,
validated tools for simulation of the seismic response of squat reinforced
concrete walls, code-oriented design equations and improved prescriptive details
to achieve specified levels of performance, fragility data suitable for
immediate use in performance-based seismic assessment and design of conventional
and nuclear structures, and teaching tools to effectively explain the resistance
and failure mechanisms of squat walls. The unique experimental capabilities of
the NEES equipment sites at Buffalo and Berkeley will be used to execute the
large-scale cyclic and hybrid-simulation experiments that must be performed to
develop the datasets required to prepare robust numerical simulation, design
guidance, and loss modeling tools. Other researchers will be able to use the
curated experimental results to further advance understanding with alternate
theories and numerical models. Physical experiments followed by numerical
simulations will be used to develop guidance for structural engineers and
loss/risk modelers on how squat reinforced concrete walls in buildings and
nuclear structures perform during earthquakes. This project will advance
fundamental science and knowledge in engineering with substantial intellectual
benefits to the structural engineering and loss modeling communities. Both
disciplines will contribute to and benefit from the integrated physical and
numerical simulation studies. The project will also train Ph.D. students, bring
in undergraduate students from a teaching university, engage underrepresented
students, impact building code development and performance-based seismic design,
and outreach to a broad spectrum of end-users in the United States and abroad
via web-accessed media, a Virtual Annual Meeting, and a Practice Committee
composed of expert design professionals. Data from this project will be made
available through the NEES data repository (http://www.nees.org)