* 0829082
* Fundamental Study of the Degradation Mechanisms of Polymer Electrolyte Membranes for PEM Fuel Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2008,05/31/2010
* Xinyu Huang, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 05/31/2010
* USD 299,998.00

CBET-0829082&lt;br/&gt;Huang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Membrane durability is a
significant technical barrier for the commercialization of polymer electrolyte
membrane (PEM) fuel cells, which are efficient and clean energy conversion
devices that can produce electricity from hydrogen. The pinhole formation and
mechanical embrittlement of fuel cell membranes lead to the frequently observed
"sudden death" behavior, which limits the service life of PEM fuel cell devices.
It is believed that the localized membrane decay is largely responsible for the
weakening and the breach of the fuel cell membrane. The objective of this
proposal is to explore the fundamental mechanisms of the localized or
inhomogeneous membrane decay phenomena through novel in situ diagnostic methods,
numerical modeling, and post-mortem analysis. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
Preliminary evidence has shown that, depending on the operation history, the
membrane decay can occur in different modes: uniform or localized. It is
hypothesized that the localized membrane decay is a result of a sequence of
events, which may include local flooding, local fuel starvation, perturbated
membrane potential distribution, carbon corrosion and Pt dissolution, and
inhomogeneous membrane decay. The localization of the decay phenomena is thought
to be due to the self-amplifying (as against self-extinguishing) nature of the
events in that they tend to create conditions that stabilize and reinforce the
local membrane decay processes. To prove this hypothesis, novel in situ
diagnostic methods are proposed to help reveal the local membrane decay
processes in great details. These include confocal micro-Raman spectroscopy and
high-resolution neutron imaging. Both techniques will be implemented to obtain
in situ maps of the membrane degradation state in running PEM fuel cells. The
map is expected to have a spatial (pixel) resolution on the order of 1 by 1 by 1
micron. The measured local intensive variables will be fed into simulation
models that predict membrane potential distribution as well as regions that are
susceptable to carbon corrosion, Pt dissolution and membrane thinning. These
predictions will be further validated by post-mortem analysis. If succesful, the
proposed method will result in the first in situ point-wise pictures of the
membrane degradation processes in running fuel cells. The proposed in situ
diagnostic methods offer significant advantages over traditional diagnostic
techniques, and can be used to study various emerging and challenging problems
that are related to ionomer membranes. The greater understanding of the
mechanisms of the inhomogeneous membane degradation will suggest directions for
engineering better materials, better cell/stack configuration, and innovative
membrane degradation mitigation strategies to improve the service life of PEM
fuel cells.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The proposed program will bring university
professors, graduate and undergraduate students together in an exciting research
effort, which has the potential to accelerate the commercialization of hydrogen
and fuel cell technologies. As part of the education effort, female and minority
students will be recruited to work on the project as summer interns. The PI and
the students will help create and provide fuel cell enriched science curricula
units to K-12 teachers. The adoption and dissemination of these curricula will
hopefully intrigue and inspire a large number of K-12 students to pursue
research in the broad area of energy for sustainability.