* 0829045
* Rational Self-Assembly of Ordered Nanoparticle Composites using DNA Interactions
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2010
* Talid Sinno, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 09/30/2010
* USD 200,000.00

CBET-0829045&lt;br/&gt;Sinno&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This
combined computational and experimental project is focused on the engineering of
ordered nano-particle composites whose self-assembly is driven by reversible DNA
bridges between particles. The creation of ordered arrays of metallic or
semiconductor nanoparticles promises to enable new materials, called
metamaterials, having truly unique and useful optical and electronic properties.
Current approaches to such nano-particle assembly using screened coulomb and
steric interactions depend sensitively on details of the particles? chemistry
and size. In contrast, DNA-directed assembly allows the engineering of a matrix
of specific attractive interactions among multiple nano-particle species, with
the interaction strength and range controlled by DNA sequence alone.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will specifically address the following two
principal research aims. The first aim is to map out the expected equilibrium
phase behavior of two component nano-particle suspensions as a function of the
relative binding strengths and radii of the two components. The second aim is to
elucidate the role that nucleation and growth kinetics play in limiting the
accessible nano-composite structures and achievable defect densities. In both
aims, detailed simulations will provide a broad survey of accessible phases;
selected structures subsequently will be realized experimentally. Concurrent
with these activities, new tools will be developed both for more accurate
simulation (Monte Carlo with correlated moves) and experiment (super-resolution
microscopy for nanostructural characterization). Using these components, this
effort will lead to a DNA-based self-assembly scheme to enable the cook-book
fabrication of ordered nanoparticle composites, where the crystal structures
formed are determined by DNA sequence and geometry rather than particle
chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Metamaterials, especially
those with properties such as a negative index of refraction are expected to
find applications in future photonic and plasmonic circuitry, as well as super
resolution microscopy. The aim of this project is to lay down fundamental
principles for rationally designing such materials. The new tools developed as
part of this project should have broad applicability well beyond the immediate
scope of the specific investigations outlined here.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
interdisciplinary project will provide ample opportunities for student training
at both the graduate and undergraduate levels. Both of the graduate students
involved in this project will expected to be actively involved in both the
computational and experimental facets, which we believe is relatively easy to
realize given the history of collaboration between the Crocker and Sinno
research groups. Students will be exposed to a state-of-the-art toolkit which
includes nano particle functionalization, advanced microscopy and numerical
modeling techniques. Moreover, the rich, visual nature of the simulation and
experimental data and their potential application in remarkable technology e.g.
invisibility will facilitate outreach efforts to high-school students in the
Philadelphia public schools and convey the excitement of scientific research.