* 0829977
* SGER - Pulsed Electron-Beam Deposition of PbTe/CdTe Nanocomposites and Thermal Property Study
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2008,12/31/2009
* Richard Mu, Fisk University
* Standard Grant
* Theodore L. Bergman
* 12/31/2009
* USD 50,000.00

CBET-0829977&lt;br/&gt;Mu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thermal transport in
nanostructures presents novel and exciting phenomena, such as surface and
interfacial boundary scattering and phonon spectrum confinement effects, which
offer new degrees of freedom to fabricate materials of desirable properties by
design. It has been shown that reduced thermal conductivity in superlattices,
nanowires, and nanocomposites can lead to a significant enhancement of
thermoelectric figure of merit, which could produce transformative impacts to
refrigeration and waste heat recovery. Currently, most nanostructured materials
under investigation for thermoelectric energy conversion are either single
crystalline superlattice thin films fabricated by e-beam epitaxial growth, which
is very expensive, or individual nanowires, which pose great challenges in
integration into functional composites. Therefore, nanostructured materials that
can be fabricated cost-effectively, yet possess nanoconfinement effects on
phonon transport are of great interest. This exploratory research project is a
novel approach to fabricate nanostructured composite materials for
thermoelectric energy conversion. More specifically, we will employ Pulsed
Electron-beam Deposition (PED), a new, versatile, cost-effective and user-
friendly thin film/nanoparticle deposition technique, to fabricate PbTe/CdTe
nanocomposite materials and investigate the thermal transport through the
fabricated material with the 3ù technique. We choose to deposit PbTe/CdTe
nanocomposite materials because bulk PbTe has shown the best thermoelectric
performance in the temperature range of 200 °C and 500 °C. In addition, we have
made initial progress in fabricating these materials with the PED system in our
lab. The fabricated PbTe/CdTe nanostructured thin films will have relatively
thick PbTe layers serving as the matrix and nanometer scale CdTe layers or
nanoparticles as the embedded nanostructure in the materials. We expect that in
addition to the alloy scattering, the matrix materials will effectively scatter
the high energy, short wavelength phonons, and the nanostructured CdTe will
provide additional scattering mechanisms to the long wavelength phonons.
Therefore, we can effectively reduce the thermal conductivity of the fabricated
materials using similar mechanisms to those for single crystalline superlattice
thin films or quantum composites. The ultimate goal of this research program is
to create a cost-effective approach to fabricate nanostructured high performance
thermoelectric materials at large scale. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of the proposed research program resides in the fabrication of the
PbTe/CdTe nanocomposite materials with the novel PED system and the
understanding of thermal transport through the fabricated nanocomposite
materials. If successful, this research will pave the road to cost-effective,
large-volume production of high-performance thermoelectric materials. In
addition, in this research we will acquire the knowledge on the interactions
between the energetic electron beam and the target and how these interactions
will affect the material fabrication process and the resulted materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With regard to broader impacts, the PED system is a
relatively new materials deposition technique and the deposition process is not
well understood yet, so the acquired knowledge on the deposition process will
have extensive impacts on other material fabrication using the PED technique.
This SGER support will help Fisk University, an HBCU Institution, to establish a
long-lasting research and education program in thermal science. The activities
will foster cross-disciplinary interactions between two universities and serve
as a major step to enhance underrepresented minority student education.