* 0829219
* Collaborative Research:  Drag Rules for Quasi-Static Granlar Media - Experimental and Numerical Studies
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2007,08/31/2009
* Stephan Koehler, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Marc S. Ingber
* 08/31/2009
* USD 43,043.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Numbers: 0626191 and 0625139&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigators: Koehler, Stephan and Santamaria, J.
Carlos&lt;br/&gt;Affiliations: Emory University and Georgia Tech Research
Corporation&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Collaborative Research: Drag Rules for
Quasi-Static Granular Media Experimental and Numerical
Studies&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The flow
of dense granular matter is technologically important, but poorly understood.
Competing models of dense granular matter are based upon different physical
assumptions, that have enough free parameters to allow for general agreement
with experimental observations. The number of experimental model systems is
relatively small, and they are typically characterized by a high degree of
symmetry involving simple flows, such as plane shear or Couette flow. In order
to advance understanding of dense granular flow, a larger and richer variety of
model systems needs to be considered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two research teams,
one from the Emory physics department and another from the Georgia Tech civil
engineering department will collaboratively investigate the dynamics of
intruders in dense granular media. Four inter-related projects are proposed: 1)
Force and flowfield measurements of intruders moving vertically through static
granular media, 2) Dependence of drag forces on the intruder's orientation, 3)
Variations of intruder drag forces due to shearing of granular matter, and 4)
Interactions between two intruders mediated through the granular medium. The
Emory team will perform the physical experiments; the Georgia Tech team will
simulate these four systems using a commercially available discrete element code
and the equivalent frictional continuum Cam Clay model. The experimental results
will verify that the code is accurate, and the numerical simulations will
provide insight into experimentally inaccessible quantities, such as the flow
fields and fabric. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed studies will provide
phenomenological rules for the resistive forces on intruders, and the results
will enable theorists to determine the validity of physical assumptions upon
which their models are based. These rules will be of practical use for
developing new methods of handling granular matter and for understanding how
certain desert animals swim through sandy
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Procedures will be developed for determining the in
situ, local rheology within granular beds based upon intruder drag. These
procedures will enhance processing of granular matter in many different
settings, varying from conveyer belts to mixing of pharmaceutical powders. This
program will build an exciting, synergistic and interdisciplinary environment,
by combining teams from two different universities and disciplines, with each
team studying the same systems but using different approaches. These
interactions will also prompt inter-disciplinary teaching of a soft condensed
matter physics course and a fundamentals of granular matter course. Additional
activities include undergraduate and graduate research participation, creation
of web-based teaching modules, and interactions with desert
biologists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;