* 0829557
* Workshop: Interdisciplinary Graduate Design Programs; Arlington, Virginia; 29-30 May 2008
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2008,12/31/2009
* Samuel Hunter, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Christina L. Bloebaum
* 12/31/2009
* USD 49,957.00

This grant provides funding to support a workshop on Interdisciplinary Graduate
Design Programs to be held at the National Science Foundation on May 29-30,
2008. The invited participants will consist of key faculty and researchers from
the United States, the Netherlands, Italy, Sweden and several other countries
who are involved in these unique graduate programs. Industry practitioners from
well-known design firms and corporations will also participate. This workshop
will provide a forum wherein the design community can discuss the challenges,
successes, and future directions of these programs to gain new insights into how
to construct, grow, and sustain interdisciplinary graduate programs that prepare
students for successful design innovation. The participants will also discuss
benchmarking metrics for program assessment while soliciting industry feedback
on program improvements. The results will be widely disseminated through
publications, a web site, presentations at ASEE and ASME conferences, a panel
session at the 2008 ASME International Design Engineering Technical Conferences,
and a special issue of the ASME Journal of Mechanical Design.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will strengthen existing and emerging
interdisciplinary graduate design programs across the country, improving our
innovation output and increasing our competitive economic advantage. The
workshop supports the emergence of a new model for graduate education which is
based on tightly integrated interdisciplinary research. The interdisciplinary
graduate design programs not only cross department boundaries within engineering
but also span college boundaries through mutually beneficial partnerships with
non-engineering programs at the university, e.g. architecture, business, art and
design, society and technology. The lessons learned from creating,
administering, and sustaining these interdisciplinary graduate design programs,
which will be widely disseminated through publications and a web-based
repository of knowledge, will provide substantive guidance to inform the
creation of other novel and highly interdisciplinary graduate programs.
&lt;br/&gt;