* 0829872
* EMT/QIS: GaAs hole spins as qubits: Eliminating hyperfine interaction-induced decoherence
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Mansour Shayegan, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 08/31/2011
* USD 600,000.00

EMT/QIS: GaAs hole spins as qubits: Eliminating hyperfine interaction-
induced&lt;br/&gt;decoherence&lt;br/&gt;Quantum Computing is an emerging area of
science and engineering. Its broad goal&lt;br/&gt;is to harness the
superposition of quantum states for computing purposes. The
elementary&lt;br/&gt;building block of a quantum computer is the quantum bit
(qubit). Quantum bits have been&lt;br/&gt;demonstrated in a wide variety of
systems ranging from trapped ions, to electron spins
in&lt;br/&gt;semiconductors, to superconductors. In order to be useful, a qubit
must be properly&lt;br/&gt;initialized, measured, and coupled to other qubits.
The quality of a qubit is characterized&lt;br/&gt;by a lifetime (T1) and a
coherence time (T2). These time scales vary by several orders
of&lt;br/&gt;magnitude from one system to another (e.g. trapped ion versus
superconducting qubits).&lt;br/&gt;It is therefore customary to quote a quality
factor, Q, which is the ratio of the coherence&lt;br/&gt;time to the typical
gate operation time.&lt;br/&gt;We will build qubits based on hole spins in GaAs
nanometer-size quantum dots.&lt;br/&gt;Hole spins are promising candidates since
the hole wavefunctions have p-like orbitals. As&lt;br/&gt;a result, hyperfine
interactions with the host crystal nuclei are expected to be
negligible,&lt;br/&gt;leading to spin coherence times approaching the hole spin
lifetime of 300 microseconds.&lt;br/&gt;Taking into account the typical gate
operation time of ~150 ps, a hole spin qubit, if&lt;br/&gt;realized, could have
a quality factor of nearly 2 million, well beyond the threshold
for&lt;br/&gt;fault tolerance. The primary goal of this project is to accurately
measure, and determine&lt;br/&gt;what limits, the quantum coherence times of
hole spins in GaAs quantum dots.