* 0829946
* EMT/MISC: Theory and methods for design and synthesis of approximate logic circuits and systems: a paradigm for emerging technologies
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Sandeep Gupta, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 08/31/2012
* USD 199,998.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This research develops a completely new approach for
automatically synthesizing and manually designing digital circuits that
implement approximate-yet-acceptable versions of logic functions. This approach
provides lower cost and higher speed versions of many widely used digital
systems. The benefits of this research will grow with the adoption of each new
nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;All future nanoscale CMOS and emerging non-CMOS
nanotechnologies will suffer from increasing levels of non-idealities ?
especially high process variations, defect densities, and noise sensitivity.
These non-idealities present a fundamental challenge, since, if left unchecked,
they will erode most benefits provided by adoption of these nanotechnologies.
This research involves development of approximate design and synthesis, a
completely new paradigm for dealing with this fundamental challenge. This
paradigm builds upon the recent demonstration that there is considerable
flexibility in the behavioral specifications for wide classes of digital
systems. Such flexibilities in specifications are captured in the form of
acceptable deviations from the nominal behavioral specifications and the first
logic synthesis and design approaches and tools are developed to exploit these
deviations to reduce cost or enhance performance and yield. In contrast to all
existing research directions, this paradigm mitigates the effects of non-
idealities by simplifying the designed circuit. This approach is applicable to
application-specific chips for many embedded systems and many types of widely
used processors, e.g., arithmetic co-processors, processors for digital signal
processing, and graphics processors. Collectively, the set of chips that benefit
from this approach constitute a significant proportion of all chips sold in any
given year. This research opens a completely new avenue for dramatically
improving cost, performance, and yield for future nanotechnologies.&lt;br/&gt;1