* 0829306
* CAREER:  Discourse Analysis:  A Catalyst for Reflective Inquiry in Mathematics Classrooms
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2008,07/31/2010
* Beth Herbel-Eisenmann, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 07/31/2010
* USD 176,866.00

The objectives of the proposed project are to examine: the nature of
mathematical discourse in middle school mathematics classrooms; the ways in
which middle school mathematics teachers' beliefs impact the discourse when
working to enact reform-oriented instruction and how this information can be
used to incorporate practitioner research using concepts and tools of discourse
analysis to improve mathematics instruction. The significance of this work comes
in understanding how classroom discourse can affect the learning environment and
engage students in learning mathematics in the ways proposed by the Standards.
The focus of those documents has been to promote conceptual understanding and
sense making instead of the procedural emphasis that often takes precedence in
more traditional mathematics teaching. The Standards vision can only be achieved
if some of the discourse patterns in current mathematics instruction are changed
from a transmission model of communication to one that supports
inquiry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research plan is to conduct six to nine case
studies of the discourse in middle school mathematics classrooms. These case
studies will highlight classroom discourse patterns -- the form, function and
meaning. In addition, we will capture the process of teachers engaging in
practitioner research projects in which they choose an aspect of their discourse
to change and study the affects of that change on the classroom learning
environment. The project will also examine how the combination of tools and
concepts from discourse analysis and practitioner research projects affect
teacher beliefs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational goal of this project is
to design a long-term professional development program that will continue beyond
this funding with other cohorts of teachers. The research case studies and other
data will be used to write case studies for both undergraduate methods courses
and to be used as part of a long-term professional development program. In
addition, these cases will be made available to other teacher educators.
University researchers and teacher researchers will collaboratively develop the
courses and workshops that comprise the professional development
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;