* 0829327
* CAREER: Integrated Research and Education in Smart Sensing and Intelligent Structures Technology
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/08/2008,01/31/2012
* Yunfeng Zhang, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 01/31/2012
* USD 326,819.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program
project is to develop an integrated research and education program in the
emerging field of smart sensing and intelligent structures technology. The
research aims to establish a novel smart sensing technology which will integrate
wireless sensor network, sensor data compression, and structural system
identification technologies. Novel high-performance data compression algorithms,
which use structural system information to maximize the compression performance,
will be developed for vibration sensor data. An integrated education plan is
also included to enhance the impact of this cutting-edge technology on college
students, G6-12 students and practicing engineers. A series of lecture modules
in smart structure technologies for non-engineering students will be developed
under a creative engineering minor program for non-engineering majors at Lehigh
University. This project also includes outreach activities in smart sensing
technologies for the S.T.A.R. program at LU, which are designed to encourage
economically and academically disadvantaged at-risk students for higher
education. Assessment technology for teaching and learning will be used to
evaluate the effectiveness of the education and outreach activities in
collaboration of educational faculty experts on campus.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcome of this investigation is expected to have a
strong impact on the advancements in sensor and structural health monitoring
technologies.