* 0829558
* CPATH CB:   Developing a Professional Community for Introducing the Principles of Enterprise Computing Technologies into the Undergraduate Curriculum
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* David Douglas, Marist College
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 08/31/2012
* USD 491,000.00

This CPATH Community Building project develops a computing education community
focused on introducing enterprise computing technologies into undergraduate
computing education. Marist College serves as the lead institution in
partnership with Illinois State University, North Carolina Central University,
University of Arkansas, and Widener University. The team plans to bring together
representatives from academia, industry, and non-profit sectors to develop and
implement new curricula focused on skills needed to develop and maintain
enterprise systems, integrate them into networks of technologically and
geographically diverse systems, and design and implement applications that span
a network of enterprise systems and distributed systems working together.
Students should have the skills to set up and run data centers that minimize
energy requirements and meet the ever increasing need for business continuity
and disaster recovery. The project includes participation by a wide range of
experts to develop cost effective undergraduate curricula based on
nonproprietary standards that address essential computing technology principles
encountered in predominantly large system environments.

The intellectual merit of the project lies in strong collaborative team and
committed industry partners. The enterprise computing focus is innovative and
important for the nation but also challenging both academically and practically.
The project has the potential to produce new research and models in an area of
emerging importance to the country.

The broader impacts of the project include the development of an educational
community to share resources such as new courses and curricula. The
implementation of new enterprise computing curricula could impact job prospects
and capacity for students across the country through new innovative computing
pathways open to a diverse student population in a range of academic
disciplines.