* 0829404
* Integrated Planning of Research, Education and Facilities in the Texas Hill Country for the Llano River Field Station-Texas Tech University
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2009,04/30/2012
* Thomas Arsuffi, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 04/30/2012
* USD 24,767.00

The Texas Tech University is awarded a grant to support strategica planning for
the Llano River Field Station (LRFS). LRFS is the largest (&gt; 400 acres)
inland field station in Texas, located in the biologically diverse Central Texas
Hill Country, and bisected by the headwaters of the South Llano River.
Objectives are to develop an integrated master plan for LRFS that will:
facilitate, support, and attract excellent basic and applied science by the
local, regional, national and international scientific communities; provide
opportunities for undergraduate, graduate and K-12 education; provide
opportunities for education and outreach to the Texas public; and to develop
partnerships with the state and federal natural resource and education agencies.
Specific activities include: 1) two separate, but integrated facilitated
workshops to incorporate input from the regional and national scientific and
educational community; 2) identification of the interests and specific roles of
partner institutions, and 3) information-gathering visits to successful FSML
facilities. The location, small size and mission of field stations gives them
the capacity to remove barriers between education and research present on main
campus, and between academic units, disciplines, scientists and non-scientists,
and K-12 schools. This project will link a highly successful K- 12 Outdoor
School 4 day/3 night educational experience with a series of basic and applied
research projects dealing with water/watersheds, exotic species, range
management, natural resources and ecological restoration amenable for study and
curriculum units of the TTU Outdoor School.