* 0829899
* Multi-Resolution Partitioning and Kinetic Function Estimation for Dynamic  Biochemical Network Model Development
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Soha Hassoun, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 08/31/2013
* USD 874,000.00

This interdisciplinary research investigates creating dynamic models of
biological systems with predictive power that is beyond the capabilities of
current generation of descriptive, static models. A biological system such as a
cell can be conceptualized as a complex integrated network of biochemical
reactions. Metabolic reactions are an important class of reactions performing
essential cellular functions such as energy generation, biosynthesis, and
harmful waste and byproduct elimination. Predictive models of cellular
metabolism offer broad benefits as tools for both basic and applied research. In
the context of public health, metabolic models can be used to integrate new
laboratory and clinical data on drug efficacy, to compare healthy and diseased
tissues, and to predict potentially harmful side effects of new drugs under
development. Metabolic models also play an essential role in biotechnology as
they enable the design and optimization of genetically engineered microbial
cells that produce industrially useful bulk and value-added chemicals (e.g.
biofuels).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on two innovative modeling
techniques for metabolic networks. The driving principle for both techniques is
integration of structural and functional analyses. The first technique is multi-
resolution structural modeling, which combines top-down modularization and
bottom-up functional abstraction of individual reactions. The second technique
compensates for incomplete information during mathematical modeling. This work
investigates a co-estimation of reaction rate law functions and relevant
parameters for each dominant reaction set while using noisy data for model
calibration. The two modeling techniques and their associated algorithms are
tested on experimental data collected from cultures of liver cells
(hepatocytes), a representative and well-studied model system with biochemical
complexity and relevance to public health. The modeling techniques obtained
through this study feature generic aspects, e.g. mathematical abstraction of
directed and time-varying interactions, which apply not only to metabolic
networks but also other types of important biochemical (e.g. signaling, gene
regulatory, etc.) networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;