* 0829512
* Integrating field methods and numerical models to quantify the links between larval transport, connectivity, and population dynamics
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2014
* Elizabeth North, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 09/30/2014
* USD 750,989.00

This coupled field-and-modeling research project is designed to address
fundamental, cutting-edge questions that will significantly enhance our
understanding of physical-biological interactions in planktonic organisms and
quantify how pelagic life stages influence population dynamics. Technological
advances in field methodology and numerical modeling will be integrated and
applied to investigate and compare how circulation patterns, larval transport,
sub-population connectivity, and population dynamics of the Eastern oyster,
Crassostrea virginica, respond to environmental variability and habitat
alteration. This project will provide information that will significantly
enhance the restoration and management of oysters. &lt;br/&gt; Physical-
biological interactions are an integral part of understanding fish, bivalve, and
crustacean early-life history and the processes that affect inter-annual
variability in their recruitment to reproducing populations. The combined
modeling and field approach builds on existing state-of-the-art models, it
applies a new technology that will significantly advance our ability to
investigate in-situ bivalve larvae dynamics, and it will generate critical
information about the early life of oysters (timing of spawning, larval
behavior) that is necessary for enhancing our understanding and prediction of
recruitment processes. &lt;br/&gt; This research will also advance our
understanding of population dynamics of organisms with a pelagic life stages by
making quantitative links between larval transport and a full life-cycle model.
In doing so, it will provide improved understanding of the inter-relationships
between, and relative importance of, larval transport, the connectivity of
different reef systems, and adult growth, mortality, and gamete production, and
how these relationships are influenced by changes in physical conditions and
habitat. &lt;br/&gt; Although focused on the oyster, Crassostrea virginica, the
ecological studies and comparisons will result in a significant enhancement in
our understanding of the interactions between physical conditions and a suite of
bivalve species. This program will benefit society by providing new insights and
understanding that will enhance fisheries management capabilities. The numerical
tools developed will have the resolution appropriate for helping to guide oyster
restoration programs, locate optimal sanctuaries (i.e., marine protected areas),
and inform spatial management of oyster harvest. Although the quantitative tools
and information generated will directly support oyster management and
restoration activities of state and federal partners in Chesapeake Bay, the
findings and tools developed in this project will be applicable to many other
systems where bivalves comprise an important component of commercial and
recreational fisheries. A PhD graduate student will be trained in field and
numerical modeling research in this coupled field-and-modeling program. In
addition to gaining a solid foundation in a cutting-edge field, the student will
have the opportunity to develop science communication skills and interact with
management agency representatives.