* 0829762
* Collaborative Research:  From Acorus to Zingiber - Assembling the Phylogeny of the Monocots
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Dennis Stevenson, New York Botanical Garden
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 08/31/2013
* USD 789,455.00

Monocots (including such groups as grasses, palms, orchids, and philodendrons)
include more than 65,000 species of flowering plants, occur in almost all
habitats, and provide the great majority of the human diet. A definitive family
tree for this group will be developed and used to understand the broad-scale
evolution of monocots over geologic time. A total of 23 genes in 601 species,
whole chloroplast genomes in 175 species, and all genes expressed in 50 species
will be sequenced and used to reconstruct the evolutionary history of this
group. Additionally, phenotypic data from living and fossil species will be
collected, and all data will be analyzed integratively to provide a
comprehensive understanding of monocot evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
resulting family tree will provide the foundation for many new studies in
physiology, ecology, biogeography, and genomics of flowering plants. Web access
to all data and results will be provided to researchers and K-12 teachers and
students. Several post-doctoral fellows, graduate students, and undergraduates
(with a focus on women and minorities) will be trained, and four young faculty
will be supported. A museum exhibit on the evolution of flowering plants will be
produced for high-profile venues in New York, Chicago, Denver, and Berkeley, and
a children's monocot garden exhibit will be developed at the New York Botanical
Garden. Posters illustrating monocot diversity and evolution will be distributed
to colleges, and staff will give talks at public high schools.