* 0829745
* EMT/BSSE Programmable Self-Adaptation: A Bio-inspired Approach To Multi-agent Robotic Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Radhika Nagpal, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 08/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

Emerging computing technologies have made it possible to
manufacture&lt;br/&gt;large-scale embedded multi-agent systems, from vast sensor
networks to&lt;br/&gt;modular robots and smart materials. A key challenge is
understanding&lt;br/&gt;how to program such systems at the individual agent
level in order to&lt;br/&gt;achieve system-level behavior that is complex,
fault-tolerant, and&lt;br/&gt;adapts to the environment. One source of
inspiration is multicellular&lt;br/&gt;biological systems (tissues, organs, and
simple organisms) that&lt;br/&gt;achieve complex self-adaptation in changing
environments through the&lt;br/&gt;distributed cooperation and sensing of vast
numbers of cells. Such&lt;br/&gt;systems can provide novel bio-inspired
principles for the design and&lt;br/&gt;programming of multi-agent
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research investigates new computational
paradigms for programming&lt;br/&gt;multi-agent robotic systems to achieve
complex self-adaptation in&lt;br/&gt;response to the environment. The two main
thrusts are: (a) the&lt;br/&gt;development of a global-to-local programming
methodology for&lt;br/&gt;describing complex global adaptation goals and
automatically deriving&lt;br/&gt;provably robust multi-agent control (b) the
development of a&lt;br/&gt;tissue-inspired modular robotic system that can
demonstrate&lt;br/&gt;self-adaptive structures. A key source of inspiration is
the&lt;br/&gt;decentralized control strategies that cells use to
achieve&lt;br/&gt;environment-responsive structures and functions, e.g. shape
adaptation&lt;br/&gt;in plants and vascular networks, and locomotion in simple
animals. The&lt;br/&gt;aim is to harness these bio-inspired principles to create
multi-agent&lt;br/&gt;robotic systems that replicate the adaptability and
responsiveness of&lt;br/&gt;living systems. This work has broad application,
from robust control&lt;br/&gt;in distributed sensor-actuator networks to the
development of&lt;br/&gt;self-adapting architectural structures and prosthetics.
This research&lt;br/&gt;significantly advances our understanding of how to
design autonomous&lt;br/&gt;multi-agent computing systems that can self-
organize, self-repair, and&lt;br/&gt;respond to the
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;