* 0829047
* GOALI: Modeling and Control of Fluid Dynamics and Ice Formation  in  Pharmaceutical Freeze-Drying
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2010
* Alina Alexeenko, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Horst Henning Winter
* 02/28/2010
* USD 93,157.00

0829047&lt;br/&gt;Alexeenko &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Freeze-drying is
widely used in pharmaceutical manufacturing to extend the shelf life of medical
drugs and to provide easy shipping and storage. The goal of freeze-drying is to
remove the solvent in such a way that the sensitive molecular structure of the
active substance of a drug is least disturbed, and to provide a sterile powder
that is quickly and completely rehydrated upon the addition of water. This is
done by fast freezing followed by sublimation. Freeze-drying is both a time- and
energy-intensive manufacturing process. For example, freeze-drying of 50
milliliters of an experimental protein drug takes up to three days and more than
2,000,000 BTU of energy. Currently, the design of freeze-drying equipment, both
laboratory-scale and industrial, is based largely on empirical knowledge. The
PIs will apply numerical simulations of vapor and non-condensable gas transport
in a freeze-dryer chamber and develop models of vapor/ice interphase transport
in a condenser. These large-scale simulations will model vapor and
noncondensable gas flow and ice formation in freeze-drying using computational
fluid dynamics and the direct simulation Monte Carlo method. Numerical modeling
will provide insight into the control of the biopharmaceutical freeze-drying
process and the design of compact condensers. Experimental studies will validate
the developed models by comparison position dependence of sublimation rates in a
freeze-dryer chamber under controlled radiative and conductive heat transfer
conditions; water vapor flow rates in the chamber-condenser connector by tunable
diode laser absorption spectroscopy; ice formation rates and geometric shapes in
the condenser for various condensing surface configurations and temperatures;
and a wide range of chamber-to-condenser pressure ratios. The validated models
and simulation approaches will form a knowledge base by which future designs of
freeze-drying systems and processes will be guided in a physics-based as opposed
to an empirical approach. Understanding the fluid dynamics of the water vapor
and non-condensable gas as well as the dynamics of vapor/ice interface in
freeze-dryers will accelerate the development of freeze-dried products and
decrease drug manufacturing costs, which will have a very high societal impact.