* 0829333
* Using Continental Scale Data In Undergraduate Ecology Education Phase 1Workshop
* BIO,EF
* 05/01/2008,12/31/2011
* Teresa Mourad, Ecological Society of America
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 12/31/2011
* USD 59,695.00

The National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON) will provide a unique
opportunity for the undergraduate education community to participate in and
teach ecology at large spatial and temporal scales. NEON will enormously expand
the potential and the opportunities for continental-scale research, education
and training. The NEON data will offer an unprecedented opportunity for students
at small undergraduate institutions to work with real data from the forefront of
ecological research either as classroom exercises or through independent
research projects. The associated cyberinfrastructure will provide the tools
that make such large-scale working partnerships not only possible, but
practical. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide funds to the Ecological
Society of America for planning activities to introduce NEON to the
undergraduate education community. ESA will conduct a scoping workshop to bring
together undergraduate educators to explore approaches to teaching that will
make use of large volumes of continental-scale data. Data on land use change and
climate change will be made available to faculty for discussion and analysis.
Undergraduate educators will receive guidance on student-active methods that
will stimulate student participation in the scientific process, using real data,
even in situations where fieldwork is not feasible. Additional planning will
occur to engage the faculty participating in as mentors to undergraduate
students as they develop (a) ideas for student research projects on a
continental scale and (b) ways in which undergraduate students can collaborate
to advance these research projects and generate new research ideas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project paves the way for college educators to take
advantage of the new opportunities and challenges that NEON will present for
ecology education. Future projects growing out of the workshop are expected to
incorporate technological features, tools, and skills useful in facilitating
data collection and analysis and ideas that will establish the foundations for
collaborative teaching, learning and undergraduate involvement in research on a
continental scale. Further, with SEEDS faculty and students involved, it is
anticipated that future projects will engage a high degree of participation from
underrepresented students in the ecological sciences.&lt;br/&gt;