* 0829844
* Collaborative Research: EMT/BSSE:Petascale Simulations of DNA Dynamics and Self-Assembly
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2013
* Ananth Grama, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 08/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

PETASCALE SIMULATIONS OF DNA DYNAMICS AND SELF-ASSEMBLY Priya Vashishta?PI,
Rajiv K. Kalia, Aiichiro Nakano (University of Southern California) Ananth Grama
(Purdue University)

DNA translocation through solid-state nanopores and nanofluidic channels
underlie ?lab-on-a-chip? technology and solid-state nanopore ?microscopy? for
molecular structure and high-speed sequencing. Highly efficient methods for
directed self-assembly of DNA offer unprecedented opportunities for the
synthesis of novel genes, chromosome mapping, biosensors, molecular machines,
nanoelectronics and nanomechanical systems, and formulations of mesoscopic
structural motifs as building blocks of emerging periodic and aperiodic
nanostructures consisting of DNAs. This project involves the study of DNA self-
assembly and translocation through nanometer-scale pores in silica and silicon
nitride membranes using a predictive hierarchical petascale simulation framework
consisting of: (1) Highly accurate quantum mechanical (QM) simulations to
describe chemical processes in DNA translocation and concatenation; (2)
multibillion-atom molecular dynamics (MD) simulations for structural properties
and dynamical processes of DNAs in confined fluidic environments, with
interatomic interactions validated by QM calculations and key experiments; (3)
hybrid MD and adaptive lattice Boltzmann (LB) simulations in which MD is
embedded in translocation/concatenation regions, and LB in the rest of the
fluid; (4) accelerated dynamics approaches to reach macroscopic time scales for
direct comparison with experimental data; (5) metascalable, self-tuning,
multicore parallel simulation algorithms; and (6) automated model transitioning
to embed higher fidelity simulations inside coarser simulations on demand with
controlled error propagation. A metascalable (or ?design once, scale on new
architectures?) parallel application-development framework is also being
developed for first-principles simulations of directed DNA self-assembly.