* 0829798
* EMT/NANO: Polymerase-Based Self-Activating and Reactivating DNA Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* John Reif, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 08/31/2012
* USD 500,000.00

A central goal of DNA nanotechnology is to develop methods for assembling
complex, aperiodic structures for nanofabrication tasks. The critical challenge
addressed in this work is robust biomolecular system design to avoid errors in
complex nanoscale pattern formation via controlled directional assembly.
Algorithmic DNA self-assembly makes use of DNA nanostructures (tiles), which
assemble together via hybridization, theoretically forming DNA lattices with
complex patterns, but are limited by significant assembly mismatch errors that
prevent further growth. The project?s innovative approach is assembly error
avoidance (rather than crystal error correction) using self-activating and
reactivating DNA protocols driven by the use of DNA polymerase enzyme. A novel
protection/deprotection strategy (using DNA polymerase displacement) enforces
the direction of tiling assembly growth to avoid growth errors. Initially, a
tile is in an inactive state, with output pads protected from binding with other
tiles, preventing lattice growth in (unwanted) reverse direction. After other
tiles bind to this tile?s input pads, it enters an active state where its output
pads are exposed, allowing further growth. Tasks include various experimental
demonstrations of activatable tiles and computer simulation software tools for
design and kinetic probabilistic simulation of the tile assembly process and
protocols. The controlled directional assembly of tiling assemblies eliminates a
major roadblock in the development of applications of patterned DNA lattices,
providing a methodology for vastly increasing the complexity of synthetic
molecular patterned nanostructures. Additional novel applications to be
demonstrated include assemblies for molecular sensing, concentration (via
activation of assembling tiles only when a speci&amp;#64257;c target molecule
docks at a particular site on the tile), and catalyzation. The work spans many
&amp;#64257;elds including chemistry, biochemistry, physics, and computer
science, with applications in bioengineering, biomedical engineering and nano-
engineering. It provides students exciting and challenging interdisciplinary
training opportunities unique to the degree of its span of multiple disciplines,
impacting the critical national need in training in multiple disciplines.