* 0829937
* EMT/QIS:  Robust Quantum Simulation Techniques for Fault-Tolerant Quantum Computation
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Aram Harrow, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 08/31/2012
* USD 324,000.00

Quantum computers offer fundamental algorithmic advantages over classical
computers and building a quantum computer would fundamentally change the power
of our computers. Large scale quantum computers, however, are difficult to build
in large part due to the fact that quantum systems interact with their
environment and quickly lose their quantum nature. The solution to this problem,
at least in theory, was provided by the theory of fault-tolerant quantum
computation. The theory of fault-tolerant quantum computation, while providing
an in principle demonstration of viability of quantum computers, suffers from
requiring protocols that have a severe complexity overhead. As a result of these
difficulties, an alternative approach toward building a robust quantum computer
has been pursued in which many-body quantum systems protect quantum information
by encoding this information in suitable protected degrees of freedom. In this
approach the natural physics of the system helps protect the quantum
information. A difficulty arises, however, due in part to the complexity
required of the engineered quantum system. The research being performed here
seeks to overcome this obstacle and open the path for constructing the
equivalent of a transistor for quantum computers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Here the
investigators study three approaches to engineering effective many-body
interactions suitable for protecting quantum information. The &amp;#64257;rst
approach involves the construction of fault-tolerant perturbation gadgets. This
research involves studying the robustness of the perturbation gadgets. The
second approach involves the use of quantum circuits to simulate Hamiltonian
dynamics. In this technique, research is performed on new methods for fault-
tolerant simulation. A &amp;#64257;nal technique involves the use of time-
dependent Hamiltonians and the research involves a detailed study of the errors
in this time-dependent construction.&lt;br/&gt;