* 0829607
* CPATH CDP:   Integrating Biology and Computing:   Empowering Future Computer Professionals
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Raj Acharya, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 08/31/2012
* USD 149,028.00

This CPATH Conceptual Development and Planning project integrates concepts from
biology and computer science to create a new track in biological computing. It
includes 23 faculty members from 14 academic disciplines with a vision for
nurturing future leaders in biological computing. The track recognizes the
importance of computing concepts and practice to current thinking in biology as
well as the potential for biological processes to inform the development of
computer science. The project involves institutional transformation and includes
outreach to secondary schools and broader communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of the project lies in the importance and currency of the
topic and clear need for such changes in computing education to prepare the
upcoming generation of computing professionals. The project team includes
researchers with significant expertise in both the computing discipline research
that underlies the implementation and in educational innovation. The project has
the potential for national impact and to provide new models for computing
education of the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the project
lie in the potential to address changing demands on computing professionals and
to attract a diverse audience of students. The project includes outreach to high
school students and broader communities. The project has the potential to
provide quality research-based resources for the preparation of undergraduates
for careers in biological computing. &lt;br/&gt;