* 0829959
* Approximating Network Design Problems on Directed and Undirected Graphs
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2012
* Guy Kortsarz, Rutgers University Camden
* Standard Grant
* Balasubramanian Kalyanasundaram
* 01/31/2012
* USD 99,997.00

Problems that require communication between among users abound in modern life.
Such problems present a collection of users and all possible links among all
pairs of users, each link carrying a cost. The links can be directed or
undirected (in the undirected case both parties can exchange information along
the link). The goal is to select a minimum cost collection of links under some
communication constraints. The simplest example of such problem is that every
user will be able to send a message to every other user perhaps via a series of
links. One of the main goals of this proposal is to understand some of the most
fundamental network design problems on directed networks whose exact
approximability status remains unclear for a very long time. Directed networks
appear frequently when modeling the problem by an undirected network is not
enough. Applications for which the networks arising are naturally directed
include web related problems, problems in social networks, problems on dynamic
(namely changing) links in artificial intelligence and more. A crucial example
is the directed Steiner problem that is to connect a set of given terminals
(stations, users) to a given root (central command) by directed links at low
cost. The intellectual merit of the proposal includes expanding our
understanding of the power of approximation algorithms and their limitations. In
a more broader context, the project will include the creation of a new graduate
course on approximation algorithms in the Computer Science department at Rutgers
University, Camden. Students taking the course will be encouraged to undertake
research work in this subject, or alternatively, work on a large practical
project that will compare the theoretical performance guarantees of
approximation algorithms versus their performance in practice.