* 0829382
* SGER:  A Novel Multi-Scoring Functions Sampling Approach to Impove Protein Modeling Resolution and It's Applications in Protein Loop Structure Prediction
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2010
* Yaohang Li, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 02/28/2010
* USD 90,000.00

The value of computer-generated protein structural models in biological research
and practice relies critically on their accuracy. However, development of high-
resolution computational approaches that can reliably produce protein structural
models with or close to experimental quality remains an unsolved problem, though
significant advances have been made in the past ten years. The main difficulties
include the tremendously large and complex protein conformation space and, more
importantly, the absence of scoring functions with satisfactory accuracy as well
as sensitivity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the research seeks to
answer a challenging question ? can one still model protein structures with high
accuracy using the existing scoring functions which are potentially insensitive
and inaccurate? Different from the common approaches of globally optimizing a
scoring function describing the conformational energy, the investigators explore
a new direction to model protein structures via efficiently sampling the common
low score regions in multiple carefully-selected knowledge-based, physics-based,
or regression-based scoring functions. This new approach addresses the scoring
function insensitivity problem based on the assumption that the native or
native-like conformations should satisfy most of the existing good scoring
functions by yielding low score values. Sampling multiple scoring functions
allows toleration of insensitivity and deficiency in individual scoring
functions and identification of conformations that can best satisfy most scoring
functions, which will eventually lead to significant resolution improvement. The
investigators verify this sampling strategy by applying it to a proof-of-concept
ab initio protein loop structure prediction problem. The work involves
integrating multiple scoring functions, including triplet torsion angle score,
physical energy, distance-based potential, loop closure score, and others, into
the sampling scheme with the goal of reliably predicting loop backbone
structures with near experimental resolution. The computational tools for loop
structure prediction are being made available as a software package to the
protein modeling research community.&lt;br/&gt;