* 0829885
* EMT/NANO: Computation Using Nanomechanical Oscillator Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Pritiraj Mohanty, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 08/31/2011
* USD 299,997.00

Computation with Nanomechanical Oscillator Networks&lt;br/&gt;PI: Pritiraj
Mohanty&lt;br/&gt;Boston University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Layman
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The neural computing paradigm is inspired by a
simple understanding: synchronization of oscillations in a network of individual
units in the brain is somehow related to the associative memory and learning
functions. This concept of storage and retrieval of complex patterns in the
synchronized states of an oscillatory network extends from pattern recognition
in the brain to a number of fascinating natural occurring phenomena of
synchronization such as the rhythmic blinking of a congregation of fireflies and
clock-like beating of pacemaker cells in a human heart. However, practical
realization of neurocomputers has been elusive in spite of intense theoretical
activity in bio-inspired computing. This research involves the development of a
scalable architecture, based on silicon-based nanomechanical oscillator networks
as building blocks, towards a hardware implementation of nueorocomputing.
Graduate, undergraduate and high school students are trained on advanced
concepts of new computing paradigms, nanofabrication and ultra-sensitive
mechanical measurements. The students are given a multidisciplinary exposure
while undergoing specialized training at the frontiers of technological and
scientific advances. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research involves an experimental approach,
which uses nanomechanical oscillator networks as building blocks of a bio-
inspired computation paradigm. Drawing on advances and insights from computing
in neurophysiological systems, the investigators study a network of
nanomechanical oscillators, capable of storing and retrieving information in the
synchronized states of the network. This research involves design, modeling,
fabrication, and characterization of prototypes of nanomechanical oscillator
networks. The investigators study the response of such networks to complex input
patterns to determine whether the network is capable of ?learning.? This
research involves the education and training of graduate, undergraduate and high
school students in a vertically integrated structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;b
r/&gt;-------&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;