* 0829401
* Collaborative Research:  Improving Estimated Fluxes of Greenhouse Gases over North America Using a Receptor-Oriented Modeling Framework and In-situ Atmospheric Measurements
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Adam Hirsch, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 12/31/2011
* USD 19,804.00

The work aims to establish accurate top-down estimates of the surface sources
and sinks for important greenhouse gases, including carbon dioxide (CO2),
methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), and carbon monoxide (CO) over North America,
and address individual science questions, particularly with regard to the causes
of variability on diurnal, seasonal, and interannual timescales that underlie
these estimates. Collocated airborne and tower-based measurements of these gases
for selected months in the period 2003-2011 will be analyzed using a receptor-
oriented Lagrangian particle dispersion model driven by a version of the Weather
Research and Forecasting (WRF) model adapted to flux inversion work. The
analysis will provide an assessment tool for independent bottom-up emission
estimates from existing inventories. The availability of reliable transport
fields and a conjoint analysis of the four gases will be critical to the success
of the study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Human-induced changes in atmospheric
concentrations of greenhouse gases are a major societal concern discussed in the
press, in Congress, and by ordinary citizens every day. Currently there is no
validation for inventory-based estimates of U.S. and North American
contributions to this global problem, and there are indications that these
estimates may be in error.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will decisively improve
this situation by providing new assessments based on strong physical and
observational constraints. The data, results, and software will be made publicly
available during the research, and the principal investigators will engage in
public outreach by communicating the results that are pertinent to the public
debate on climate change.