* 0829218
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Human Ecology, Agricultural Intensification and Landscape Transformation at the Ancient Maya Polity of Uxbenka, Southern Belize
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2008,11/30/2010
* Douglas Kennett, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/2010
* USD 14,998.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Douglas J. Kennett, Brendan Culleton will conduct
archaeological research on intensive land use strategies, and social and
environmental change at the ancient Maya site of Uxbenká. Uxbenká emerged as the
first urban center in southern Belize ca. AD 250, and grew in prominence by
mediating regional trade routes until abandonment ca. AD 850. In many parts of
the Maya world the emergence of city-states like Uxbenká increased pressure on
local ecosystems for food production and water resources due to greater
population density, elite tribute demands, and short- to long-term climate
fluctuations. This project will investigate the social and environmental
consequences of intensive forest clearing, crop production and settlement
expansion at Uxbenká through field survey and excavation of soil and water
conservation features, household groups, and computer simulations of human
ecological interactions.

Deforestation and soil erosion are taken as symptoms of the environmental
degradation of the Classic Maya period, setting the stage for the Terminal
Classic "Maya Collapse" at the hands of "megadroughts". Though the Maya
megadroughts and human ecological impacts have captured the public imagination,
various soil and water management strategies were employed throughout the Maya
region to counter ecological degradation and promote social stability for
extended periods. Because the Maya occupied diverse ecological zones and
developed local strategies to solve local problems, site-specific studies of
landscape alteration (forest clearing, cultivation, terracing, irrigation) are
needed to understand how societies emerge, persist and disintegrate in a
changing human ecosystem. In the wetter climate and richer soils of southern
Belize, did the droughts that struck the Yucatán and the Petén have similar
catastrophic effects? Or, were human-environment interactions more complex, and
the demise of Uxbenká a more dynamic story? To bring these complexities to
light, this project will employ strategic excavations and radiocarbon dating of
previously identified household groups, and geoarchaeological and trace element
analysis of water- and soil-management features at Uxbenká and associated
household groups. This record of landscape alteration and settlement expansion
will be articulated with regional climate records to explore the interconnected
causes and consequences of resource intensification in an emerging Maya
political center. A parallel computer simulation of settlement and farming
decision-making will complement the archaeological work by examining outcomes
various social and ecological scenarios over several millennia.

The growing public concern over the fates of societies places great demands on
archaeologists and the archaeological record to go beyond descriptions of
"collapses" to explain the processes by which complex societies coalesce and
disintegrate, and to provide insights into our own future prospects in an
increasingly interdependent global society. This requires archaeologists to
grapple with diverse bodies of social, ecological and climatic data, and this
project will train the co-PI and numerous undergraduate assistants who will
assist in the lab and the field. Continuing community outreach in the local Maya
community of Santa Cruz adjacent to Uxbenká will enhance the public
understanding science and the importance of managing heritage resources.
Research findings will be disseminated to the scientific community through peer-
reviewed publications, participation in national and international conferences,
and public lectures.