* 0829827
* EMT: Collaborative Research: Primate-inspired Heterogeneous Mobile and Static Sensor Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Yang Xiao, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 08/31/2012
* USD 524,039.00

EMT: Collaborative Research: Primate-inspired Heterogeneous Mobile and Static
Sensor Networks &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although previous bio-inspired models have
concentrated on invertebrates (such as ants), mammals such as primates with
higher cognitive function are valuable for modeling the increasingly complex
problems in engineering. Understanding primates? social and communication
systems, and applying what is learned from them to engineering domains is likely
to inspire solutions to a number of problems.&lt;br/&gt;This research involves
studying and modeling modes of group behavior and communication of coppery titi
monkeys, rhesus macaques, and other primate models, and applying what the
investigators learn to the distributed control of heterogeneous mobile and
static sensor networks. The investigators will model the social and
communication behavior of these primates, which will provide biological
inspiration for solving problems in communication and networking. The phases of
this research include: 1) identification, interpretation, and translation of
primate behavioral models, 2) assessment of the effectiveness of small and large
group formations based on primate grouping models in heterogeneous mobile and
static sensor networks, 3) development of bio-inspired message-based
communications, and 4) development of bio-inspired behavior-based
communications. This research aims to achieve a deeper understanding of
effectiveness of bio-inspired communications and networking by studying
primates, and to establish interdisciplinary research and education in the
fields of biological modeling, sensor networking, and robots
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;