* 0829824
* EMT/NANO: Hybrid CMOS-Nano-CMOS Architectures and CAD Tools for Nanoelectronic and Bio-Inspired Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2009
* Garrett Rose, Polytechnic University of New York
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2009
* USD 99,998.00

Hybrid CMOS-Nano-CMOS Architectures and CAD Tools &lt;br/&gt;for Nanoelectronic
and Bio-Inspired
Applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emerging within
the still novel field of nanoelectronics are many technologies that offer
features such as reconfigurability, non-volatile memory, and low power
consumption. Through this work, we intend to explore ways in which such
attractive properties can be exploited in the design and development of a high-
density reconfigurable architecture. This project combines two leading
technological concepts for the development of future electronic systems: hybrid
CMOS-nanoelectronic circuits and 3D integration. Our project will focus on
studying methodologies associated with the design and development of novel 3D
CMOS-nano-CMOS circuits. Specifically, we will prototype and evaluate a small
hybrid CMOS-nano circuit consisting of a multistage nanoscale PLA based on metal
oxide nanoelectronic switches with a direct interface to a layer of CMOS
circuitry. The goal of this project is to lay the groundwork for developing more
complex 3D CMOS-nano systems in the future. As part of this research, we will
study methods for accurately modeling nanoelectronic devices and circuits for
robust design, optimizing CMOS-nano-CMOS circuit designs using state of the art
CAD techniques and fabricating and integrating these different technologies on a
single die. &lt;br/&gt;