* 0829286
* Facility Support: Continental Scientific Drilling
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Douglas Schnurrenberger, DOSECC Inc
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2011
* USD 249,547.00

This award will provide management and operational support for the conduct of
continental scientific drilling projects, allowing Principal Investigators to
focus on scientific investigations. The methods proposed to implement this
objective include: preparation of drilling plans and budgets, design and
fabrication of equipment, implementation and management of drilling,
communications with scientists and the public, program coordination and
integration, human resource development and education, and health and safety
protocols. DOSECC operates drilling systems that are dedicated to the needs of
scientists. The result of funding this proposal will be to increase the
efficiency of scientific drilling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drilling is the only
method available for directly accessing and sampling the subsurface. Scientific
drilling on continents is critical for understanding the third dimension
including stratigraphic succession (history of earth processes), sampling poorly
or non-exposed intervals and those altered by surface-weathering processes, and
sampling the climate proxies preserved in modern and ancient lakes. Past and
future projects are addressing transformative concepts in the earth sciences
such as climate history, human origins and migration, and mass extinctions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DOSECC provides infrastructure necessary for academic
research of the Earth?s subsurface. Nearly all scientific drilling projects
involve international teams of scientists and students. These projects integrate
research and education and serve to increase diversity in science by bringing
together investigators from different nations, cultures and backgrounds. In
order to encourage student involvement in this research, DOSECC has initiated a
Student Internship Program that funds teachers and students from any nation to
participate in scientific drilling projects. Scientific drilling has societal
benefits, including monitoring of seismic and volcanic hazards, identification
of natural resources, and determination of climate variability. The projects are
often the subject of television and web reporting. DOSECC has established a
Distinguished Lecture Series to disseminate results of scientific drilling
projects. This series is open to any university on request. DOSECC also produces
a bi-annual newsletter for the scientific drilling community, and publishes
manuals regarding the best practices for planning and implementing successful
and safe scientific drilling projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;