* 0829894
* National Workshop on High-Confidence Automotive Cyber-Physical Systems. To be Held  April 3-4, 2008 in Troy, Michigan.
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2008,01/31/2009
* Ragunathan Rajkumar, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 01/31/2009
* USD 29,664.00

The purpose of this workshop, to be held April 3-4, 2008 in Troy, Michigan, is
to provide an open forum for research leaders and visionaries to develop a
roadmap for the deployment of cyber-physical systems (CPS) in the automotive
sector. Participants come from academia, industry, and government. The workshop
considers both the opportunities for transformative impacts of CPS in the
automotive sector as well as the challenges presented to the CPS research
community by demanding automotive applications. The goals of the workshop are to
develop a vision, determine and highlight technical and scientific challenges,
and identify promising research approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to
intellectual merit, the workshop addresses an important opportunity for an
industry segment that is important to U.S. industrial competitiveness in the
global market and that provides an opportunity to bring a demanding application
domain into consideration by the cyber-physical systems researcher
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to broader impact, the workshop
itself and follow-on research and other activities have the potential to have a
significant impact on the competitiveness of the U.S. automotive industry, as
well as on important societal issues including energy efficiency for automobiles
and highway safety. The workshop also has the potential to provide engineering
and computer science researchers with insight into an important and challenging
application domain that can improve the intellectual depth and the practical
application of university research.