* 0829918
* Quantum Control of Polar Molecules for Quantum Information and Quantum Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Daniel Elliott, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 08/31/2011
* USD 319,999.00

Quantum Control of Polar Molecules for Quantum Information and Quantum Computing

Abstract:

Quantum computers promise to revolutionize our ability to perform computation
and solve complicated problems. However, quantum computers are difficult to
build. It remains unclear what quantum systems will eventually be used for
implementation of a ?scalable? quantum computer, which needs to operate on a
large number of quantum bits (qubits) in order to outperform classical
computers. This research develops a novel technology using quantum coherent
control to produce and manipulate a large number of cold polar molecules. Such
polar molecules have many appealing features to be used as qubits. The
investigators use all-optical methods to achieve parallel yet local and
individual control of many polar molecules. This work can lead to new approaches
toward scalable quantum computing. Graduate and undergraduate students will
participate in this research in an interdisciplinary team and learn at the
forefront of optics and photonics, atomic and molecular physics, and quantum
information science.

This research develops a novel technology using quantum coherent control in the
production and manipulation of cold polar molecules, motivated by potential
applications of such polar molecules in quantum information processing and
computing. The investigators combine two powerful techniques in modern molecular
physics, photoassociation and phase coherent control, to explore novel methods
of quantum control of polar molecules, using an optically-based approach to
achieve local yet massively-parallel individual control of both the density and
orientation of polar molecules. This work could lead to the development of new
protocols and schemes of scalable quantum information processing and computing.