* 0829533
* CPATH CB: Applied Computer Science for the Humanities and Social Sciences
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Steven Reiss, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2012
* USD 555,995.00

Computers are becoming essential in all disciplines. Researchers in the social
sciences rely on the availability of large data repositories and the general
availability of data over the Web. Researchers in the humanities are
increasingly looking to analyze the growing number of electronic corpora.
Workers in all fields are making use of new ways to publish data and of to
interact with colleagues and others using electronic media. Moreover, more and
more jobs and companies are relying on the understanding and processing of
information. Modern companies as diverse as Google, WalMart, Amazon, and Goldman
Sachs all owe their success in large part to their ability to evaluate and act
on available information. It is estimated that in the next ten years, over
twelve million people in the U.S. workforce will consider programming their
primary job, which is far more than the current or near-term number of computer
science majors. To address these needs, to better prepare students for careers
involving information processing, to prepare&lt;br/&gt;tomorrow?s researchers in
the humanities and social sciences, and to prepare tomorrow?s workers for an
information-based world, computer science needs to reach out beyond its
traditional audience and even beyond the sciences. This project focuses on
disciplines that have traditionally&lt;br/&gt;been neglected by computer
scientists, harnessing the growing revolution in applying computing to social
artifacts. Second, it will result in a novel, application-driven, on-demand
presentation of computing material, coming to topics like machine-learning and
data-mining very early, rather than late, in the curriculum. Third, the
development of a curriculum arranged in concentric rings of growing commitment,
where a student who stops early will still get a meaningful education. It will
provide the proper foundation for the growing use of computing and
cyberinfrastructure in the humanities and social sciences. It will ultimately
train such students have been relegated to with the tools to make their own non-
trivial contributions to cyberinfrastructure. It will result in more women and
minorities, groups traditionally underrepresented in computing, working with and
using computation and cyberinfrastructure. Finally, it will enable students to
wed their deep social and humanistic insights to tools that can enable them to
build wonderful inventions that have the power to greatly enrich
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;