* 0829931
* Collaborative Research:  EMT/QIS:  Quantum Algorithms and Post-Quantum Cryptography
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Cristopher Moore, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 08/31/2012
* USD 100,000.00

Collaborative Research: EMT/QIS: Quantum Algorithms and Post-Quantum
Cryptography Project Summary

Cryptography is the basic infrastructural element enabling privacy and security
for electronic transactions. However, when a large-scale quantum computer is
finally built, it will force us to abandon established methods of cryptography,
such as RSA and Diffie-Hellman, which are in common use today. The proposed
research will further this line of disruptive quantum algorithmic research; but
it also aims to erect a new framework of secure post-quantum cryptography, in
order to maintain this societally critical infrastructure.

The most attractive approach for salvaging modern cryptography would be to
develop classical cryptosystems for which we have compelling evidence of
security even in the face of quantum adversaries. Recent work by the PIs and
their collaborators has shown that certain algebraic problems possess hardness
properties relevant even for quantum algorithms. We propose to strengthen and
leverage these results in order to develop cryptographic schemes which can be
carried out by today's computers, but which will remain secure even against
quantum attack in the future.

In tandem with this effort, we propose to develop new quantum algorithms for
breaking cryptosystems based on conjugacy in the braid group. This is one of the
few remaining classical cryptosystems which has not already been shown to be
vulnerable to quantum attack.

Our research program is also directly integrated with graduate student training
at all four institutions, undergraduate educational innovation, educational
outreach, and broad scientific dissemination.

