* 0829893
* EMT/MISC: Collaborative Research: Harnessing Statistical Physics for Computing and Communication
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Devavrat Shah, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 08/31/2012
* USD 180,000.00

This project exploits methods from statistical physics to provide fundamental
advances in computing and communication systems. The intersection of computer
science, information theory and statistical physics has seen a recent explosion
of activity, resulting in new algorithms and new methods of analysis. Discrete
computational challenges including constraint satisfaction, error correction and
control of massive networks have benefited from techniques and insights offered
by statistical physics. Physics, at the same time, has been significantly
enriched by approaches from discrete computation, such as message-passing
algorithms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators study two complementary
approaches for addressing algorithmic challenges: 1) treating problem instances
as members of a random ensemble that can be analyzed as a physical model, and 2)
identifying specific classes of instances amenable to physical analysis. The
first suggests a fundamental connection between algorithmic performance and an
underlying physical phase structure, and has already led to significant new
algorithms for unstructured random graphs or networks. The challenge is to
generalize it to structured cases. The second uses techniques such as
renormalization group and multiscale decomposition, and is proving to be a
powerful new approach in probabilistic inference. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;