* 0829300
* URM Alaska - In From the Cold
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2013
* Marvin Schulte, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 12/31/2013
* USD 350,328.00

URM Alaska: In from the Cold is a three year pilot project at the University of
Alaska Fairbanks (UAF) that is designed to prepare under-represented minority
undergraduate students for post graduate studies and research careers in the
biological sciences. The strategy for meeting this goal is to engage students in
exciting, publishable research projects under the the guidance of established
faculty and to provide them with a strong mentoring component to keep them
retained in science. The program will target junior Alaska Native students and
provide them with annual stipends, travel to professional meetings, and research
supplies. Faculty mentors will help students develop their laboratory and
communication skills. The student research experience will be supplemented with
a science career seminar series and group networking activities. Four students
will be recruited the first year. An additional four students are expected to
participate in the second year. At the end of 3 years, it is expected that eight
Native Alaska students would have completed the program, with each cohort
spending 2 years in the program. About half of the students will be enrolled in
the Biochemistry/Molecular Biology program and the other half will be in the
Biology and Wildlife Program. More information is available from the PI, Dr.
Thomas Clausen, at FFTPC@UAF.EDU, or by visiting www.uaf.edu/chem.