* 0829971
* Group Travel Grant-7th International Symposium of ESIQIE - IPN, Mexico City, Mexico
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2008,04/30/2009
* Athanassios Panagiotopoulos, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 04/30/2009
* USD 3,206.00

CBET-0829971&lt;br/&gt;Panagiotopoulos&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a group
travel support ($4,508) for participation of four faculty members from U.S.
universities in the 7th International Symposium of ESIQIE-IPN. The 7th
International Symposium will take place in Mexico City, Mexico on the campus
Institute Polytechnical National (IPN) from May 20-22,
2008.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual focus areas of the Symposium are the
state of the Chemical and Metallurgical process engineering from both the
industrial and academic point of view, and the energy needs for society in the
21st century. The potential broader impacts of sending a group of U.S.
professors to this Symposium include (a) creation of new and strengthening of
existing U.S.-Mexico academic research interactions, (b) enhancement of
interactions of U.S. faculty with PEMEX, the Mexican Petroleum company as well
as other industrial participants of the symposium (c) improved understanding of
the impact of globalization and NAFTA on U.S. chemical manufacturing and (d)
international dissemination of NSF-supported research
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 7th International Symposium will be chaired by
Prof. Luis A. Galicia-Luna. The U.S. participants to be supported are Prof. Ram
B. Gupta (Auburn Univ.), Prof. Kenneth R. Hall (Texas A&amp;M), Prof.
Athanassios Z. Panagiotopoulos (Princeton Univ.) and Prof. Philip E. Savage (U.
of Michigan). As stated above, the focus of the Symposium is the state of the
Chemical and Metallurgical process engineering from both the industrial and
academic point of view, and the energy needs for society in the 21st century.
The symposium is normally attended by close to 100 Mexican and other Latin
American professors and students. Some of the non-USA participants ultimately
attend USA Universities to initial and complete collaborative research
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ESIQIE - IPN Symposium organizers will
provide support for local&lt;br/&gt;lodging, thus significantly reducing the net
cost to the NSF of USA participation.