* 0829947
* EMT/MISC Nanogrid Implementation of
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,02/29/2012
* Richard Granger, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 02/29/2012
* USD 296,254.00

NSF 08-517 - Emerging Models and Technologies for Computation
(EMT)&lt;br/&gt;EMT/MISC Nanogrid Implementation of&lt;br/&gt;Massively Parallel
Algorithms&lt;br/&gt;PI: Dan Hammerstrom, PSU; Co-PI: Richard Granger,
Dartmouth;&lt;br/&gt;Co-PI: Konstantin Likharev, SUNY Stony
Brook&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Our goal is to investigate the use of
radically new implementation technology to enhance Intelligent Computing (IC)
with new algorithms and new architectural and design techniques. We are focusing
this work on recognition problems in computer vision. The algorithms we are
studying have their origin in neuroscience, but they are significant
abstractions of those algorithms, with the goal of retaining the essence of the
computation while dropping many of the biological details. The 1st assumption is
that these algorithms constitute a promising approach to achieving improved
levels of IC. The 2nd assumption is that scaling to very large networks is a
necessary requirement of intelligent computing, and the algorithms we are using
do scale. The 3rd assumption is that CMOS will never give us the algorithm
scaling we need at a reasonable cost/performance for scaled implementations of
these algorithms. Thus we need to move to a far denser medium. Our 4th
assumption then is that hybrid CMOS / nanogrids (CMOL)CMOL is the most promising
implementation technology on the horizon.&lt;br/&gt;Consequently the goal of the
research proposed here is to implement massively parallel, statistically based
algorithms in CMOL, which is our solution to the general problem. Our approach
is to take a real application with a number of different algorithmic stages and
study the mapping of that stage to CMOL. The design spectrum for each stage will
be based on a concept we call virtualization. The performance/price of a
particular implementation is determined by the degree of virtualization, which
in turn is determined by the algorithm and its dynamic
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;