* 0829225
* International Polar Year Symposia and Web Seminars at NSTA Conferences on Science Education: Collaboration between NSF, NOAA, and NASA
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2010
* Albert Byers, National Science Teaching Association
* Standard Grant
* Renee Crain
* 07/31/2010
* USD 39,616.00

The International Polar Year 2007-2009 is a landmark event following 50-years
after International Geophysical Year 1957. Not only is there a substantial
emphasis on new discoveries in polar science and international collaboration,
but on involving the general public in the process and the discoveries through
formal and informal education. The National Science Teachers Association is the
largest and oldest national organization of K-12 science teachers, with over
55,000 members. Each year there is an annual meeting with upwards of 30,000
participants and regional meetings to serve a broad cross-section of the
country. This proposal is NSF's contribution to an interagency effort with NASA
and NOAA to focus three symposia at the national meeting, not on particular
agency efforts, but on specifically on IPY science through three themes: Ice,
Life, and Water and Air. NSTA focuses on promoting innovation and excellence in
science teaching and learning as well as the professional development of
teachers to teach science. At NSTA meetings, teachers are exposed to current
information in science and science education, which makes this an ideal venue
for connecting K-12 educators and administrators with IPY 2007 curriculum
materials and information. IPY 2007 begins in March 2007. The NSTA national
meeting will be in St. Louis, Missouri March 28 - April 1, 2007, an ideal time
to involve teachers in IPY science and provide them with the resources to
leverage the inherent interest in the polar regions to teach science in
accordance with national science education standards. NSTA together with
researchers supported by NSF, NASA and NOAA will develop content for the
symposia and online instruction following the conference. Symposia have a short
overview session followed by a full day of presentations focusing on aspects of
the science theme. Content will focus on the most current polar research in
these areas and tie it to numerous national science teaching standards. This
project is NSF's contribution to the multi-agency effort by supporting one
symposia at the national meeting in St. Louis and one at a regional meeting in
Salt Lake City, Utah December 7-9, 2006. The regional meeting will be an
opportunity to pilot the shared deliver of IPY content and fine-tune the on-site
delivery, evaluation metrics and evaluation structure to improve the delivery of
IPY content at the National Meeting. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;