* 0829652
* African Biomathematics Initiative
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Fred Roberts, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 08/31/2012
* USD 940,000.00

The continent of Africa faces numerous socio-economic and public health
challenges, including newly emerging or rapidly changing diseases; quickly
changing ecological systems resulting from climate change; exploitation of
natural resources; the need or desire to conserve disappearing ecosystems and
wildlife; the challenge of resource management in the context of limited
resources; changing agricultural practices and their impact on human health; and
the effect of health events and changing climate and ecology on social
structures, economic systems, and political stability. Research and training in
biomathematics can lead to substantial inroads in addressing these challenges.
Addressing them is of importance not only to Africa but also to the rest of the
world, including the US. The problems of Africa present particularly exciting
and complex challenges for mathematical scientists, ranging from issues of
mathematical modeling to issues of data analysis and interpretation. To allow US
scientists to best help tackle these challenges, which range from issues of
mathematical modeling to issues of data analysis and interpretation,
partnerships are needed between US and African mathematical scientists so that
US scientists can get first-hand understanding of the problems of Africa and the
data they need for their models. Many of these challenges fall at the interface
between the mathematical and biological sciences. Dealing with these challenges
requires a large number of researchers working on and trained in biomathematics
and prepared to deal with specific biomath challenges arising from problems of
Africa. Thus, it is important to enhance development of biomathematics and to
train US mathematical scientists to work in biomathematics and in international
venues with international collaborations. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project
features three US-Africa research workshops in Africa, focusing on challenges
arising from Africa whose solution requires serious mathematical components: (1)
conservation biology and creation of ecological reserves and related issues of
risk of extinction and risk of invasive species; (2) economic aspects of
epidemiology; and (3) the use of genetics to control diseases of humans and
crops. The first two workshops will be preceded by an Advanced Study Institute
(ASI), aimed at preparing graduate students to participate in the workshop, in
follow-up research projects, and in long-term international collaborations.
Small research projects catalyzed by the ASIs and workshops will involve US and
African participants. Because successful model development should never be
divorced from data but sometimes is, a biomath modeling clinic with a data
analysis emphasis is planned. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because it is important to
train some African students in more depth than is possible in the planned ASIs,
the project will host African graduate students for year-long visits, in the
process exposing US graduate student and postdoctoral biomathematicians to the
problems of Africa in a longer, more extended mode than is possible with a two-
week activity. African faculty will also come as visitors to engage in joint
research projects. Materials arising from the ASIs and workshops will be widely
disseminated through books, articles, websites, CDs, and reports, so others can
copy these activities. Project results will be used in a separately-funded
program that brings current research into the undergraduate classroom.
International partnerships with the African Institute for Mathematical Sciences
(AIMS), the South African Centre of Excellence for Epidemiological Modelling and
Analysis (SACEMA), the African Mathematical Institutes Network (AMI-Net), the
African Mathematics Millennium Science Initiative (AMMSI), and the Canadian
Network of Mathematics of Information Technology and Complex Systems (MITACS)
will enhance the program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the
NSF Office of International Science and Engineering, and the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities.