* 0829583
* Collaborative Research: Leading Indicators of Regime Shift - an Ecosystem Experiment
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Michael Pace, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 08/31/2012
* USD 469,685.00

Non-Technical Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Word count:
242&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many changes in nature are slow and gradual, but
sometimes extensive changes happen fast. Droughts, losses of production from
rangelands, collapse of fisheries, toxic algae blooms, and outbreaks of disease
or invasive species can occur rapidly, with significant impacts on living
resources and large costs to society. Such big changes are difficult to
forecast. Recent theoretical advances suggest that certain indicators can help
foresee and manage big changes in resources before they occur. Like leading
economic indicators, these leading ecological indicators can be observed before
a big shift. So far these theories have not been tested in the field. This
project will test potential indicators by experimentally inducing massive
changes in the food chain of a lake, while monitoring the lake before, during
and after the changes using modern sensor and signal processing technology. The
research will evaluate the sensitivity of the indicators and whether they can be
used to detect a large change in advance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
assess leading indicators that could potentially be used to manage a wide range
of living resources, while at the same time testing new theory about rapid
extensive changes in nature. We will present a workshop and field trip on rapid
environmental change for journalists at the Society of Environmental Journalists
meeting in Madison in fall 2009. The project will train graduate and
undergraduate students and contribute teaching materials for courses at the
Institute of Ecosystem Studies, St. Norbert College, and University of
Wisconsin-Madison.&lt;br/&gt;