* 0829295
* Meeting: Integrating Evolution, Development, and Genomics (IEDG 2008) Meeting at the University of California-Berkeley, CA, May 28-30, 2008
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2009
* Nipam Patel, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 04/30/2009
* USD 6,650.00

Nipam H. Patel&lt;br/&gt;Proposal # IOS-0829295&lt;br/&gt;Integrating Evolution,
Development, and Genomics (IEDG 2008) Meeting&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"Integrating
Evolution, Development, and Genomics 2008 (IEDG 2008)" is a graduate student-
organized biology meeting to be held at the University of California, Berkeley
from May 28-30th, 2008. It will highlight innovative research from diverse
branches of biological science, ranging from embryo development to dinosaur
paleontology to genomics, with the aim of understanding the mechanisms that have
generated the great diversity of life we see on Earth today. The goals of the
meeting are to promote collaborations between specialists from different but
complementary research fields, encourage the exchange of their creative methods,
and communicate a breadth of exciting research to all participants. Seventeen
researchers from around the world have been invited to speak at IEDG 2008. Of
these, 35% are young scientists, 29% are women, and 23% are from international
institutions. Their research interests are diverse and their research subjects
include plants, animals, and fungi. The attendees of IEDG 2008 will be limited
to 200 graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and other researchers who will
attend talks and participate in formal and informal workshops and fieldtrips.
This uniquely intimate meeting format will encourage all participants
(especially graduate students and postdoctoral researchers) to learn from one-
on-one discussions with other scientists and promote links between traditional
and newer fields of biology. Funds from this award will be used, in part, to
subsidize travel for graduate student participants. This meeting will also
publicize the value of innovative and integrated biological research and the
need for its continued progress and expansion.