* 0829563
* CPATH CB: Computational Thinking Showcase: Computing Concepts Across the Curriculum
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Vicki Allan, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2013
* USD 532,997.00

All recognize the pressing need for more computer science graduates, as well as
the often unappealing nature of introductory classes. The goal of this project
is to showcase and teach the skills necessary to thrive in computer science,
while engaging a diverse student body at a variety of education levels. In order
to revitalize undergraduate education in computer science and address the need
for an increase in undergraduate majors, this project will use a novel three-
fold approach. The community of college professors, high school teachers, and an
industrial partner will plan and implement an exciting first exposure to
computer science by engaging experiential learning. Interactive Learning
Modules, developed by the collaboration team members at different institutions,
will serve as a vehicle for bringing innovation to the classroom. These
collaboration-based experiences throughout the computer science curriculum are
encouraged through a number of mechanisms, including multi-institution teams,
games, and research into effective design of curricula and modules. The modules
themselves are expected to inspire creation of addition interactive modules,
designed by students for students, identifying an aspect of computational
thinking, a separate domain of its use and a variety of which in which the
modules provides experiences. A summer seminar experience for teachers will
provide credit hours as well as experience in using the learning modules.
Evaluation will cover both formative and summative aspects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;