* 0829416
* Planning Grant for Comprehensive Facility Enhancement of the Florida State University Coastal &amp; Marine Laboratory
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Felicia Coleman, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2009
* USD 24,992.00

The Florida State University is awarded a grant to develop a strategic plan for
upgrading and expanding its facilities. This plan is warranted by the increased
use supporting the new mission and the condition of the aging facilities. In
January 2006, it expanded its mission to that of a programmatically-based
institution for integrated research, education, and outreach within the coastal
and marine ecosystems of the northeastern Gulf of Mexico. This new direction is
strongly supported by the FSU administration, as made evident by its financial
support of recent facilities improvements and the addition of two resident
faculty and two postdoctoral associates, with one more faculty member and
postdoctoral associate arriving in June.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plan development
will occur in four phases: (1) site analysis and initial data gathering, (2)
needs assessment consisting of site visits to three comparable laboratories and
a stakeholders workshop, (3) design and development, and (4) cost estimates and
phasing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although
the facility is already serving the needs of scientists, students (high school
to graduate school) teachers and the general public from Florida State as well
as other Colleges and Universities around the country, expansion of the lab will
clearly advance this discovery and understanding while promoting teaching,
training, and learning at the center. The planning project involves consulting
with and getting input from various current and potential users of the facility.
The planning project involves consulting with and getting input from various
current and potential users of the
facility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;