* 0829867
* EMT/BSSE: Biological networks as a communication model for entities with complex interactions
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Tamer Kahveci, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 08/31/2012
* USD 299,999.00

Biological networks show the complex interactions between bio-chemical entities
that are often vital for the survival of organisms. The entities communicate
with each other to collaborate and perform complex functions that they can not
do individually. Numerous applications follow an interaction pattern that
resembles biological networks. Wireless networks, sensor networks and homeland
security are just a few examples to these applications. Employing biological
networks to model the communication patterns in these applications is very
promising as the biological networks are robust and flexible. The biological
networks efficiently adapt to the alterations in genes or proteins to minimize
the damage done to the network by finding alternative ways to keep the network
stable whenever it is possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the critical
problems in analysis of biological networks as well as many other applications
with complex communication networks is finding similarities between them. To
solve this problem, it is necessary to find an alignment of the interacting
entities of the input pathways. An alignment of two networks is a one-to-one
mapping between a subset of their nodes (i.e., entities). This research develops
a generic framework that enables efficient alignment of two networks for gene
interaction and metabolic networks. These two networks cover a broad spectrum of
communication models ranging from Boolean to stoichiometric models. Unlike
existing network alignment methods, this proposal considers the functional
similarities of the interacting entities in addition to their structural and
topological similarities. This research also develops new methods for indexing
network databases. These index structures allow answering range and top-k
queries efficiently over a network database. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;