* 0829515
* Conference: Multiscale and Stochastic Modeling, Analysis, and Computation; October 2008, East Lansing, MI
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2009
* Di Liu, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2009
* USD 20,000.00

This award supports the Workshop on Multiscale and Stochastic Modeling,
Analysis, and Computation, held at Michigan State University on 10-11 October
2008. The meeting focuses on two related topics: the application of multi-scale
modeling and analysis to the development of nano-structured materials for energy
conversion applications, and the integration of stochastic methods into the
modeling and analysis of multi-scale and cellular processes. The workshop aims
to provide a forum to exchange viewpoints, identify core issues, and promote
collaborative research among applied mathematicians, physicists, and biologists
who are interested in nano-scale materials and cellular reacting networks. By
combining the two areas into a single workshop and by interspersing theoretical
and applied talks, the program is designed to catalyze cross-fertilization
between scientists with the various disciplinary
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative research initiated in connection
with this workshop may spur important advances in the areas of energy
technology, cellular networks, and nano-structured materials. The workshop
encourages and supports broad participation by students, postdocs, and junior
faculty, especially women, under-represented minorities, and people with
disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Workshop web page:
http://www.math.msu.edu/%7Erichardl/workshop/index.html&lt;br/&gt;