* 0829616
* Collaborative Research:   CPATH CB:   Distributed Expertise in Enhancing Computing Education with Connections to the Arts
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Lillian Cassel, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2013
* USD 379,998.00

Computing Education is essential not only for Computer Science and its many
sibling disciplines(Computer Engineering, Software Engineering, Information
Systems, etc.) but for practically all other academic disciplines. Computers are
pervasive today and many professionals develop basic programming skills as a way
to express ideas, problems and solutions in computational terms within their own
disciplines. It is common to find curricula in the arts (music, graphical
design), business (accounting, economics), sciences (biology, chemistry,
physics), and social sciences with computational courses in their curriculum. In
a way, computing is becoming a requirement of most professional degrees. This
project addresses both the separation between computing specialists and to
widespread integration of computing concepts, not just the technology but
computational thinking, in other disciplines. The project will use technologies
now commonly available to permit faculty to collaborate in offering courses that
extend the potential reach of experts to a broader audience, as well as a
collection of recorded expert lectures. In addition, it will develop a visual,
interactive interface to a common framework around which to explore similarities
and differences across domains and to enable decisions about educational plan
development. The teams will also host workshops to identify innovative
approaches to teaching, as well as support initiation of new collaborative
course experience and reflect of the utility of the courses. The opportunity
computing education is to learn how motivated hands-on learning can engage
students and provide opportunities to introduce computing concepts. In addition
to aiming for diversity in the groups of participating faculty, the project will
extend the reach of computing to disciplines not normally associated with that
content and will also represent the scope of their discipline to computing
students, providing a broader view of the impact of the discipline as it is
applied in creative fields. This project addresses the growing conviction that
inter-disciplinary approaches are crucial to revitalizing computing education
and offers a solution to the need for broader reach of individual areas of
expertise. If successful, this project could spread to national implementations
with very great effect.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;