* 0829911
* EMT: MISC: Expanding the Computing Domain with Self-assembled Nanophotonics
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2010
* Alvin Lebeck, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 09/30/2010
* USD 100,000.00

The development of high density, integrated circuit (IC) technology in the late
1970s has been a fundamental enabler for today?s computation and communication
infrastructure. Despite their many advantages, silicon ICs are difficult, if not
impossible, to fully utilize at the molecular scale for applications in
biological science. The challenge arises from the need for environmental
compatibility and single molecule sensing. Therefore, to date, silicon ICs have
been limited to computational domains at the macro scale with few exceptions.
Unfortunately, this prevents biological scientists from fully leveraging
computing as a way to improve and accelerate their daily
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit? The proposed vision is to expand the
computing domain by developing a fused sensor-compute node that is compatible
with cells and is functional in aqueous fluids. This represents progress in two
areas identified by the recent NSF Workshop on Nanoelectronics as important for
the development of the EMT program: DNA-Based Electronics (EMT: BSSE) and
Nanoarchitecture (EMT: NANO)[1]. To meet the challenges of this new domain this
proposal explores resonance energy transfer (RET) logic on DNA nanostructures as
a technology for biologically compatible fused sensor-compute nodes. The primary
research component of this proposal is the fabrication and characterization of
simple RET circuits and sensing modes on DNA grids.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research is highly interdisciplinary and requires that theoretical research
(i.e., circuit and architecture design and evaluation) occur simultaneously with
experimental research (i.e., fabrication and characterization). The previous
collaborative research by the PIs on DNA nanostructures, nanoscale devices,
circuits and architectures demonstrates the expertise necessary to successfully
perform the research outlined in this proposal.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts? These
research activities will involve undergraduate students in development roles
through independent studies and summer research positions. Attention will be
focused on engaging students from underrepresented groups. Recently, an African-
American undergraduate student was involved with the PIs? other projects through
an NSF-REU program run jointly by UNC and Duke. A graduating Ph.D. materials
science student with a CS BSc was recruited through this same program and with
continued support will take on a postdoctoral position working on DNA self-
assembly and electrochemistry at Duke. Currently, three undergraduates are
working in the group on research projects. This proposal will expand these
efforts by working with the nationally recognized outreach programs at Duke run
by Ms. Martha Absher.&lt;br/&gt;Potential for Transformative Change? The
integration of sensing and computation at the molecular scale expands the
computing domain and enables the new paradigm of diffusion limited computation.
This new paradigm has a wide variety of potential applications from querying the
status of a cell to accelerating the progress of biomarker assays. This
represents a fundamentally new way to apply computing to common problems in the
biological sciences.&lt;br/&gt;