* 0829601
* CPATH CB:   Improving Computing Education by Developing Regional Communities of Computing Educators
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Mark Guzdial, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2013
* USD 439,827.00

The approach to improving computing education is to connect computer science
teachers at different levels in order to develop a community focused on common
goals and activities that will revitalize both undergraduate and high school
computing education. The disciplinary commons of computing educators (DCCE)
takes the path of transforming computing education by transforming computing
educators. This project will focus on introductory computer science teacher in
Georgia. Any change or reform in education must involve the teachers; this
project starts with the teachers. The strategy is to gather introductory
computer science teachers from different universities along with high school
computer science teachers, especially advanced placement teachers. These
teachers naturally have common interests in approaches and common topics to
discuss. High school teachers are interested in what happens at the post-
secondary level and how best to prepare their students. University teachers want
to enhance the transition of students from high school and to encourage more
students to learn computing. The discussions are encouraged by developing
engaged researchers and community leaders. Different approaches will be
supported, with ideas seeded into the community. The ongoing research will
enhance the teaching done, which has been shown to contribute to student
learning. The project will create a model for teachers in other areas of
computing and the rest of the country.