* 0829958
* Distributed Coordination for Signal Detection in Sensor Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Rick Blum, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2013
* USD 270,000.00

Distributed Coordination for Signal Detection in Sensor
Networks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hypothesis testing, often called signal detection,
is essential for Engineering and Science while being one of the most important
applications of signal processing. Though signal detection has been studied for
many years, only recently has energy efficient signal detection been
considered&lt;br/&gt;for sensor networking applications. Energy efficiency
appears to be the most critical barrier for sensor networking. Sensor networks
hold great promise for solving many important problems including improved
monitoring, control and repair of the human body, buildings, bridges, energy
production facilities, forests and other critical infrastructure, while also
providing important contributions to homeland security, law enforcement,
disaster prediction/avoidance and defense related
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators intend to demonstrate it is
possible to coordinate the operation of multiple dispersed sensors in a
distributed manner, without inter-sensor communication, such that significant
energy is saved without any loss in detection performance. The key is to jointly
consider the signal detection and the communications. This can be achieved by
having the sensors with the&lt;br/&gt;most informative observations transmit
first, while either the sensors or the fusion center listen to keep track of the
total likelihood of the possible hypotheses. This allows the sensor
transmissions to be halted when the evidence for one hypothesis becomes
overwhelming. The approach generalizes previous order statistic and sequential
testing approaches while optimizing performance in a specific way that models a
highly distributed mode of operation for the signal processing, communication,
and networking. The goal of this project is to fully understand the theory of
energy efficient signal detection for sensor networks employing distributed
processing. New approaches&lt;br/&gt;will be developed and tested with an
emphasis on performance and complexity estimation.