* 0829761
* Improvement and Expansion at Centre ValBio Research Station, Ranomafana National Park, Madagascar
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Patricia Wright, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 12/31/2011
* USD 258,000.00

The State University of New York at Stony Brook is awarded a grand to expand the
Centre ValBio Research Station (CVB) research station facilities to include an
additional laboratory space, a computer training lab and residential space.
Construction of the research center has already begun and the first floor has
been completed with funds provided by Stony Brook University and private
donations. This award will enable completion of the superstructure of the
building. This new phase of construction at the CVB station is the result of a
multi-year planning and implementation process to provide flexible facilities
for multiple users and changing needs, ranging from workshops for local
villagers and student training to supporting large scale research initiatives.
&lt;br/&gt;CVB is located in Ranomafana National Park (RNP), Madagascar, which
covers 43,500 ha of rainforest in southeastern Madagascar. Over 650 faculty-
level researchers and students, many from US universities, have conducted
research at RNP during the last five years. Work at CVB has resulted in nearly
450 scholarly publications in prestigious journals and edited volumes, 34 PhD
dissertations, and 130 Master?s theses. CVB is the most important center for
rainforest research, education and training and the only research station with
more than one permanent building in Madagascar. Numbers of international (non-
Malagasy) researchers has grown from 102 per year in 2003 to 235 per year in
2007. &lt;br/&gt;