* 0829442
* FSML: Improving the Research and Education Infrastructure at the Palo Verde Biological Station
* BIO,DBI
* 12/15/2008,11/30/2011
* Elizabeth Losos, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 11/30/2011
* USD 181,670.00

The Organization for Tropical Studies, (OTS) a non-profit consortium of more
than 60 colleges, universities and research institutions based at Duke
University is awarded a grant to improve the research and education
infrastructure at the Palo Verde Biological Station in Costa Rica. With this
grant, OTS will improve station facilities by 1) constructing a freshwater and
wetland research laboratory to foster and support research and education on
freshwater and wetland ecology; 2) building a new education center to handle a
growing number of student groups visiting the station; 3) upgrading
cyberinfrastructure and connectivity? and, in particular, increasing bandwidth
and wireless coverage, installing IP telephones; and 4) upgrading equipment
associated with the meteorological station. The proposed changes will foster
opportunities for expanding spatial and temporal scales of research and
education and facilitate regional and global comparisons among biological
ecosystems. Collaborations among scientists across disciplines and different
locations will encourage sharing and access of databases, providing new
directions for scientific questions and challenges. OTS anticipates more than 50
educational courses and 45 young researchers each year will be directly affected
by the proposed improvements. Upgrading laboratory and classroom facilities will
ease congestion and provide for a more enriching research and educational
experience for diverse groups of scientists and students visiting the
station.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Palo Verde Biological Station is owned and
operated by OTS. It is situated in the heart of Palo Verde National Park that is
managed as part of the Tempisque Conservation Area by the Ministry of
Environment of Costa Rica. More than 30,000 ha of wildlands lie within 20 km of
the field station and form a rich complex of seasonal lowland habitats that
cover much of the lower basin of the Rio Tempisque. Palo Verde?s salt and fresh
wetlands interdigitate with the marine and estuarine ecosystems of the Gulf of
Nicoya. It was declared a Ramsar Site in 1991 and hosts on a regular basis a
population of over 20,000 waterfowl.