* 0829470
* FSML:  Construction of a Multi-user Facility at the Jornada Experimental Range Field Station
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2008,04/30/2012
* Kris Havstad, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 04/30/2012
* USD 238,000.00

New Mexico State University has been awarded a grant for a multi-user facility
to enhance access to research and education at the Jornada Experimental Range.
Established in 1912, research at Jornada has resulted in one of the longest
records of ecological data and resulting publications in existence for desert
landscapes. This knowledge base has been a major contribution to understanding
key ecological processes and properties of the Chihuahuan Desert, and ecological
principles that apply to the 1/3PrdP of the world?s land surface that is arid
rangeland. The facility participates in a broad array of important national
science programs, including as one of the original cohorts of Long Term
Ecological Research sites and now a proposed relocatable site within the
National Ecological Observation Network, has elevated the Jornada into a unique
status as a multi-agency, multi-dimensional, and international scientific
facility of major importance for arid lands, their conservation, and their
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award will greatly improve capabilities for
research and education at the Jornada by providing funds to construct a 2000 sq.
ft. P multi-user facility to support research and training for scientists,
students, land managers, and the general public. The facility will provide space
visiting scientist offices, storage and meeting spaces, data management and
sample preparation. Over 50 agencies, institutions, non-government
organizations, and universities from 4 continents are actively collaborating
with the research program will benefit from the facility. The facility will have
major Jornada is a key site for training of land managers of both public and
private rangelands that comprise nearly 50% of the land area of the US. Jornada
provides sites for education programs for over 10,000 students and teachers per
year in collaboration with the Asombro Institute for Science
Education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;