* 0829485
* FSML:  High Speed Internet Installation at the Adirondack Ecological Center
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* William Porter, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2010
* USD 154,700.00

The SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry has been awarded a grant
to establish high-speed Internet capacity at the Adirondack Ecological Center, a
field station in the central Adirondack Mountains of northern New York State.
The enhancement will provide T-1 access to the dining center, student quarters
and faculty/scientist housing via fiber-optic cable and wireless nodes. The
station has seen a dramatic expansion in station use, data sharing, research and
educational outreach programs over recent years. The new capabilities afforded
by the improved Internet connectivity will lead to increased research
productivity and enhancement of the existing extensive undergraduate and
graduate educational programs. People working at the station will have immediate
access to critical scientific resources including geographic information
systems, literature and research data available throughout the world. The
station staff will also have much improved capacity to disseminate data and
information about research projects. The new network will also facilitate
collaboration through improved communication within the Forest and with
collaborators throughout the world including LTER, OBFS and NEON. The improved
communication will also advance strategic goals of developing onsite residential
programs for graduate students during the academic year by enabling greater
distance learning via course offered on the main campus in Syracuse. Finally,
improved communications will further the station's goal of engaging business
leaders and policy makers for educational experiences.