* 0829900
* EMT/BSSE Synthetic Biological Integrated Circuits for Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2008,04/30/2011
* Gregory Timp, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 04/30/2011
* USD 450,000.00

EMT/BSSE: Synthetic Biological Integrated Circuits for Computing Abstract
Synthetic biology promises a new paradigm for information processing. By
rewiring gene networks, the molecular biology of the cell can be co-opted to
produce all the modules used for computation. Moreover, these modules can be
produced in very large numbers inexpensively from a single bacterium literally
overnight by designing circuits with built-in antibiotic resistance. But the
promise of synthetic biology for information processing won?t be realized until
engineered gene networks operating in different cells can be assembled into
integrated circuits to reliably express a computing function. The prospects for
a biological integrated circuit hinge on solutions to three problems: control
over the microenvironment of the cell, which affects signal transmission and
timing; the difficulty of cascading elements due to the long response time
evident in the synthesized gene circuits; and the stochastic noise that develops
from biochemical reactions involving a small number of molecules. In this
research, the investigators synthesize gene circuits designed for high
sensitivity and high signal-to-noise protein production, transform bacteria with
them, and then assemble the different bacteria with submicron precision into
large arrays using molecular signals to wire them together to express a complex
computing function. The researchers sort through a succession of gene circuits
using directed evolution in pursuit of sensitivity and stability with respect to
noise. To efficiently produce proteins with high signal-to-noise ratio without
excessive energy, they leverage a protocol that uses MazF, an mRNA interferase,
to produce only the proteins of interest in living E. coli and otherwise arrest
cell growth. Once the gene networks are designed and tested, the different
bacteria are assembled on a hydrogel scaffold with submicron precision into 3D
circuits using optical tweezers.

