* 0829285
* SGER: The Anaktuvuk River Fire of 2007: A Test Bed for NEON Technology and Protocols in Northern Alaska
* BIO,EF
* 04/15/2008,03/31/2009
* Gaius Shaver, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 03/31/2009
* USD 200,000.00

This SGER award will provide funds for Redeployable sensor towers and sensor
networks to investigate the initial effects of a major fire that occurred on the
North Slope of Alaska in July-September 2007, and to begin documenting recovery
of the landscape including terrestrial and aquatic components. SGER funding
would allow a survey and sampling program to begin in April or early May 2008
and to continue through the following summer. Products of the research would
include a unique data set on distribution, intensity, and patchiness of the
burn, with documentation of initial impacts on surface carbon, water, and energy
balance, element cycles and terrestrial and aquatic communities. The research
would also serve as a field test of equipment packages and data protocols
currently under development for use in the National Environmental Observatory
Network (NEON). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts include (1) the
interpretation of these fire-related changes in the context of global climate
change in the Arctic region, and (2) the ability to use this major, large-area
disturbance to develop and test landscape-level models heretofore based only on
finer-scale experimental and comparative studies of individual arctic
ecosystems. Much of the sampling work will include graduate and REU students
working at Toolik Lake, as well as science journalists participating in a unique
MBL science journalism program.&lt;br/&gt;