* 0829503
* Improving the Scientific Capabilities and Safety of the Marine Operations and Diving Programs at Moss Landing Marine Laboratories
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Kenneth Coale, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2010
* USD 112,264.00

San Jose State University?s Moss Landing marine Lab is awarded a grant to
purchase a Nitrox and SCUBA Cylinder Filling Station and CTD Rosette. Nitrox is
used at mid-depths of 15-40m and standards for scientific diver use of Nitrox
were adopted by AAUS in 1998. Nitrox training is offered to all MLML research
divers.. Nitrox increases available bottom time, and decreases diving injury
risks due to high partial pressures of nitrogen at depth. In 2007, MLML
scientists made 1267 mid-depth dives in 2007, compared with 908 dives in 2006.
Therefore the overall number of dives at depths that would benefit by breathing
Nitrox is increasing and expected to continue to increase in the future. It is
important that researchers and students have this resource easily available to
them for increased safety while diving. The CTD will improve their ability to
collect water at various depths and an attached CTD allowing continuous
measurement of time, depth, temperature, and salinity. This rosette/CTD will be
associated with the vessel, therefore, available for all researchers using this
vessel.

Moss Landing Marine Laboratory (MLML) is a very productive marine lab. They are
particularly efficient at using limited resources to achieve results. Their work
is voluminous and of high quality. NSF and other federal agencies are important
funding sources for the research on-site. The scientific productivity is in part
due to the accessibility of a plethora of marine environments.

Broader Impacts

The proposed improvements would impact a large number of internal and external
users. MLML serves a consortium of 7 CSU campuses, thus it inherently has a
regional impact. The enhanced Nitrox capabilities proposed here would increase
the amount of safe time available for divers underwater. The proposed program
changes will enhance infrastructure for research and education by upgrading
diving facility and safety and increase time underwater, broadening boating
access and safety, expanding research capabilities of small vessels. The
equipment will be available to a broad range of researchers, teachers and
students. Moss Landing has both active community engagement and interaction with
outside institutions as collaborators and visitors. The broader impacts include
advanced teaching and research tools and increased data access to K-12
educational systems.