* 0829316
* Sources of Wage Inequality
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2007,07/31/2011
* Christopher Taber, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2011
* USD 142,742.00

Proposal No: 0617438 Institution: Northwestern University NSF Program: ECONOMICS
Principal Investigator: Taber, Christopher Title: Sources of Wage Inequality

ABSTRACT

The sources and consequences of wage inequality are of both academic interest
and an important policy issue. The four most important models of post-schooling
wage determination in economics are human capital, the Roy model, the
compensating differentials model, and the search model. The key aspect of the
Roy model is comparative advantage in which some workers earn more than others
as a result of different skill levels at labor market entry. Workers choose the
job for which they achieve the highest level of earnings. By contrast, in a
compensating wage differentials model a worker is willing to be paid less in
order to work on a job that they enjoy more. Thus, workers with identical talent
can earn different salaries. Finally, workers may have had poor luck in finding
their ideal job. This type of search friction can also lead to heterogeneity in
earnings as some workers may work for higher wage firms. Researchers on wage
heterogeneity have generally emphasized one model over others. While separating
human capital accumulation from the others is quite common, we know surprisingly
little about the relative importance of the other three sources of inequality.
Thus, it is not possible to infer the relative importance of each of these
explanations of wage heterogeneity. The goal of the proposed is to uncover the
contribution of these different components to overall earnings inequality by
developing and estimating a structural model of wage heterogeneity that
encompasses all four explanations of wage inequality.

The intellectual merit of the project arises from the following four activities.
This research will derive the first empirically implementable structural model
of earnings inequality containing the four major post schooling wage models in
labor economics, human capital, the Roy model, the compensating differentials
model, and the search model. It will show how the parameters of the model can be
uniquely identified from the type of data at our disposal. Using a unique data
set on individuals, the model will be estimated with the latest and appropriate
econometric techniques. Finally, the estimated parameters of the model will be
used to uncover the relative importance of the four sources of wage inequality.
The results of this research will have broader impacts in several directions.
For example, the results of this research project will provide empirically
grounded frameworks that can be used to understand a number of labor market
phenomena. The results of this research could improve our understanding of low
income labor market policy. If the goal is to counteract earnings inequality,
the four models have very different policy implications.

