* 0829252
* URM Proposal:  Undergraduate Research &amp; Mentoring in Environmental Biology on Land-Lake ecosystems
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2013
* William Sigler, University of Toledo
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 12/31/2013
* USD 610,210.00

The URM program at the University of Toledo will train undergraduate students,
especially those from under-represented minority groups, in research and prepare
them for future graduate study in environmental biology. Four cohorts of six
students, who will be drawn from a very diverse student population on campus,
will receive financial support to participate in two calendar years of
intensive, independent, and integrated research and mentoring program. At least
eleven faculty members will serve as mentors in this URM program and engage the
students in a wide-range of environmental and ecological disciplines focusing on
stresses to the land-lake ecosystem interface, including (i) toxic algal blooms
and exotic species, (ii) declining fish spawning habitat and emerging VHS viral
disease, (iii) wetlands and water quality, and (iv) terrestrial impacts on
watershed services. URM students will interact in a joint course and seminar
curriculum while earning independent research credits. This URM will provide
regular interaction with agency and environmental professionals to develop an
understanding of the significance and application of their research work, while
augmenting the understanding of the role of anthropogenic stressors in water
quality crises. For additional information, please contact Dr. Von Sigler at
von.sigler@utoledo.edu, or visit http://www.utoledo.edu/as/envsciences/NSF-
URM.html.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;