* 0829128
* Biocompatible Metal (Core)-Layered Double Hydroxide (Shell) Nanoparticles for siRNA Delivery
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* Kaushal Rege, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Athanassios Sambanis
* 08/31/2014
* USD 378,729.00

CBET-0829128&lt;br/&gt;K. Rege, Arizona State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this collaborative
research is the engineering and mechanistic understanding of biocompatible core
(gold nanorod)-shell (layered-double hydroxide or LDH) based nanoparticles for
selective delivery of siRNA with an eye towards enhancing hyperthermia
treatments. Specific segments in the proposed nanoparticle are dedicated to (1)
hyperthermic ablation and (2) carrying siRNA for inhibiting heat shock protein
response to hyperthermia. The proposed research, therefore, employs bottom-up
nanoscale engineering for direct impact in biomedical
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LDH structures are a class of inorganic ceramic
materials with the general formula M2+1(1-x)M3+(OH)2.(An-)x/n.mH2O, where M2+ is
a divalent cation, M3+ is a trivalent cation, and An- is the interlayer anion of
valence n. The unique LDH structure readily allows the intercalation of anionic
molecules (e.g. siRNA) via ion exchange; varying the ratios of metal ions
results in the tunable loading of siRNA in these nanoparticles. Nanoscale LDH
shells may be generated using physiologically necessary metals (e.g. iron and
zinc), thus obviating toxicity-related concerns. Furthermore, the disintegration
of the LDH shell at late endosomal / lysozomal (acidic) pH results in an
environmentally-responsive platform. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
objectives are: (1) synthesis and characterization of gold nanorod-LDH
nanoparticles with narrow size distribution profiles, (2) generation of siRNA-
loaded core-shell nanoparticles, and (3) in-vitro evaluation of siRNA delivery
and combination treatment using core-shell nanostructures. Simultaneous siRNA
delivery and hyperthermic ablation on a single nanoparticle are unique
attributes of the proposed platform, and can significantly enhance therapeutic
efficacies for the ablation of cancer cells. Successful completion of the
proposed research will result in a platform that can be extended to diverse
biomedical applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research, at the
interface of nanotechnology and biomedical sciences, synergistically combines
principles from nanoparticle synthesis, hyperthermia, surface chemistry,
biomolecular adsorption, and cell biology, and is intended to have a direct
impact on biomedical sciences in the near future. Graduate students will be
trained in the application of nanotechnology in the biomedical sciences
resulting in well rounded, interdisciplinary training in engineering and
biomedical sciences. The educational thrust is also on the recruitment of
underrepresented populations and women in graduate studies in engineering as
exemplified by the graduate students currently in our respective research
groups. In addition, the PI has recently initiated collaboration with Down-to-
Earth Science (DES), an NSF-funded GK-12 project at Arizona State University
(http://gk12.asu.edu). The PI and Co-PI, and the graduate students will partner
with the director, staff, and graduate students of the DES program in bringing
the biomedical benefits of nanotechnology into K-12 classrooms through lectures
and web-based education tools. The proposed research will also have a
significant impact on undergraduate education with a particular emphasis on the
biomedical benefits of nanotechnology. Six undergraduate students, including
four from the Barrett Honors College, in the PI's laboratory and two
undergraduate students in the co-PI's laboratory at ASU exemplify our commitment
to encouraging talented students to pursue research opportunities and graduate
studies in engineering. All undergraduate students in the PI?s laboratory are
recipients of the Fulton Undergraduate Research Initiative (FURI) award from the
Ira A. Fulton School of Engineering at ASU which is a unique program that
encourages undergraduate research in engineering.