* 0829481
* Improvements in Facilities for Field Research, Education and Marine Operations at the Great Lakes WATER Institute
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2011
* J Klump, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 12/31/2011
* USD 255,000.00

The University of Wisconsin at Milwaukee (UWM) is awarded a grant for the
conversion and renovation of approximately 4,000 GSF of floor space into a field
research operations, staging and sample processing facility for ?Water,
Environment, and Technology?. This field facility will provide: direct access to
the dock with overhead door and platform lift; direct access to boat storage
yard with overhead door and vehicle ramp; facilities for mobilization, storage,
maintenance, cleaning, and isolation of nets, buoys and other field gear; an
open field laboratory bay for sample processing and analysis; and adjacent
temporary aquaria tank space for holding collected specimens. It will also
assist with funding for the conversion of the existing smaller staging area into
a new instructional laboratory which the Institute currently lacks. The UWM
Great Lakes Wisconsin Aquatic Technology and Environmental Research (WATER)
Institute is the only oceanographic-scale research dock on Lake Michigan that is
active year round. The facility houses the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
Center for Great Lakes Studies and serves as a base for UW research vessels and
scientists from other campuses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed new space at the WATER Institute
would support anticipated growth in educational and outreach activities.
Programs that would be developed or expanded upon include: Partnership with
Discovery World, Partnership with Milwaukee Public Museum/JASON Project,
Parnership with Urban Ecology Center and others listed in the body of the
proposal. The urban location of the WATER Institute provides an opportunity to
engage underrepresented groups and groups from diverse socio-economic
backgrounds. In addition, the long-running REU program provides opportunities
for undergraduates. Other educational/outreach programs have suffered from lack
of teaching space, and most programs, e.g., JASON, UEC, SSCHC, COSEE, indicate
an interest in participating more, once the space is made available. &lt;br/&gt;