* 0829546
* MOD: A Political-Economic Model of Opposition/Support for Science and Innovation Policies
* SBE,SBE
* 12/15/2008,11/30/2010
* Mark Taylor, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Julia I. Lane
* 11/30/2010
* USD 57,605.00

This project addresses an important gap in the science of science and innovation
policy scholarship by explaining why well-designed science and innovation
policies are sometimes blocked, distorted, or improperly executed. It develops a
model of how domestic political variables affect the design, passage, and
implementation of science and innovation policy (SIP). The key distinction in
this project is that most innovation research takes support for science and
technology as given, and then asks which policies can best achieve the nation?s
science and technology goals. In contrast, this research project problematizes
support for science and technology. That is, it acknowledges that technological
change creates political and economic winners and losers within society. It then
attempts to model the behavior of these winning and losing interest-groups in
regards to SIP. History shows that the losers will fight to obstruct, co-opt, or
alter otherwise "good" policies that promote science and innovation. Thus,
understanding how and why these fights evolve is essential for understanding why
some countries are better at science and technological change than others. Put
differently, what this research contributes, that previous work has not, is a
better understanding of how and why political resistance to technological change
arises, and the conditions under which it can affect SIP and SIP outcomes.

Political-economic models, such as the one developed in this project, have been
successfully used to explain policy development in other important subfields
such as free trade, international finance, and economic development. This
project probes the feasibility of applying these modeling approaches to better
explain SIP outcomes. Certainly case studies of individual instances of
successful or failed innovation policy have been performed, but a more general
political-economic model (such as the one designed in this project) has yet to
be presented. This research project therefore opens up a new avenue of SciSIP
research, one with substantial complementarities with existing lines of SciSIP
scholarship. Specifically, it investigates the effects on SIP of: political
battles between different interest-groups, different political institutions
(legislatures, executives, bureaucracies), and their different policy priorities
under changing national economic and security conditions.

Broader impacts: This research helps to explain why otherwise "good" policies
and institutions fail to deliver scientific and technological progress. It
therefore informs the innovation debates taking place within a variety of
disciplines (economics, political science, business, industry studies), each of
which tends to omit analysis of the politics behind innovation policies and
institutions (or at least lacks a general model of these politics). A successful
model also informs the policy process. It identifies the conditions under which
certain policy designs might be more or less likely to be passed and properly
implemented by government. This can aid strategies for achieving more widespread
political support for SIPs and their implementation, and thereby help
policymakers deliver more effective SIPs. The products of this research are
being disseminated online, at academic and policy research conferences, in
graduate and undergraduate level courses, and in peer-reviewed journal articles.
The project is also being used as an opportunity contribute to research training
by involving a graduate student research assistant. Therefore this project
impacts research, policymaking, and student communities.