* 0829548
* Insightful Understanding of China's Science Education and Research
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2008,10/31/2009
* Wei Zhao, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* W. Y. B. Chang
* 10/31/2009
* USD 50,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0829548 ZHAO, Wei-
RPI&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;?Complementarities between the United States and China
Workshops in Science Research and Education?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports up to 10 deans representing the natural and computer sciences from a
broad diversity of U.S. universities to undertake a 10-day structured visit
(October 20-31, 2008) to meet peers at major scientific research organizations
in three cities in China, namely, Beijing, Xi?an and Shanghai. Participants are
selected based on demonstrated leadership in their respective science
communities, and from institutions which have a strong interest, but less
experience with China at the institutional level. Half the participants are
women or minorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U.S. PI is Dr. Wei Zhao, Dean of
Science at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. The counterpart organizers are Dr.
LIN, Jiahua, Office of the Provost, Peking University, Ms. CHEN, Huai,
International Office of the National Natural Science Foundation of China, and
Dr. ZHANG, ShengSheng, International College of Shanghai Jiaotong University.
The objectives of the visit include developing insight into challenges in
science education, developing targeted exchange programs that complement
research strengths of U.S. and Chinese institutions, and assessing the
complementarities of China?s scientific infrastructure with the research
interests of U.S. early-career researchers and students from the fields of
science represented in the delegation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;