* 0829944
* EMT/QIS: Continuous-time quantum computation
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Andrew Landahl, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 08/31/2011
* USD 180,000.00

Theoretical approaches to quantum computing frequently model the state of a
quantum system as something that changes discretely in time. However, an
unmeasured quantum system fundamentally evolves continuously in time as
described by Schroedinger's equation. Even the quantum measurement process can
be described by a continuous-time stochastic differential equation. This
research explores quantum computation in its complete continuous-time
formulation, with the goal of uncovering new paradigms for processing quantum
information.

The research focuses on three key areas: continuous-time quantum computing
architectures, continuous-time quantum error correction, and continuous-time
quantum algorithms. These areas were selected because examples highlighting the
differences between continuous-time and discrete-time quantum computing
formulations are already known in each of them. For example, continuous-time
quantum walk architectures require no external dynamical controls, continuous-
time quantum feedback can mediate quantum error correction, and continuous-time
quantum scattering can calculate Boolean formulas with fewer queries than any
classical algorithm can. A major objective of this research is to expand upon
these directions and develop new ones. The strategy will be to focus on problems
that are sufficiently well-defined and tractable that progress can be made.

This project not only supports graduate student training in quantum information
science but also supports education and outreach activities through the
Southwest Quantum Information and Technology (SQuInT) Network. The PI will seek
out exceptional students outside his home institution, especially encouraging
those in underrepresented groups, and sponsor their attendance at SQuInT
meetings to further enrich this growing field.