* 0829132
* Heterotrophic Degradation of and Bioaugmentation for Emerging Trace Contaminants in Wastewater Treatment
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Heidi Gough, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Debra Reinhart
* 09/30/2012
* USD 358,000.00

CBET- 0829132&lt;br/&gt;Ferguson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal
objectives of this proposal are to identify and characterize microbes in
activated sludge that are capable of biodegrading emerging trace-contaminants
(ETCs) at low concentrations, and develop a bioaugmentation process for existing
wastewater treatment systems to remove ETCs from wastewater. In the last decades
many ecological concerns have arisen related to ETC in aquatic environments. As
a primary environmental source, ETC removal is one of the main challenges
currently facing wastewater treatment facilities. Many studies examining the
fate of ETCs in treatment processes suggest that biologic degradation
contributes to transformations of ETCs. While the existence of microbes that can
grow heterotrophically on ETCs has thus been confirmed, their ability to grow
and contribute to ETCs degradation at the extreme low-concentrations has not
been fully explored. In this proposed study, advanced analytical chemistry,
microbiology and molecular biology methods will be combined to study the
heterotrophic degradation of ETCs in wastewater treatment. The ultimate goal of
the research is to develop a bioaugmentation approach for existing biologic
treatment processes that will enhance ETC removal by addressing the following
hypotheses: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Microbes presented in activated sludge are
capable of degrading ETCs at low concentrations. &lt;br/&gt;2. Metabolic
degradative activity is expressed at environmental concentrations of ETCs.
&lt;br/&gt;3. Heterotrophic degradation contributes to observed losses in WTF of
ETCs. &lt;br/&gt;4. The ability of microbes that degrade trace-level compounds
to also grow using other organics will allow bioaugmentation engineering based
on growth with less hazardous compounds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
potentially transformative in that a method of bioaugmentation for specific ETCs
degradation will be developed to investigate and design processes for biomass
addition to achieve targeted effluent limitations, as they are promulgated.
Direct educational benefits include the training of graduate students, and
participation of undergraduate researchers. Increased participation by
underrepresented groups will be realized through established program through
continued partnership with the University of Washington, College of Engineering
Office of Diversity.