* 0829890
* EMT/NANO: Single Atom Wide Wires with Insulation: New Paradigm for Ballistic Transport
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,02/29/2012
* Linda Doerrer, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 02/29/2012
* USD 263,500.00

The creation of new compounds and materials that facilitate efficient electronic
conduction is an important and on-going challenge for the development of
nanoscale technologies. We study the development of a new family of one-
dimensional materials whose core consists of a one-atom wide conducting wire
that is surrounding by insulating protecting groups. These wires are designed
simultaneously with their insulating coating such that the wires can be packed
with maximum density. The insulating groups serve to isolate each wire for ease
of synthesis, promote highly one-dimensional structures, and facilitate
efficient conduction along but not between the wires. The proposed materials
build on established compounds from our group, proven methodologies, and are
expanded with new ligands and redox reactions to achieve the desired electronic
structures. Salts will be prepared in which each cation and anion contain a
metal atom, M, surrounded by ligands based on L and X groups. Previous work
established the use of metathesis reactions to synthesize double salts with d8
and d10 metal-containing cations and anions of the form [ML3X][MX2] and
[ML2X2][MX2], where L is a neutral Lewis base donor and X is anionic group. The
cations and anions stack in an infinite array forming a chain of metal atoms
with infinite metal-metal contacts along the length of the chain. Extensive use
has been made of Au and Pt structures to date which will be elaborated upon with
Co, Ni, Cu, Rh, Ir, Pr, and Ag. Other ion motifs will be developed as well
including [MX4]-and [MLX3]-, This synthetic scheme is extremely flexible and
will therefore allow an essentially infinite array of different electronic
occupations to be prepared.

