* 0829926
* EMT/NANO: Co-Exploration of Device and System Architecture for Quantum NanoElectronics
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Vijaykrishnan Narayanan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 08/31/2012
* USD 200,020.00

Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;Objectives: The objective of our proposal is co-
exploration of simulation and design of single or few electron nanoscale quantum
devices into binary decision diagram based reconfigurable logic architectures
for realization of robust, ultra-low power computing systems. The approach is
based on split-gate quantum nanodots as the decision node elements while
incorporating functional reconfigurability. This research will primarily focus
on the device architecture design to demonstrate its viability in realizing
logic architectures with sufficient logic depth, functional robustnesss, and
energy delay product approaching the quantum limit.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit: Key contributions expected from this research are: 1) Simultaneous design
and optimization of nanoscale quantum devices to implement system level logic
architecture operating with record power-delay product approaching the quantum
limit of kT/q*ln(2) 2) Detailed quantum simulations of single and cascaded
devices to facilitate design of reconfigurable BDD-based logic circuits for
achieving reliable ultra low power operation. The proposed research is
transformative since it will expand our fundamental understanding of physics and
operation of compound semiconductor based nanodevices in restricted geometries
in novel multiple gate configurations, as well as design and implementation of
energy efficient reconfigurable BDD logic
architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The results from this
research will foster new directions at the intersection of material science,
electrical engineering and computer engineering extending mesoscopic devices to
logic architectures. The proposed research directly addresses the ongoing quest
in the semiconductor industry for longer term solutions to energy efficient
technology scaling. Undergraduate and graduate students, involved in this
research, will get versatile training in cross-disciplinary areas in preparation
of their careers in the burgeoning nanoelectronics industry. The device models,
nanofabrication techniques and design methodologies developed will be used in
creating courseware which will be available through our website for use by other
educators, researchers and industrial practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;