* 0829393
* SGER: Excavation, Osteology and DNA Determination of the Tarkio Valley, Iowa,  Ground Sloths
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2008,05/31/2010
* Holmes Semken, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Boush
* 05/31/2010
* USD 19,983.00

Excavation, Osteology and DNA Determination of the Tarkio Valley, Iowa, Ground
Sloths &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Holmes A. Semken, Jr.
PI&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract. An extraordinary adult ice-age giant ground
sloth, Megalonyx jeffersonii, was discovered in a southwest Iowa stream bed in
2001 following a major flood. Subsequent excavations, possible only during
periods of reduced flow, have produced 104 elements (about 55 percent) of the
discovery skeleton. This specimen now represents the second most complete
Jefferson?s giant ground sloth known. The scientific value of this adult
specimen was compounded tremendously by the subsequent discovery of two
juveniles (41 bones at present) of different ages partially intermingled with
the adult. This is the first direct association of an adult Megalonyx with
possible offspring. The pond-like depositional unit containing the sloth remains
also contains plant macrofossils, pollen, mollusks as well as limited numbers of
micro-vertebrates. These will provide information on the immediate and regional
environments at the time of death. Superior preservation of the sloth remains
suggests that isotope analyses of the skeletal elements should provide dietary
information about these enigmatic creatures as well as temperature values around
the time of death. The probability of good isotopic analyses is supported by
elemental maps of an adult tooth. Carbon has been determined as present in the
dentition so it is possible that DNA is also is present. If present, sex, family
relationships and absolute age of the specimens in radiocarbon years may be
determined. The site, latest Pleistocene in age based on stratigraphic position,
is located a known distance from the glacial front (Des Moines lobe) and should
provide insight on the climatic tolerances of this wide-ranging taxon at an
ecological extreme. It is clear that breeding occurred near the ice front. It
also appears that the sloth group lived close to the end-Pleistocene mega-mammal
extinction event and may assist in the search for an explanation. The Tarkio
Valley biotic association offers an unparalleled opportunity to enhance our
knowledge of both the physiology and paleoecology of Megalonyx.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A team of scholars with specialties in palynology, stable
isotopes, plant macrofossils, microvertebrates, molecular biology, archaeology
and Quaternary stratigraphy is eager to supervise students in the total analysis
of the association. However, before a comprehensive analysis of the specimens
and their paleoenvironmental associations, can be conducted, it is necessary to
(1) ensure recovery all remaining skeletal elements, (2) complete a skeletal
inventory and osteological analysis of each sloth and (3) ascertain if
comparative DNA analyses of the Tarkio specimens is possible. Part of the find
is located under eight meters of overburden on the north bank of the Tarkio
Valley, others are just below the stream bed and the bone bed extends under a
four meter slump block to the south. The north bank has been cleared but heavy
equipment is required to expose the stream bed and uncover the bone-bearing
deposits under the south bank. Once total excavation is accomplished, a complete
element inventory, osteological analysis and bone distribution map will be
prepared to provide the basic data necessary for all future investigations. The
final phase of this exploratory effort at the Tarkio Valley site is to determine
if sufficient DNA is preserved to establish relationships between individual
sloths at the site. Completion of these three phases will then permit the Tarkio
Valley locality to be one of the most comprehensively examined ice-age large
mammal associations on record. This discovery has excited thousands of people
regionally via a web site, traveling exhibits, lectures and volunteer
participation. An outreach Intern will provide immediate updates and better
coordinate all of these activities. Activities can be reviewed at:
www.uiowa.edu/~nathist/Site/sloth/index.html &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;