* 0829199
* Engineered, Solid-State Processes for Enhanced Biosolar Hydrogen Production Enabling the Development of Biocomposite Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2010
* Roger Ely, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul L. Bishop
* 09/30/2010
* USD 89,974.00

CBET-0829199&lt;br/&gt;Ely&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biosolar hydrogen (H2)
production is a promising sustainable energy alternative. The major feedstocks,
sunlight and water, are widely distributed and abundant, and amounts of H2 that
could be produced far exceed current and projected energy demand. The light
harvesting capabilities of cyanobacteria offer potential efficiencies that are
tremendously high compared to production of carbonaceous biofuels, like ethanol
and biodiesel, from primary production. A solid-state matrix that encapsulates
cyanobacteria to create a biocomposite material may offer some significant
design and operational advantages over conventional bioreactors while also
reducing operation and equipment costs. Biocomposite material engineering is a
very new and rapidly growing field, but before its potential can be fully
realized for this or other, similar projects, an improved understanding of
interactions between the solid matrix and encapsulated cells is needed. Using
Synechocystis PCC 6803 as a model, the ultimate goal of this project will be to
develop fundamental knowledge pertaining to design and construction of
biocomposites while exploiting several advantages of cell encapsulation in
silica sol-gel and achieving maximal H2 production per unit mass of encapsulated
cells. The objectives of this research are to (1) determine the optimal gel
composition and immobilization approach for desired viability, longevity, and
metabolic activity of encapsulated cells; (2) determine and describe molecular-
level interactions between the sol-gel and the encapsulated cells; and (3)
characterize photosynthetic activity and H2 production from the encapsulated
cultures to optimize gel geometry and optical properties for H2 production.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides a critical step toward developing
sustainable biophotolytic H2 production systems that can sustainably meet energy
demands. Knowledge derived and applications resulting from the research could
help to develop biomimetic models to create biobased generators to produce
molecular H2 from water and light, which would have enormous impacts on all
sectors of society. Since water would replace fossil fuels as the feedstock,
fossil fuel use, exposures and health-related effects would all decline. Such
generators could be incorporated into integrated H2 energy systems, providing
generation, storage, and utilization of H2 in one unit. Finally, we will provide
a unique opportunity for training graduate, undergraduate and high-school
students with multi-disciplinary knowledge and skills.