* 0829146
* TiO2-based nanocomposites for solar fuel production:  Engineering the solid-solid interface for specialized photocatalytic function
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Kimberly Gray, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 08/31/2012
* USD 402,000.00

CBET-0829146 &lt;br/&gt;Gray &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a large gap between
our present use of solar energy and its enormous untapped potential. This is due
to a variety of technical challenges, but primary among them is the need to
develop highly efficient, photo-active materials for sunlight capture and in
this case, conversion to chemical fuels. The aim of the proposed research is to
synthesize using dc-reactive magnetron sputtering TiO2-based nanocomposite
materials that harvest visible light to drive CO2 reduction, thereby producing
energy rich fuels selectively and efficiently. We believe that the key to this
goal is to understand the role played by the solid-solid interface of the nano-
structured composites. Recent findings in our laboratory reveal a number of
surprising insights as to why TiO2 composites tend to display higher photo-
activity than pure phase materials and point to the critical role of the solid-
solid interface as the location of catalytic "hot spots." Efforts to probe the
role of the solid solid interface in photocatalysis are stymied by an inability
to synthesize under sufficiently controlled conditions and in sufficient
quantities the "interface," which would then allow structural characterization
and functional interrogation. We hypothesize that the solid-solid interface of
TiO2-based, nanostructured composite materials can be synthesized by magnetron
sputtering to yield an optimum combination of optical, electronic and chemical
properties to improve solar fuel generation by CO2
reduction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the proposed work is to interrogate
and then, manipulate the critical features of the sputtered solid-solid
interface that are fundamental to the high efficiency, visible light
photoreduction of CO2 to energy rich fuels such as CH4 or CH3OH. The phase
transition occurring at the solid-solid interface of sputtered TiO2 composites
may induce changes in the coordination state of Ti4+. The tetrahedral
coordinated Ti has been proposed as the catalytic active site in a variety of
photoactive materials that catalyze the reduction of CO2. We believe that
interfacial tetrahedrally coordinated Ti sites explain the high activity of
mixed phase titania powders and have shown this to be the case in both Degussa
P25 and sol-gel materials. In this proposed work, we answer the following
questions: (1) Is tetrahedrally coordinated Ti formed at the phase interface of
oxygen deficient (TiO2-x) anatase/rutile nanocomposites; (2) Is this localized
site associated with CO2 photoreduction in our sputtered composite materials and
how can we optimize its function under visible light activation; (3) Will
sputtered cation substitution of V, Nb or Ta produce bulk electronic and optical
modification of our material to yield a red shift in the absorption edge without
altering the surface or interfacial catalytic properties of our composites to
reduce CO2?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This research will explain
the structural and functional basis of the photocatalytic activity in TiO2-based
nanostructured composites synthesized by reactive magnetron sputtering. The
proposed research redirects the investigation of TiO2, widely regarded as well
studied materials, but among the best suited for energy and environmental use.
We seek to engineer, interrogate and exploit critical features of mixed phase,
non-stoichiometric nanocomposites. Our goal is to reproducibly create and
identify interfacial defects sites that drive reductive chemistry. The results
of our proposed work will produce a continuum of knowledge that links the
relationships between synthesis, structure and function, all focused on
photocatalytic CO2 reduction to generate energy rich fuels. With this
understanding we will be better able to tune catalytic performance for efficient
solar energy harvest and storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The
broader significance of the proposed work is that this deeper understanding will
allow us to design a new generation of material systems tailored to energy
applications, especially those associated with solar energy harvest, conversion
and storage. The proposed work is fundamental, but also has implications to a
wide range of applied engineering areas, particularly those related to the
development of sustainable, carbon neutral technologies and renewable resources.
The proposed work promises to push the design of photoactive materials far
beyond where the technology exists today. The research has a strong
interdisciplinary nature reaching across the materials, chemical and
environmental engineering fields to facilitate advanced teaching and learning
among a cadre of faculty, undergraduate, graduate and postgraduate students and
the larger community. Undergraduate research opportunities abound as this
project connects to the avid interest among our student population in topics
related to energy and the environment. This project also provides numerous
vehicles for reaching non-science students, middle and high school science
teachers and the general public. The PIs have established expertise and ongoing
collaboration particularly well suited to the ambitious research program
described within this proposal.