* 0829908
* 2008 Minority Faculty Development Workshop
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2010
* Gilda Barabino, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 07/31/2010
* USD 250,000.00

CBET-0829908&lt;br/&gt;Barabino&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lack of diversification
of the engineering faculty is well documented as are the serious ramifications
of this problem on building a diverse workforce that will enhance and support
national prosperity. A culturally diverse faculty is necessary to provide role
models who will enhance the attraction and retention of underrepresented
students in engineering and who will replace an aging engineering faculty.
Increasing the representation of minority engineering faculty requires a
multifaceted approach that includes increasing the number of doctoral graduates
who are entering and being retained in the academy. This need is addressed by
the proposed 2008 Minority Faculty Development Workshop (MFDW) to be held at NSF
in October of 2008. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goals of the 2008 Workshop
are to provide underrepresented minority aspiring faculty with advice, guidance
and developmental tools necessary to enter, succeed and thrive in academe and to
increase the numbers of faculty of color in engineering. The theme of the 2008
workshop is "Building Tomorrow's Engineering Faculty Today" and the target
audience is members of underrepresented groups as defined by NSF (African-
American, Hispanic or Native American) holding graduate assistant or
postdoctoral appointments in a U.S. four-year institution. Through a series of
carefully crafted and tailored sessions and activities, participants will become
more knowledgeable and better able to navigate the path to career success as an
engineering faculty member. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Minority
faculty development programs have been shown to have a positive effect on
achieving academic career success and increasing the numbers of underrepresented
minority faculty (Johnson, 1999, Moody, 2004). It has also been shown that
minority faculty are less likely to have mentors, are more likely to be under-
informed about tenure and promotion procedures and policies, typically receive
funding at lower rates than majority faculty, often have lower publication rates
than majority faculty, and are more likely to suffer from exclusion at their
institutions (Gregory, 1995, Allen, 2002). The proposed workshop incorporates
literature-based strategies and takes a scholarly approach towards the
development of a cadre of minority faculty poised for academic excellence.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: For underrepresented minorities, the
pipeline to the academy is fraught with persistent leaks at all levels that
ultimately threaten our nation's ability to train a diverse workforce equipped
to handle 21st century problems. At the graduate and postdoctoral levels,
underrepresented minority students and associates 1) are subjected to systematic
and institutional biases during their training that impacts their ability to
persist and thrive, 2) lack mentors and role models who share their background,
3) often lack sufficient knowledge of and preparation for academic careers and
4) are often dissuaded from pursuing such careers. The proposed 2008 Minority
Faculty Development Workshop specifically targets this group and provides tools
and strategies to enhance their success in navigating the path to and through
the academy. These efforts will lead to increases in the number of
underrepresented minority engineering faculty and contribute to the training and
retention of a diverse population of students. Planned dissemination efforts
that exploit current cyberinfrastructure initiatives will broaden the pool of
participants and beneficiaries of the workshop and its ultimate
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This activity is supported by every Division and
Office in the Engineering Directorate.