* 0829420
* Infrastructure and Equipment Improvements for the South Padre Island Field Stations
* BIO,DBI
* 12/15/2008,11/30/2012
* Lawrence Lof, The University of Texas at Brownsville
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 11/30/2012
* USD 135,185.00

The University of Texas at Brownsville has been awarded a grant for
infrastructural improvements and equipment for the South Padre Island field
stations to include (1) renovating currently unexploited rooms on the 3rd (1,760
sq. ft.) and 2nd (615 sq. ft.) floors of the South Padre Island Center to create
a space for accommodating visiting scientists, students, and community groups
for extended stays, (2) improving the plumbing and seawater storage systems, and
(3) acquiring a 24' outboard vessel to support the research and education
programs of both institutions. This project is a joint activity conducted under
a memorandum of agreement between the University of Texas at Brownsville/Texas
Southmost College (UTB/TSC) and the University of Texas-Pan American (UTPA)
which covers joint use of the station and collaborations between the two
institutions. Research activities at the station include restoration ecology,
community ecology, environmental physiology, invasive species biology, remote
sensing, sedimentology, geochemistry, and hydrology.

The research laboratories of UTB/TSC and UTPA faculty serve as an important
bridge between research and educational activities (including outreach programs)
in the marine and geosciences for this largely Hispanic region. Therefore, the
broader impacts of these proposed improvements will dramatically increase the
participation of underrepresented groups in science. The proposed improvements
will enable collaborations with larger research institutions, support the
current needs of UTB/TSC and UTPA researchers, and thereby contribute
significantly to our capacity to offer high-quality research programs and engage
underrepresented students in interdisciplinary research projects in STEM related
areas.