* 0829667
* Advancing Computing Curricula and Expanding Learning Experiences through Re-engineered and Accelerated Technology Education (ACCELERATE)
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Rebecca Giorcelli, Fairmont State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2011
* USD 149,915.00

Advancing Computing Curricula and Expanding Learning Experiences through
Reengineered and Accelerated Technology Education (ACCELERATE) is a Conceptual
Development and Planning Project for the Institutional Transformation track that
moves the undergraduate computing education at Fairmont State University (FSU)
and Pierpont Community and Technical College (PC&TC) toward transformative
learning. ACCELERATE brings together the Information Systems, Information
Technology, and Computer Science (IS/IT/CS), programs at FSU and PC&TC to
explore the infrastructure changes needed to realize the implementation of the
institutional transformative vision. The ACCELERATE team includes faculty and
administrative members from the IS/IT/CS departments who will work closely at
the department and institution levels to lay the foundation for an integrated
approach to computing curricula. During this planning period, the team will also
formalize communication networks with the West Virginia High Technology
Consortium Foundation, an organization representing over 200 local high
technology companies in North Central West Virginia, to ensure the
infrastructure is in place to achieve the long-term goal of directly aligning
revised curricula with industry needs. The proposed ACCELERATE activities have
dual curriculum reflections: across computing disciplines and across general
education. While some efforts in computing fields have been made to transform
higher education computing, little research has been conducted into the merits
of shared resources and cross-computing discipline efforts. As a long-range
project, the implementation of the planning findings have significant potential
for transforming the way computing education is learned nation-wide by creating
a synergy across computing disciplines. Maintaining the scholarly focus in
content area but creating shared teaching strategies, courses, and dialog among
computing disciplines will significantly transform computing education and allow
it to rapidly respond to the needs of the 21st Century workplace.

