* 0829901
* Collaborative Research: Process-Centered, Analysis-driven System Development Applied to Human-Intensive Medical Processes
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Philip Henneman, Baystate Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2011
* USD 100,000.00

NSF Proposals 0820198/0820138

Title: Process-Centered, Analysis-Driven System Development Applied to Human-
Intensive Medical Processes

PIs: Lori Clarke, Philip Henneman, George Avrunin, Elizabeth Henneman, and Leon
Osterweil

This project presents a new approach to developing human-intensive systems in
which the coordination among human participants, hardware devices, and
application software systems are specified in an executable, process-definition
language. Process definitions are subjected to rigorous analysis in order to
detect defects and evaluate proposed improvements. Such validated process
definitions can then be used to drive simulations and train process
participants. The proposed approach is to be evaluated by developing a process
support environment that is then used to define and analyze medical processes.
Medical processes provide a particularly good evaluation domain as they are
human-intensive, involve diverse software applications and hardware devices, and
are both safety critical and error prone. Separating and rigorously analyzing
the coordination aspects of complex, human-intensive systems represent a
paradigm shift from current development practices. This approach provides a
strong technical and methodological basis for the engineering of human-intensive
systems, leading to systems that are scalable, understandable, and able to
amplify human efficacy and control. Finally, this process-centered approach has
the potential to improve the quality and reduce the cost of medical care.