* 0829838
* EMT/Nano: Energy Minimization Computing using Field Coupled Nanomagnets--Modeling and Fabrication
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Sudeep Sarkar, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2012
* USD 250,000.00

0829838 - EMT/Nano: Energy Minimization Computing using Field Coupled
Nanomagnets--Modeling and Fabrication&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sudeep Sarkar,
Sanjukta Bhanja&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Field coupled computing is a radically
different paradigm where electrical, magnetic or spin coupling among nano-
devices are utilized for computation. By far, most advances has been in the
nano-fabrication of nanomagnets, mostly driven by the need for denser memory and
patterned magnetic storage media. This research will open up unconventional
front in computing. Unlike other current works in nanocomputing that seeks to
replicate traditional computing involving Boolean logic, this research is using
magnetic field-based computing (MFC) to solve optimization problems in computer
vision. In the long run, this research will help design computers that will be
able to solve hard problems in automated object recognition in a computationally
efficient manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ground state of a nanomagnet
collection minimizes the Hamiltonian that is governed by the pairwise dipolar
interactions between the nanomagnets. The specific focus of this research is to
harnesses this energy minimization aspect to solve quadratic energy minimization
problems in computer vision. The investigators are developing computational
method, based on multi-dimensional scaling, to decide upon the spatial
arrangement of nanomagnets that matches a particular quadratic minimization
problem. Each variable is represented by a nanomagnet and the distances between
them are such that the dipolar interactions match the corresponding pair wise
energy term in the optimization problem. The nanomagnets that participate in a
specific computation are to be selected from a field of regularly placed
nanomagnets. Some of the scientific questions being considered are. What would
be the optimal geometry and appropriate material for these nanomagnets? How
would one select the nanomagnets from an array of uniformly spaced nanomagnets
to involve in computation? Can we demonstrate these functions by fabricating
circuits?&lt;br/&gt;