* 0829236
* URM:  Enhancing Diversity in Environmental Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2015
* John McLachlan, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 12/31/2015
* USD 563,564.00

The URM proposal entitled Enhancing Diversity in Environmental Biology (EDEB) is
a university partnership to recruit and mentor underrepresented undergraduate
students from Xavier and Tulane Universities and prepares them for admission and
completion of environmental biology graduate programs. A structured and
collaborative program, EDEB will be administered through the Tulane/Xavier
Center for Bioenvironmental Research (CBR). The CBR represents a nineteen-year
university partnership in bioenvironmental research; increasing diversity in
this field is a core concept in its mission. Nationally only 3.4% of the
doctoral degrees in biology are awarded to African Americans (NSF Science and
Engineering Doctorate Awards: 2005), and only a small fraction of these become
environmental biologists. An important method to increase interest in
environmental biology is to combine undergraduate lectures with student research
in close collaboration with faculty mentors. Recent studies focusing on
undergraduate students in research programs support this approach, particularly
for first generation college and/or minority students. EDEB will implement a
training program in environmental biology that includes research tools and
techniques; mentored laboratory and field experiences; and critical thinking and
career exploration activities. Students will receive a unique, collaborative
mentoring experience utilizing a ?mentoring triad? concept in which they will be
jointly mentored by a Tulane University faculty member and a Xavier University
faculty member. This project will fortify the successful majority-minority
institutional alliance between Tulane and Xavier Universities by building on the
strengths of the CBR. For additional information, contact PIs: Dr. John
McLachlan jmclach@tulane.edu or Dr. Syed Muniruzzaman smuniruz@xula.edu . For
additional information, visit http://www.cbr.tulane.edu/ .