* 0829180
* U.S.-Norway Workshop on Reconciling Supply of and Demand for Research in the Science of Science and Innovation Policy (SciSIP)
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2011
* Roger Pielke, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 07/31/2011
* USD 39,435.00

OISE 0829180&lt;br/&gt;Pielke&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This U.S.-Norwegian workshop
will bring together a group of pioneering policy researchers to examine
approaches for improving the best possible match between the information that is
available to decision makers and the information used to support actual
decisions. Organizers, Roger Pielke of the University of Colorado-Boulder, and
his Norwegian partner, Merle Jacob of the University of Oslo?s Center for
Technology, Innovation and Culture, will direct a four-day program in Oslo to
address the question: ?How can scholars who study science and innovation policy
contribute more effectively to the needs of policy makers facing decisions about
science and innovation policy??&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop draws upon
Norwegian and U.S. perspectives for a comparative program designed to focus on
both the supply and demand sides of the relationship of knowledge producers and
users in the two countries. The goal is to derive systematic knowledge about how
the supply of scientific information, via the broad areas of science and
technologies studies and policy research, relates to the demand for information
among science and innovation policy decision makers and to the capacity of
decision makers to use the information they receive. Results from this workshop
are expected help develop approaches to address the challenge of producing and
using new knowledge about science and innovation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
workshop fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by
enabling experts in the United States and Europe to combine complementary
talents and share research resources in areas of strong mutual interest and
competence. Broader impacts include early career introduction of U.S. graduate
and post doctoral students to Norwegian and U.S. experts in the growing field
called the Science of Science and Innovation Policy (SciSIP). Overall,
participants are expected gain deeper understanding of problems associated with
the integration of research and action in a two country
context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;