* 0829619
* CPATH CDP:   Integrating Sustainability Into Undergraduate Computing Education
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Linda Ott, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 06/30/2012
* USD 228,554.00

This Conceptual Development and Planning project integrates sustainability
concepts throughout undergraduate computing education. An interdisciplinary team
of faculty from engineering, computer science, and cognitive science plans to
test, develop, implement, and evaluate an educational model for sustainability
integration into the curriculum. The team plans to develop models, projects and
courses for beginning and upper level students, including a new course in green
computing. The group envisions a focus on the power consumption of large data
centers aspects of sustainability. The goal is to prepare students with the
computing competencies, multi-disciplinary knowledge, and computational thinking
methodologies to create a sustainable future. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of the project lies in the importance and currency of the
topic and clear need for such changes in computing education to prepare the
upcoming generation of computing professionals. The cross-disciplinary project
team includes researchers with significant expertise in both the computing
discipline research that underlies the implementation and in educational
innovation. The project has the potential for providing new research models in
an emerging field critical for future generations as well as the current
one.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the project lie in the
potential to address changing demands on computing professionals and to attract
a diverse audience of students. The project has the potential to provide
innovative models for transforming computing education that are of value to
other colleges and universities across the nation.