* 0829957
* U.S. National Committee for Diversitas
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Margaret Collins, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Lydeard
* 08/31/2011
* USD 200,000.00

The U.S. National Academy of Sciences holds the United States membership in
DIVERSITAS, an international program of biodiversity science that links
biologists, ecologists and social scientists from around the world in support of
sustainable use of biodiversity. This project will support activities of the
U.S. National Committee for DIVERSITAS, which comprises a group of distinguished
scientists that works nationally and internationally to raise awareness of
biodiversity issues. The U.S. National Committee (USNC), chaired by Professor
Peter Crane of the University of Chicago, contributes to the formulation and
execution of a strong DIVERSITAS research program. In early 2009, the USNC will
oversee the organization of a National Academies Symposium on Biodiversity
Science in Washington, D.C., focusing on three critical scientific and policy
debates concerning biodiversity and ecosystem services: climate change and
energy, trade and invasive species, and food security. It is timed to
commemorate the bicentenary of the birth of Charles Darwin, when there will be
broad media interest in biological diversity. In parallel with the planning for
the symposium, the USNC will oversee the preparation and dissemination of a
report including policy briefs on each of these three issues. After the
Symposium, the USNC focus will shift to promoting and organizing U.S.
participation in the DIVERSITAS Open Science Conference (OSC) in South Africa,
scheduled for October 16-19, 2009. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The crucial role of
biodiversity in supporting human well-being provides a common thread to a vast
array of scientific investigations and public policy issues, from agricultural
productivity and biomedical sciences to energy production, freshwater
availability, and human development patterns. Understanding of biological
systems ? from organisms to ecosystems ? and how human cultures depend on them
are of critical importance to the nation and the world in a time of global
development and changing climate. DIVERSITAS provides a crucial mechanism for
bringing together the diverse international scientific and policy communities
working on these issues, and the USNC for DIVERSITAS ensures that the U.S. is
both thoroughly engaged in the work of DIVERSITAS, and receives maximum benefit
from the knowledge gained through its activities.