* 0829114
* Thermochemical production of fuels: Solar energy after dark
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Sossina Haile, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 09/30/2011
* USD 348,271.00

CBET-0829114&lt;br/&gt;Haile&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More energy from sunlight
strikes the earth in one hour than all of the energy consumed on the planet in
one year. Thus, the challenge modern society faces is not one of identifying a
sustainable energy source, but rather one of capitalizing on the vast solar
resource base. To truly transform our energy production technologies, we need to
go beyond efficient capture of solar energy for immediate electricity generation
and turn to the problem of convenient storage of the energy from this
intermittent source for on-demand utilization. To address this challenge of
solar energy at night, we propose an elegant strategy that relies on the oxygen
uptake and release capacity of selected metal oxides. Specifically, a metal
oxide is cycled between, for example, MO2 and MO2-, using thermal energy as the
input and the changes in oxidation state utilized to produce a chemical fuel, as
shown schematically for hydrogen production in the panel. The thermal energy
ideally derives from solar-thermal concentration, but may also be derived from
nuclear power plants. &lt;br/&gt;In this work, we specifically focus on ceria-
based oxides, which have already demonstrated promise for this application,
while pursuing exploratory studies using oxides with wide non-stoichiometry
ranges and rapid oxygen transport kinetics. By careful selection of the reaction
substrate and/or judicious use of catalysts, we anticipate production not only
of hydrogen fuel, as shown in the panel, but also carbon containing fuels
(syngas, methane, methanol) when carbon dioxide is used as an additional input
reactant. Beyond the bulk nature of the material, we will explore the role of
architecture in optimizing fuel productivity. We will fabricate monolithic
reaction substrates based on inverse opal structures, which combine the features
of low tortuosity (low resistance to gas phase mass transport), short solid
state diffusion paths and sufficiently high surface and are more robust against
coarsening and performance degradation than particle based reaction substrates.
The experimental plan thus encompasses a broad range of thermodynamic and
kinetic studies to elucidate reaction pathways, which, in turn, are essential
for system optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond the fundamental scientific
questions concerning the thermochemical production of fuels that these studies
will answer, the proposed work addresses the key technological challenge of
solar energy storage. As envisioned, the fuel production process is simple,
utilizes earth-abundant elements, and permits production of a variety of reduced
chemical fuels (H2, CH4, CH3OH, etc.). The breadth of tools to be utilized
combined with the high level of public interest in energy technologies renders
this an ideal program for training future materials scientists. Furthermore, the
continued commitment of the PI to public outreach (through, for example, the
PI's participation in the California Science Center exhibits on fuel cells for
transportation and for sustainable energy) will ensure that these results are
disseminated to society as a whole. For this program in particular, the PI is
committed to hosting two summer high school students who will come to Caltech
via the Institute for Educational Advancement.