* 0829494
* Polishing a Gem for Wilderness Research and Education: A Planning Proposal for Taylor Wilderness Research Station
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2008,05/31/2011
* James Scott, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 05/31/2011
* USD 24,989.00

The University of Idaho is awarded a grant to develop a strategic plan for the
Taylor Wilderness Research Station (TWRS) in central Idaho. The Central Idaho
Wilderness region is the largest contiguous tract of wild land in the lower U.S.
with unparalleled possibilities to contribute to a future understanding of
climate change impacts, wild fire effects, aquatic ecosystem function, invasive
species, and large mammal predator-prey dynamics in pristine vs. managed western
mountain habitats. Taylor Wilderness Research Station, in the middle of the
Frank Church River of No Return Wilderness and the Central Idaho Wilderness
region, provides opportunities and&lt;br/&gt;advantages for furthering
scientific understanding and educational experiences that go beyond the unique
geographic setting. The primary product will be a 10-year Master Plan for
strategic growth at the TWRS (physical plant, equipment, data management,
communication) that optimizes logistical, operational and institutional goals.
The Master Plan also will; 1) outline an education plan that provides
unparalleled field experiences and the incorporation of Native American
traditional knowledge, 2) develop external funding initiatives for research and
education programs and facilities improvements, 3) identify necessary
collaborations with neighboring field stations and agencies to address
fundamental regional knowledge gaps, and 4) outline the strategy required for
subsequent 2-3 year decade planning efforts.&lt;br/&gt;