* 0829950
* EMT/NANO:  Broadcast Optical Interconnects for Global Communication in Many-Core Chip-Multiprocessor
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Manish Vachharajani, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 08/31/2012
* USD 1,050,000.00

EMT/NANO: Broadcast Optical Interconnects for&lt;br/&gt;Global Communication in
Many-Core&lt;br/&gt;Chip-Multiprocessor&lt;br/&gt;Alan Mickelson (Principal
Investigator)&lt;br/&gt;Dejan FilipoviÂ´c&lt;br/&gt;Won Park&lt;br/&gt;Li
Shang&lt;br/&gt;Manish Vachharajani&lt;br/&gt;Electrical and Computer
Engineering&lt;br/&gt;University of
Colorado&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Computer performance scaling is critical
to advances in a wide range of fields, including&lt;br/&gt;medicine,
telecommunications, climate science, weather forecasting, engineering, and
design.&lt;br/&gt;With the rise of multicore systems and increasing processor-
core count as the hardware&lt;br/&gt;mechanism for increased compute power,
parallel program performance is now critical to&lt;br/&gt;continue this
performance scaling. This work emphasizes latency reduction as this will
be&lt;br/&gt;the most important performance impediment as the number of
processors increases. Electrical&lt;br/&gt;interconnections can support the
large information bandwidth over small distance, for&lt;br/&gt;example, between
neighboring processors. Packet switching can share bandwidth
between&lt;br/&gt;processors at a cost of latency that increases with inter-
processor spacing. This research&lt;br/&gt;involves the use of nano scale optics
to implement an optical broadcast network that can&lt;br/&gt;address all
processors during a single clock cycle. Media access control will partition
information&lt;br/&gt;between the high bandwidth point to point messages to be
packet switched and&lt;br/&gt;latency bound synchronization messages to be
optically broadcast.&lt;br/&gt;The investigators address the problem of a hybrid
on-chip interconnection network both&lt;br/&gt;experimentally and theoretically.
The bulk of the experimental work will involve fabricating&lt;br/&gt;and
demonstrating the operation of nanophotonic broadcast network. The
broadcast&lt;br/&gt;network will consist of a two dimensional slab waveguide
region addressed with optical antennas&lt;br/&gt;that are fed and read out from
nanophonic channel waveguide components. Optical&lt;br/&gt;sources will be
placed off-chip and input to the netwrk through silicon on insulator
waveguides.&lt;br/&gt;Wavelength division multiplexing will provide multi
simultaneous channel operation&lt;br/&gt;through the single transceiver per
processor interconnect. The media access control that&lt;br/&gt;partitions inter
processor communication into high bandwidth packet switched
communications&lt;br/&gt;and latency bound synchronization messages will be
simulated using experimental data&lt;br/&gt;and phenomenological models of the
actual interconnection network.