* 0829326
* The Economic Foundations of Relationships
* SBE,SES
* 12/14/2007,06/30/2010
* Larry Samuelson, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2010
* USD 104,786.00

The research described in this proposal seeks an understanding of the role and
importance of relationships in allocating resources. People often work without
using contracts, prices, legal devices, or markets in their economic affairs,
even when such means are available. Instead, they rely on relationships. A
relationship is a continuing interaction between identified (rather than
anonymous) agents, with current incentives created by adjusting future payoffs
rather than making current transfers, and with these future payoffs ensured by
creating the appropriate future incentives rather than by writing contracts. For
example, firms who regularly deal with one another often pay no attention to the
contracts governing their interactions, if they bother with such contracts at
all, responding to imbalances with an unspecified "we'll make it up next time."
Without some imperfection, there would be no role for relationships, in the
narrow sense in which this term is used here, in allocating resources.
Commodities would take the form of complete conditional contracts, specifying an
outcome for every current and future contingency, and would be be traded in an
Arrow-Debreu market at prices that support an efficient allocation. Once we move
away from this ideal, however, the door opens for all sorts of supplementary
mechanisms to improve market performance. Given that it is especially difficult
to write complete contacts over future events -- few would be able or willing to
commit to every detail of their future career, even on a contingent basis, when
entering the labor force -- relationships quite naturally come into
play.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research has three components. The first
is the study of the circumstances under which prices or markets might not be
effective in allocating resources. This research will assume that the usual
sources of market failure -- imperfect competition, externalities, and private
information -- do not arise, in order to focus on the role of investments that
are required for market participation. The second component, centered around
models based on repeated games, will study the role of relationships in
allocating resources. The third will bring an evolutionary perspective to bear
on some of the basic difficulties that arise when working with&lt;br/&gt;models
based on repeated games.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual goal of the
proposed research is a better understanding of economic behavior. A running
theme will be that we can often expect prices and markets to play a key role in
allocating resources, but can also often expect them to be supplemented with
less formal means organized around relationships. The proposed research will be
theoretical, but with an eye toward providing foundations for more applied
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the proposed research will
include contributions to our understanding of effective economic policies and
institutions. The work will strengthen ties between evolutionary work in
economics, psychology and biology and will provide support for graduate students
doing research on related topics.