* 0829376
* Support for US Participants to 2nd International Workshop on Microstructure and Micromechanics of Stone-based Infrastructure Materials; Beijing, China; Fall 2008
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2009
* Linbing Wang, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Glaucio H. Paulino
* 04/30/2009
* USD 15,000.00

Proposal Number: 0829376&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Support for US Participants
to 2nd International Workshop on Microstructure and Micromechanics of Stone-
based Infrastructure Materials; Beijing, China; Fall
2008&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports partial
travel expenses of 12-15 US participants to the 2nd International Workshop on
Microstructure and Micromechanics of Stone-based Infrastructure Materials to be
held September 25-26, 2008 at Tsinghua University in Beijing, China. The 2nd
workshop has an important role in 1) consolidating the results of the first
workshop; 2) reviewing and updating technical progress since that time (October
5th ? 6th, 2006); 3) resolving barriers to developing national and international
collaborations; and 4) identifying strategies for sustaining the activity. The
focus of the workshop is on stone-based infrastructure materials including
cement concrete, asphalt concrete and human augmented soils, which form the core
materials in modern civil infrastructure. Enhanced and sustainable stone-based
infrastructure materials yield important impacts on any nation in terms of
available natural resources as well as economic and environmental impact.
&lt;br/&gt;The US NSF and researchers were the primary driving forces that
initiated the 1st workshop and action plan. It is important that US researchers
and educators participate the 2nd workshop to maintain their leadership
position. The major outcome of the 2nd workshop, which was not undertaken during
the 1st workshop, is the development and implementation of a sustainable plan
and initiation of collaborations on developing educational materials and unified
research methods for stone- based materials. &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits
of the workshop lie in the fact that it will help synergize research on
structure and mechanics of stone-based infrastructure materials and ultimately
enabling the design of high performance materials. The broader impacts of the
workshop include potential initiation of an international organization and the
development of educational materials that will improve the education of the next
generation of researchers and practitioners on improved design, construction,
and maintenance with concomitant cost-savings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;