* 0829024
* Synthesis of Nanoporous Materials in Ionic Liquids: A Fundamental Study of the Solvent's Role
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Jennifer Anthony, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nora Savage
* 07/31/2012
* USD 321,168.00

&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the proposed research is to define the role of the
solvent in the self?]assembly synthesis of nanoporous zeolitic materials. The
proposed work will combine the lead PI?fs (JLA) experience of experimentally
investigating ionic liquid solvation properties and zeolite syntheses with the
co?]PI?fs (TIM) experience in molecular modeling of ionic liquids systems. This
collaborative project will establish a foundation for understanding the
fundamental interactions between the ionic liquid and the nanomaterial precursor
compounds that will then enable the rational selection of ionic liquids as
solvents for the syntheses of new nanoporous materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
proposes using a combination of solubility and spectroscopy measurements,
thermodynamic theory, and molecular modeling to study materials made via
ionothermal synthesis, where the solvent is an ionic liquid. The intellectual
merit of the proposed research includes a detailed investigation into how
systematic changes to the ionic liquid structure influence the interactions with
the nanomaterial precursors and how that in turn affects the formation of the
final material. At the conclusion of this work, the investigators will have
reported (1) the first solubility measurements of nanomaterial precursors in
ionic liquids, (2) thermodynamic models to describe the phase behavior of the
precursors and ionic liquids, (3) the crucial validation of molecular dynamics
simulations for ionic liquid / precursor systems, (4) the quantification of the
chemical complexes formed between the solute and solvent in the initial stages
of zeolite synthesis, and (5) the elucidation of trends between the
solute/solvent phase behavior and material formation that will be used to
rationally select ionic liquids solvents for synthesis of novel nanoporous
materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACT &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of the project are multifold. Specifically, with respect to
impacts on the broad fields of ionic liquids and nanoporous materials, this work
will (1) enrich the literature on ionic liquid solution behavior and ionothermal
synthesis of nanoporous zeolitic materials, (2) provide solute/solvent
relationships that can be extended to the ionothermal synthesis of other
materials (e.g. silicates, metal organic frameworks, nanometal oxides, etc.),
and (3) provide fundamental data critical for the development of computer
simulations and predictive modeling techniques that will be important for
designing materials. Additionally, both PIs are committed to the education and
recruitment of engineering students. The proposed work will enable the inclusion
of both graduate and undergraduate students in the research laboratory,
facilitate an interactive collaboration between research groups at two
universities, and allow the PIs to work with existing outreach infrastructure at
their respective institutions to recruit students from underrepresented groups
to the fields of science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;