* 0829586
* PDB Management by the Research Collaboratory for Structural Bioinformatics
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2014
* Helen Berman, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Cooperative Agreement
* Peter McCartney
* 02/28/2014
* USD 32,076,399.00

An award is made to Rutgers, the State University of New Jersey to manage the
Protein Data Bank (PDB), an international repository and primary source for
information about the structure of biological macromolecules. The PDB is a key
research resource and a central component to our understanding of living
systems. It serves a broad community of experimental, structural and
computational scientists, and educators at all levels. PDB access is provided
through primary web and ftp sites (www.pdb.org, ftp.pdb.org) or via multiple
mirror sites distributed worldwide. The goal of the Research Collaboratory for
Structural Biology (RCSB) in managing PDB is to provide a single, searchable
archive of accurate and well-annotated data on experimentally determined
macromolecular structure. Systems developed by RCSB are currently being used for
data processing, archiving, distribution and query, as well as maintenance of
the physical archive. In addition to continued operation of the primary data
archiving, ingestion, and dissemination functions, the project will implement
several enhancements to the existing infrastructure. First, they will introduce
view interfaces to the PDB data aligned to specific user community interests
such as model organisms, protein families, or ligand binding sites. Second, they
will contribute to standards for quantitative representation of structural
biology data via advanced data formats, metadata standards, software design, and
data dissemination. Third, they will build upon the strengths of the
international wwPDB partnership by introducing integrated data processing
frameworks to improve efficiency and automation of data curation across the
wwPDB partnership. Finally, the RCSB will continue to work with diverse
communities to ensure the PDB resource best serves the interest if science,
medicine, and education. The result of this effort will be a significant
improvement in the utility and value of the Protein Data Bank for both
specialists and non-specialists alike. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mechanisms for
increasing the broader impacts of this work include the following: a series of
workshops and meeting sessions, active participation in scientific meetings, a
regular newsletter, the on-going use of a help desk to increase the access and
utility of PDB for the specialist and non-specialist research community, and use
of focus groups to insure maximum usability of PDB data. Participation in
graduate and undergraduate coursework design and implementation and in
structured research opportunities is being used to increase the impact of PDB on
university-level education. Participation in teacher training workshops and a
collaborative effort to launch a teacher development program provide
opportunities to bring PDB resources to the K/12 environment. The general public
is being made aware of PDB efforts through a traveling art exhibit and through
frequent news releases and informational programs. Online-based activities like
the Molecular Anatomy Project and Molecule of the Month will reach audiences
nationally and globally. Collectively, these efforts will extend the benefits of
PDB resources and activities to the broadest possible community.&lt;br/&gt;