* 0830388
* TLS: Early prediction of the impact of research through large-scale analysis and modeling citation dynamics
* SBE,SBE
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Luis Amaral, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Joshua Rosenbloom
* 09/30/2012
* USD 450,817.00

The number of scientific journals and the number of papers published in those
journals is increasing at a fast pace: currently, there are roughly 9,000
scientific journals, a twenty-fold increase from the 400 scientific journals
available in 1955. The size and growth of the research literature places a
tremendous burden on decision-making agents, such as funding agencies,
university administrators, and reviewers, who have to evaluate the quality of
research of individuals and institutions in a fast and efficient manner. In
addition, the evaluation of individuals and institutions relies heavily on the
assessment of the ultimate impact of published research, typically measured as
the number of publications or the number of citations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the oversimplification of using just a few numbers
to quantify the scientific merit of a body of research, the entire science and
technology community is relying more and more on citation-based statistics as a
tool for evaluating the research performance of individuals and institutions and
the development of tools that facilitate the evaluation task is crucial in order
to ensure the highest quality standard for funded
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major challenge is that stakeholders often want
an estimate of the impact of a paper long before citations start to accumulate.
This project aims precisely at facilitating such a task by developing tools to
predict, soon after publication, the ultimate impact of research. This project
uses longitudinal data available for papers published since 1955, drawing upon
the concept that one can infer patterns of citation accumulation from large-
scale analysis of historical data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The
outcome of this research is of relevance to decision makers that are called on
to evaluate the productivity of researchers and institutions, as well as the
impact of their work. The goal of this project is to develop transparent
statistically-sound methods in order to enable institutions and funding agencies
to make better informed decisions based on an objective assessment of the impact
of published research.