* 0830093
* Center for Environmental Implications of Nanotechnology
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2015
* Mark Wiesner, Duke University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2015
* USD 15,141,010.00

Duke University&lt;br/&gt;Carnegie Mellon University&lt;br/&gt;Howard
University&lt;br/&gt;Stanford University&lt;br/&gt;University of
Kentucky&lt;br/&gt;Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award establishes a Center to conduct
research and education on the environmental impacts of nanomaterials. It will
advance discovery of general principles that determine the movement and
transformation of nanomaterials in the environment and their effects on
organisms and ecosystems. The Center will further translate this knowledge into
the language of risk assessment to guide nanotechnology in ways that minimize
harm to the environment. This Center engages a highly interdisciplinary, multi-
institutional team in integrated research to establish a theoretical
understanding of how the physics and surface chemistry of nanomaterials
determine their interactions with the environment, from the molecular level to
that of entire ecosystems. The Center will develop new methods for detection and
tracking of natural and manufactured nanomaterials in the environment.
Information on nanomaterial properties and environmental impacts will be
synthesized into models that can be used to predict environmental risk.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanotechnology holds great promise both to the nation's
economic growth and to enhance our ability to live in more sustainable ways.
However, the responsible implementation of this technology is hampered by
uncertainty over the environmental impacts of nanomaterials. There is an urgent
societal need to understand this risk, while at the same time providing
guidelines for safe design to prevent environmental harm. This Center will
conduct the fundamental research necessary to reduce uncertainty in the
environmental impacts of nanotechnology. It will contribute uniquely to a
network of nanotechnology centers that serve the national needs. The Center will
also promote interdisciplinary training of the next generation of nanoscale
scientists and engineers in ways that broaden participation in the newly
emerging field of environmental nanoscience. In collaboration with national
laboratories, non-governmental organizations, and industry, the Center will
further research and education goals and engage in outreach that informs both
experts and the public at large about the safety issues surrounding
nanotechnology