* 0830225
* Physiology of Isoprene Emission from Plants
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2008,02/28/2010
* Thomas Sharkey, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen J Tonsor
* 02/28/2010
* USD 244,841.00

More hydrocarbon enters the atmosphere as isoprene emitted from plants than from
any other single source. Isoprene emission is affected by weather and its
emission can protect leaves from short high temperature episodes. However,
isoprene also participates in atmospheric chemistry leading to ozone, and
possibly aerosols, particles that adversely affect human health. Isoprene
emission varies widely among plants, with some species emitting much larger
amounts than other species. This research will use molecular biology tools to
determine the methods plant cells use to control the synthesis of isoprene. The
research will also address why some plants make isoprene while others do not,
how plants gain the ability to make isoprene, and how weather affects the
biochemical reactions in plant cells that lead to the synthesis of isoprene.
Regulation of enzymes found to be important in isoprene synthesis will be
investigated by using bacteria to express those enzymes. The study organism for
most of the research will be the model tree species black poplar (Populus
trichocarpa) whose genes have been fully sequenced. This research will provide
information needed to know how to manipulate isoprene emission from trees,
whether we want to make some trees stop making isoprene to protect the
atmosphere or if we want to make some crops make it to protect them against high
temperature damage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Isoprene research is
important because it contributes to understanding atmospheric reactions
including the production of ozone and aerosols, both of which have significant
effects on human health. This research will be used to attract undergraduate
students to research. High school students will participate through the Summer
Science Institute, which is a seven week residential program. About 70% of its
participants are students from groups underrepresented in scientific research.
Isoprene research is generally interesting to students and they like the
connection to real-world problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;