* 0830370
* Collaborative Research:    Groups in Computer Science
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Laszlo Babai, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Balasubramanian Kalyanasundaram
* 07/31/2011
* USD 135,494.00

This project has three main goals: the design, analysis, and implementation of
algorithms for efficiently processing matrix groups; the development of the
mathematical tools required for the analysis of such algorithms; and the
application of group computations, both theoretical and practical, to solve
various problems in mathematics and computer science. These areas have seen
major recent progress, to a considerable degree due to research by the PIs and
their collaborators; the project identifies and pursues new directions of
attack. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Groups are the mathematical formulation of the
notion of symmetry, and so they are ubiquitous in mathematics and the sciences.
Algorithms for finite groups and their associated Cayley graphs have a wide
range of applications, from problems of group theory to the mixing rate of
Markov chains, the design of interconnection networks for large interacting
arrays of CPU's, the graph isomorphism problem (of relevance to computer science
and to chemical documentation), group-based cryptography, and the construction
of graphs and designs with a high degree of symmetry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact of the proposal is primarily through the implementations of the
new algorithms in GAP. GAP is world-wide distributed, free computer algebra
system that provides a computing environment for research in group theory,
algebra, graph theory, coding theory, and design theory, and hundreds of
research papers cite GAP as a tool used in them. There is also an increasing
demand to use GAP in undergraduate abstract algebra courses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal theme of the project is the synergy between
the theoretical and the practical, benefitting both the field of Symbolic
Algebra and the Theory of Computing. The focus is on the design and
implementation of matrix group algorithms that are both fast in practice and
admit rigorous asymptotic analysis. The project develops a new methodology which
combines and enhances the two existing approaches, the geometric and the
abstract structural (``black-box'') techniques. Another goal of the project is
the further development of a recent data structure by Neunh\"offer and the
second PI that combines the various permutation and matrix group algorithms into
a coherent system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Statistical study of the element-orders
of finite simple groups has been a key to recent significant algorithmic
developments; the project extends this line of study to the distributions of
pairs of groups elements via generating function methods.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Further, the project includes problems in group theory,
combinatorics, and computer science that may either be necessary for the design
and analysis of the new algorithms, or may become accessible due to insights
obtained from the new machinery. In particular, the PIs study the minimum base
size of primitive permutation groups, the diameter of Cayley graphs of the
symmetric groups, and problems related to graph isomorphism and Boolean
complexity, including ``property testing'' and parameters of Boolean functions
with a transitive group of automorphisms.