* 0830408
* Increasing the Participation of Minority-serving Institutions in the Research in Disabilities Education Program
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2008,02/28/2010
* Shirley McBay, QUALITY EDUCATION FOR MINORITIES NETWORK
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 02/28/2010
* USD 152,929.00

The "Increasing the Participation of Minority-serving Institutions in the
Research in Disabilities Education Program" project will provide technical
assistance to enhance disability support services at minority-serving
institutions (MSIs) with STEM programs and to increase the participation of MSIs
in the NSF's Research in Disabilities Education (RDE) program. The technical
assistance will be provided in the form of a workshop to assist institutional
teams in expanding and enhancing STEM focused disability support services and in
further developing ideas for proposals they plan to submit to the FY 2009 RDE
competition. Specifically, QEM is seeking support to conduct a two-day workshop
in the fall of 2008, for three-person teams from Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCUs), Hispanic-serving Institutions (HSIs), and Tribal Colleges
and Universities (TCUs).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two-day workshop will be
designed to accommodate 20 three-person institutional teams. Each team must
include: (1) a STEM faculty member from an eligible institution; (2) the
coordinator or other officer for the institution's student support services
whose responsibilities include providing support to students with disabilities;
and (3) a member of the institution's Education/Special Education faculty. The
goals of the workshop are as follows:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;a) To discuss the
specific services and resources available to students with disabilities on each
of the participating campuses and the use of these services and resources by
students;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;b) To identify effective strategies used on the
respective campuses to ensure that students with disabilities have access to all
campus facilities as well as to instructional materials, tutorial assistance,
and other resources, including assistive technologies to support their academic
study;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;c) To identify barriers to providing needed services
and support on the respective campuses and to discuss ways those barriers might
be reduced/eliminated; and&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;d) To review the latest program
solicitation for NSF's Research in Disabilities Education (RDE) Program; review
selected abstracts of currently active RDE-funded projects; hear presentations
by RDE-funded project directors on effective strategies; and discuss the
participating teams' preliminary ideas for potential RDE
proposals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes consultants who are
knowledgeable about students with disabilities in post-secondary STEM education
and who are experts in the area of services provided by post-secondary
institutions for students with disabilities. An independent evaluator will
assess the outcomes and impacts of this project, and project dissemination will
include diffusion of information via an accessible web-site that can be easily
used by people with disabilities.