* 0830626
* Semi-algebraic complexity and models for massive data set processing
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Paul Beame, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 07/31/2012
* USD 497,377.00

This project focuses on the computational complexity of problems in semi-
algebraic inference and in massive data set processing, as well as on advancing
the analytical techniques of multiparty communication complexity, which has been
a useful tool for understanding problems in both of these
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Semi-algebraic inference systems express sets of
constraints using polynomial inequalities and use rules of inference to derive
new polynomial inequalities from existing ones. They are widely used in
operations research and combinatorial optimization. Part of this project is to
investigate what can be derived efficiently using semi-algebraic inference,
including the complexity of proofs of unsatisfiability based on semi-algebraic
inference, the quality of the linear and semi-definite programming
approximations for NP-hard optimization problems that can derived using known
semi-algebraic inference, and the extent to which our understanding of inference
over binary domains can be leveraged to yield better algorithms for classes of
semi-algebraic inference over the real numbers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Networked
computers have allowed the accumulation of data sets of unprecedented size. New
distributed methods that process such massive data sets efficiently by giving
only approximate answers are having substantial impact in practice. However, the
theoretical models of massive data set processing that have been analyzed to
date represent only a very limited class of methods and do not capture
techniques already used in practice. Part of this research is aimed at producing
and analyzing theoretical models that will allow us to understand the
limitations of these methods for massive data set processing and to make better
use of them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multiparty communication complexity measures
the amount of information that must be communicated between multiple
participants, each having partial information about the inputs to a function, in
order to compute its output. Because of its flexibility it is widely applicable
to problems in computational complexity. The final goal of this project is to
add to the rather limited set of techniques that can be used to analyze
multiparty communication complexity with the aim goal of improving its
applications to semi-algebraic inference and distributed massive data set
processing.&lt;br/&gt;