* 0830068
* Collaborative Research: Predictability of the Physical Climate System
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* James Kinter, Institute of Global Environment and Society
* Standard Grant
* Eric T. DeWeaver
* 08/31/2014
* USD 7,202,295.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Research by the Center for Ocean-Land-Atmosphere Studies (COLA) will continue
and expand the investigation of seasonal-to-interannual predictability in a
changing climate, focusing on realizable predictability of the current climate,
including the influence of global change - changing greenhouse gas
concentrations, aerosols and land use - on the interactive ocean-atmosphere-
landcryosphere system. A comprehensive predictability framework, grounded in
information theory, will be further developed to understand the contributions to
predictability from the initial state, the high and low frequency atmospheric
transients, the coupling of climate system components, and global change. The
role of the land surface and its couplings to the atmosphere and oceans, the
predictability of El Ni√±o and the Southern Oscillation (ENSO) and the ENSO
response, intrinsic vs. externally-forced variations in the Atlantic and Indian
Oceans, the global hydrologic cycle, monsoons and North American drought, and
the predictability of the statistics of weather and climate extremes will be
specifically addressed.

The scope of work will be extended to investigate the predictability of decadal
variations to determine (1) whether or not shifts in the probability
distribution of ENSO, or of seasonal anomalies in general, are predictable at
decadal lead times, (2) the limits of decadal predictability, and (3) the
effects of global change. The question of how the predictability of the natural
modes of variability may change in conjunction with the global change is
particularly relevant for providing regionally specific information on future
climate and depends critically on the simulation capabilities of climate models.
The long-term goal will be to help establish the scientific foundations for
dynamic decadal climate prediction.

This work will employ the national climate models supported by NSF, NOAA, and
NASA, including the Community Climate System Model (CCSM), the Climate Forecast
System (CFS), the Goddard Earth Observing System (GEOS) model and the GFDL
models, with efforts to identify the strengths and weaknesses of individual
models and to optimally combine them (both a priori and a posteriori). The
prospect of much higher resolutions in these global models is of critical
importance. The research will also include initial efforts directed toward
process-resolving models for climate prediction in collaboration with CMMAP,
both for the purposes of predictability/prediction studies and to evaluate the
efficacy of resolved vs. parameterized clouds in global climate models. The ways
in which model deficiencies are limiting the ability to both quantify
predictability and realize skillful climate predictions will be examined.
Maximum advantage will be taken of each model's individual strengths and
uniqueness, including its niche in the nation's climate modeling agenda, and
feedback at scientific and operational levels will be provided to each of the
modeling groups.

BROADER IMPACT While COLA's primary focus is basic research, its establishment
as a national center, its strategic partnerships and its open policies make COLA
a national resource. The Committee on Strategic Guidance for NSF's Support of
the Atmospheric Sciences (2007) found that COLA's efforts to understand climate
predictability, to provide national leadership in climate research, and to
provide information technology infrastructure are important contributors to the
nation's multi-agency goals for global climate variability and change and better
climate forecast services. COLA activities have broader impacts beyond basic
Research via publications, education, seminars and workshops, advisory and
review panels, and software and information services making a difference in
several key areas, including: o Contributions to the Intergovernmental Program
on Climate Change Fourth Assessment Report o Educating the next generation of
climate scientists through a PhD program in strategic partnership with George
Mason University as well as a high school internship program o The distinguished
scientific lectures program that is well attended by Washington, DC-area
scientists and students, and the joint COLA-CPC "Climate Test Bed (CPC) Seminar
Series" o On-site and external workshops, including workshops organized for the
Sloan Foundation and the International Centre for Theoretical Physics and the
May 2008 World Modeling Summit for Climate Prediction o Active membership and
leadership of national and international panels of the World Climate Research
Program (WCRP), NSF, AGU, US CLImate VARiability and predictability program
(CLIIVAR), the Global Energy and Water cycle EXperiment (GEWEX), NOAA Applied
Research Centers (ARCs) and Climate Test Bed (CTB), the CCSM, the NSF STC Multi
Scale Modeling of Atmospheric Processes (CMMAP), that International Center for
Theoretical Physics (ICTP), and the national TeraGrid o Distributing weather and
climate software and information, including GrADS and GDS - free, open-source
software that is fully supported by COLA (www.iges.org/grads/grads.html)