* 0830753
* Motion-Planning Based Techniques for Modeling &amp; Simulating Molecular Motions
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2014
* Nancy Amato, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Jack S. Snoeyink
* 08/31/2014
* USD 434,009.00

NUMBER: 0830753&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: Texas Engineering Experiment
Station&lt;br/&gt;PI: Amato, Nancy &amp; Rauchwerger, Lawrence&lt;br/&gt;TITLE:
Motion-Planning Based Techniques for Modeling &amp; Simulating Molecular
Motions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecular motions play an essential role in many
biochemical processes. Since it is difficult to experimentally observe molecular
motions, computational methods for studying such issues are essential. This
research investigates a novel computational method for studying molecular
motions that the investigators have developed and validated against experimental
data in preliminary work. The research has the potential to provide insight into
a number of important questions related to protein folding, stability, and
solubility. For example, protein misfolding and aggregation is associated with
devastating neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's
disease, prion diseases, and related diseases. In addition to publications,
results generated by the research are shared with the community in a publicly
available database of molecular motions. The protein folding server also allows
scientists to submit their own proteins which will be analyzed for them:
http://parasol.tamu.edu/foldingserver/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new
computational method invested in this research represents a trade-off between
methods such as molecular dynamics and Monte Carlo simulations that provide
detailed individual folding trajectories and techniques such as statistical
mechanical methods that provide global folding landscape statistics. This method
builds a graph (roadmap) corresponding to an approximate map of the molecule's
energy landscape that encodes many (typically thousands) folding pathways.
Though the individual pathways produced are not as detailed as trajectories
generated from a molecular dynamics simulation, they can be used to study
properties such as secondary structure formation order and folding kinetics. The
major research goals of this project include the development of new and/or
improved metrics and analysis techniques for conformations and roadmaps that can
be applied in protein stability and kinetics studies and the development of
strategies for employing high-performance computing to increase the size and
complexity of the systems that can be studied. The investigators validate and
apply these new techniques to folding core identification, amyloid formation,
kinetics studies, and comparative analysis of proteins. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;