* 0830655
* Automated Intrusive Algorithms for Numerical Simulation of Partial Differential Equations via Software-Based Frechet Differentiation
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Kevin Long, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 09/30/2011
* USD 270,000.00

Abstract: Automated intrusive algorithms for numerical&lt;br/&gt;simulation of
partial differential equations via software-based&lt;br/&gt;Frechet
differentiation &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computers were invented to
automate tedious and error-prone numerical&lt;br/&gt;computations; ironically,
programming computers is itself a tedious&lt;br/&gt;and error-prone task. Given
the importance and expense of developing&lt;br/&gt;scientific simulation
programs, it is worth studying whether computers&lt;br/&gt;can improve the
development, as well as the execution, of these&lt;br/&gt;programs. This project
focuses on the open-source software Sundance,&lt;br/&gt;which automates
transition from high-level mathematical abstractions&lt;br/&gt;to high-
performance, parallel partial differential equation (PDE)&lt;br/&gt;simulation
code, freeing users from the burden of low-level&lt;br/&gt;programming. This
approach can reduce simulator development time from&lt;br/&gt;months or years to
days or even hours. Less obvious, but equally&lt;br/&gt;important, benefits of
basing software firmly on mathematical&lt;br/&gt;abstractions are that internal
performance improvements can be&lt;br/&gt;automated, and that intrusive
algorithms -- algorithms that require&lt;br/&gt;transformation of the equation
set to produce nonstandard operators --&lt;br/&gt;can be implemented much more
easily because such transformations can&lt;br/&gt;be carried out
automatically.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is enabled by formulating programming
tasks as mathematical&lt;br/&gt;problems whose solutions are then automated.
Central to this is a &lt;br/&gt;theorem establishing Frechet differentiation as
a ``bridge'' between&lt;br/&gt;high-level symbolic programming and high-
performance numerical&lt;br/&gt;computing. Previous work has laid the
foundations for this; this&lt;br/&gt;extends those results work to other aspects
of PDE simulation and to&lt;br/&gt;non-PDE paradigms such as density functional
theory (DFT), and &lt;br/&gt;investigates intrusive preconditioners for coupled
multiphysics&lt;br/&gt;problems. The combination of automatic high performance
and&lt;br/&gt;the ready availability of efficient intrusive algorithms
for&lt;br/&gt;preconditioning, sensitivity analysis, and PDE-
constrained&lt;br/&gt;optimization makes it possible for a high-level, general-
purpose tool&lt;br/&gt;such as Sundance to actually outperform hand-coded
special-purpose&lt;br/&gt;simulators. The ready availability of advanced
optimization&lt;br/&gt;algorithms with finite element discretizations for
nonlinear coupled&lt;br/&gt;systems, all with efficient implementation and a
short development&lt;br/&gt;cycle, will be transformative to how computational
scientists work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;