* 0830944
* DataNet Full Proposal:  DataNetONE (Observation Network for Earth)
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2009,04/30/2015
* William Michener, University of New Mexico
* Cooperative Agreement
* Robert Chadduck
* 04/30/2015
* USD 21,194,548.00

The University of New Mexico (UNM) will develop and deploy DataNetONE
(Observation Network for Earth), a sustainable long-term data preservation and
access network, with related search and discovery, data integration, and user
services and analytic tools. The goal of the DataNetONE (Observation Network for
Earth) project is to enable scientists, decision-makers, and citizens to
understand the nature and pace of change on Earth and to address associated
environmental, social, and technological challenges. The initial focus will be
on multi-disciplinary observational data collected by biological and
environmental scientists, national and international research networks, and
environmental observatories. DataNetONE will be extended to serve a broader
range of science domains both directly and through interoperability with other
DataNet deployments. The project is under the direction of Dr. William Michener
at the UNM. DataNetONE is designed to enable the long-term preservation of
diverse and complex multi-scale, multi-discipline, and multi-national science
data by providing open, persistent, robust, and secure access to well-described
and easily discovered Earth observational data. Expected users include
scientists, educators, librarians, resource managers, and the public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential impact of long-term preservation and
integrated access to diverse and complex multi-scale, multi-discipline,
multinational science data is transformative in the speed with which researchers
will be able to assemble and analyze data sets and in the types of problems they
will be able to address. Scientific investigations that will be greatly
facilitated by DataNetONE include understanding the relationships among human
population density, atmospheric nitrogen and carbon dioxide, energy consumption
and global temperatures; understanding and predicting the emergence and spread
of diseases like avian flu; critical areas where local or regional changes may
have strong effects on earth system interactions, feedbacks, or teleconnections;
the impact of "megapolitan-ization" on ecological systems; and the
interrelationships among coupled human and natural systems.