* 0830381
* Perturbation Codes: A New Class of Linear Convolutional Codes
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* John Kieffer, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2011
* USD 115,000.00

Abstract for NSF Proposal 0830381&lt;br/&gt;Project Title: Perturbation Codes: A
New Class of Linear&lt;br/&gt;Convolutional Codes&lt;br/&gt;Linear convolutional
codes are widespread in data communication systems and data&lt;br/&gt;storage
systems. Each such code processes data at a ¯xed rate and with a ¯xed delay, so
that&lt;br/&gt;the fraction of errors (called average distortion) in the
reconstructed data will be acceptably&lt;br/&gt;small. The primary problem of
linear convolutional code design is to ¯nd an optimal code,&lt;br/&gt;which is a
code yielding the minimum average distortion among codes in a ¯nite set of
feasible&lt;br/&gt;codes. In most cases, with past techniques, this problem
could only be solved approximately,&lt;br/&gt;yielding an almost optimal code (a
code with near minimum average distortion), the set of&lt;br/&gt;feasible codes
being too large for the average distortion of codes to be examined
individually.&lt;br/&gt;In this project, we investigate a new technique, called
perturbation theory, which reduces the&lt;br/&gt;set of feasible codes to a much
smaller set of codes called perturbation codes. In many cases,&lt;br/&gt;an
optimal code will be one of the perturbation codes, and it can be found in a
reasonable&lt;br/&gt;amount of time.&lt;br/&gt;Each linear convolutional code in
the set of feasible codes is described via a parity check&lt;br/&gt;matrix over
the binary ¯eld, consisting of a ¯xed number of rows and columns. A
perturba-&lt;br/&gt;tion class of codes consists of codes whose parity check
matrices can be arranged so that a&lt;br/&gt;certain number of rows at the top
remain ¯xed. Any code will lie in more than one pertur-&lt;br/&gt;bation class
of codes, depending upon which rows of the parity check matrix are held
¯xed.&lt;br/&gt;Under certain conditions, there will be a natural group acting
on the parity check matrices&lt;br/&gt;of a perturbation class of codes. Using
the group structure, a subset of each perturbation&lt;br/&gt;class of codes is
selected. A code will be declared to be a perturbation code if it is among
the&lt;br/&gt;selected codes in a certain number of perturbation classes
containing the code. There is °ex-&lt;br/&gt;ibility in the de¯nition of
perturbation code. In this project, we investigate how to
properly&lt;br/&gt;delineate the perturbation code concept so that an optimal
code can be found from among&lt;br/&gt;a small set of perturbation codes, for
source and channel models of su±cient symmetry.