* 0830210
* MOD: Integrating Social and Cognitive Elements of Discovery and Innovation
* SBE,SBE
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Christian Schunn, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Julia I. Lane
* 08/31/2011
* USD 214,557.00

Innovation and discovery involve individuals working successfully together in
teams. It is critical for the Science of Science and Innovation Policy to
understand how the cognition of individuals, the direct source of novel ideas
and critical decision making, is impacted by social teamwork variables. Prior
research has typically studied social teamwork variables in isolation or
individual cognition variables in isolation. To know how to intervene to
increase engineering and scientific output, the relationships between the two
must be known, or else we might improve one at the cost of hurting the other,
which likely would have no net improvement in final scientific or engineering
productivity. The current project examines a very large quantity of video data
collected from a recent highly successful case of science and engineering, the
Mars Exploration Rover, which both wildly exceeded engineering requirements for
the mission and produced many important scientific discoveries. Yet, not all
days of the mission were equally successful. From this video record, the project
traces the path from the structure of different subgroups (such as having formal
roles and diversity of knowledge in the subgroups) to the occurrence of
different social processes (such as task conflict, breadth of participation,
communication norms, and shared mental models) to the occurrence of different
cognitive processes (such as analogy, information search, and evaluation) and
finally to outcomes (such as new methods for rover control and new hypotheses
regarding the nature of Mars).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Another critical factor for
Science of Science and Innovation Policy is to examine both divergent thinking
and convergent thinking. Innovation rarely happens unless new ideas are
considered. But progress will not happen unless the best ideas among the
proposed set are ultimately selected. To know how to best intervene to improve
discovery and innovation, progress must be made on finding out when to
intervene, which likely depends upon whether divergent or convergent thinking is
currently required. A number of prior inconsistent research results likely
resulted from a failure to separately consider divergent and convergent
thinking. The current project examines both elements to build a much more
complete model of how cognitive and social variables come together to produce
new and successful engineering innovations and scientific discoveries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The US is facing serious challenges in
the fields of science and technology. Innovation must be harnessed to generate
new products, create employment opportunities, and strengthen the national
economy. It is vital that the flourishing of science and engineering teams be
examined with the same rigor as other important human endeavors. This project
also has implications for science and engineering education: as ways of
composing, structuring, and instructing teams are examined, suggestions for
pedagogy will be formulated based on empirical findings.&lt;br/&gt;