* 0830414
* NEESR-II: Toward Rapid Return to Occupancy in Unbraced Steel Frames
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2014
* Rupa Purasinghe, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2014
* USD 361,617.00

This award is an outcome of the NSF 08-519 program solicitation George E. Brown,
Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES) Research (NEESR)
competition and includes Portland State University (lead institution),
University of Washington (subaward), and California State University, Los
Angeles (subaward). The project will utilize the multiple shake table NEES
equipment site at the University of Nevada, Reno. The basic seismic design
philosophy for steel frame buildings has been to rely on the gravity load system
in order to prevent loss of life. However, the expectations of building owners
and society are no longer satisfied with merely providing life safety, so new
structural systems are needed for achieving improved performance levels that
limit damage. One of the design targets needs to include rapid return to
occupancy, especially for earthquakes that are less severe than the maximum
expected. The overall objective of this project is to develop a lateral load
resisting system, the linked column frame system, for unbraced steel frames
capable of achieving specific target performance levels. The proposed structural
system includes configurations of novel and conventional structural components
that together result in predictable and rapidly recoverable damage. NEES
equipment sites offer a unique capability to experimentally evaluate system
level response under dynamic loads, which is required to study the interaction
of the structural components and evaluate the potential advantages of the
proposed building frames. This NEES individual investigator project will
transform seismic design approach in regions of moderate and high seismicity by
developing a unique seismic load resisting system, thereby contributing to the
intellectual merit of the project. The research will use advanced experimental
and computational research methods to develop the necessary understanding of
system and component behaviors. Data sets from large-scale dynamic experiments
will be generated to ensure that analytical models capable of capturing both
component and system behavior are developed. The depth of understanding achieved
through such an experimental and analytical research program will enable the
development of robust design methodologies. The outcomes of this research will
not only impact seismic design, but also result in other broader impacts.
Utilization of such new structural systems will reduce post-event downtime and
building repair costs, and thus will have a significant impact on reducing
earthquake losses and life-cycle costs. Further, the research will develop
understanding of a novel composite construction that could be adapted to other
structural components. This project will also impact engineering education and
diversity through active collaboration with faculty and undergraduate students
from a minority serving and predominantly undergraduate institution. The
proposed activities are combined with an integrated educational component
designed to emphasize the importance of capacity and performance design in
undergraduate engineering education. These educational aspects will be
reinforced through research participation using existing NEES web based
telepresence tools. Data from this project will be made available through the
NEES data repository (http://www.nees.org).