* 0830854
* Collaborative Research: A Northeast Partnership for Developing the Information Assurance Workforce
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2008,03/31/2011
* Janis Wolak, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 03/31/2011
* USD 100,000.00

Computer Science (31)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project focuses on
digital forensics in the context of law enforcement investigations of Internet-
related child sexual exploitation crimes. The project includes collaboration on
curricula exchanges, information assurance seminars, mentoring, research
projects (involving undergraduate students), and in the running of Federal,
State University Forensics Exchange (F-SAFE)
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Problems in
forensics and information assurance in general are addressed by advancing three
key objectives towards workforce development involving (i) faculty and
institutional development, (ii) outreach to diverse populations, and (iii) a
partnership between the academy and law enforcement. The goal is to ensure that
faculty from a broad range of institutions benefit. This synergistic, multi-
disciplinary collaboration cultivates faculty expertise in security and
forensics by leveraging shared research agendas, collaborative course
development, joint seminars, multidisciplinary exchange, peer mentoring, and
professional contacts with law enforcement. The collaboration brings together
faculty with expertise in computer security and privacy, forensics, networking,
databases, cyber-crime, criminal justice and investigations, and Internet-
related child sexual exploitation crimes, including research about law
enforcement responses and evaluation of law enforcement training programs. The
project draws from computer science, criminology, and sociology and includes
both technical and social science research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The collaboration enables a clear path for undergraduates to complete
their graduate work in computer science at partner institutions. The FSAFE
partnership includes the collaborating universities, the Massachusetts State
Police, the New York State Police, and the DoJ Internet Crimes Against Children
(ICAC) Task Force. By working together, exchanging experiences and knowledge,
these communities can make much greater progress. This is a key aspect of
faculty development, as gaining a real-work perspective not only influences
research but improves the ability of teachers to educate the next generation of
professionals and researchers.&lt;br/&gt;