* 0830747
* Collaborative Research:  Robust Low Complexity Approaches to Source Localization and Sensor Placement in Wireless Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Soura Dasgupta, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2013
* USD 220,333.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Localization involves the estimation of the precise location
of an object based on various forms of relative position information available
of the object. Source and sensor localization is a fundamental capability
broadly useful in a number of emerging applications. For example a network of
sensors deployed to combat bioterrorism, must not only detect the presence of a
potential threat, but also must pinpoint the source of the threat. Similarly, in
pervasive computing, locating an errant mobile user permits the computer network
to identify the most appropriate server with matching capabilities for the user.
Likewise, in sensor networks individual sensors must know their own positions,
so as to route packets, detect faults, and sense and record events. There is
also an emerging multibillion dollar wireless localization industry. This
research will address issues that hold the key to fast efficient
localization.&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will adopt a three pronged approach.
First, various optimum estimates will be investigated under a variety of
practical signal models. These include maximum likelihood and minimum variance
estimates. Theoretical performance limits will be determined. Secondly, the
investigators will generalize and analyze various algorithms that obtain these
estimates efficiently with low complexity. Specifically, the investigators will
study optimal localization involving minimization of non-convex cost functions
that admit multiple local minima. To overcome the problem of multiple local
minima, the investigators will develop a relaxation framework based on convex
optimization to obtain fast near optimal solutions. Finally, the proper
placement of wireless sensors and anchors impacts both the accuracy and the
complexity with which localization is performed. Thus, the investigators will
study optimum anchor placement to aid both these attributes. These
investigations are critical to the understanding of the theoretical foundation
of wireless source localization, and will fundamentally impact its broad
applications.