* 0830134
* CAREER:  A Design Data Analysis Approach to Early Stage Design Process Modeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/04/2007,06/30/2012
* Maria Yang, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Paul Collopy
* 06/30/2012
* USD 398,826.00

This Early Faculty Career Development (CAREER) project integrates research in
the early, formulation stage of engineering design with education of university
students and outreach to K-12 youth. The early phase of design includes the
generation, exploration, and selection of potential design concepts. Decisions
made during this stage can have strong impact on the remainder of the design
process and its outcomes. Ideally, changes in an individual design can be
tracked over the early phase of design so that potential assessments about the
final design can be made. However, early stage design process is by nature
highly fluid and unstructured, making such measurements very challenging. The
approach that this investigation takes is to analyze the data output of the
early stage design process itself, rather than focus on the design artifact
alone. The goal is to model and determine methods for evaluating the concept
generation and exploration process. Measures will be determined through analysis
of design process information, such as text, sketches, and prototypes drawn from
design artifacts and design documentation.

The evolution of these artifacts and design process will be modeled and combined
with process measures to serve as indicators of potential design outcomes and
used as feedback for the dynamic design process. This work will be conducted in
active collaboration with engineering companies, including those in the
aerospace and automotive industries. Closely linked to this research are efforts
to expose K-12 students to early stage engineering design via hands-on, project-
based design activities with organizations such as the Tech Museum of
Innovation, and through a documentary video production that promotes
engineering. These endeavors aim to engage young people in early stage
engineering design and cultivate their interest in engineering in general, and
will likely achieve new teaching and learning paradigms for innovative
engineering design.