* 0830246
* The Linguistic Representation of Number: Integrating Theoretical and Developmental Perspectives
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2007,05/31/2011
* Julien Musolino, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 05/31/2011
* USD 135,476.00

This project investigates one of our most fundamental cognitive abilities: our
capacity to use numbers. Given the pivotal role that numbers play in our lives,
understanding how children acquire numerical concepts and how they learn to
express these concepts through the medium of language represents an important
goal for disciplines engaged in the study of human cognition. This project
brings together three independent lines of research on expressions containing
number words, e.g. two balloons, three dogs. The first stems from work in
Linguistics and proposes to account for the meaning and formal properties of
such expressions. The second comes from the study of language development: when
and how do children acquire the number vocabulary? The third comes from the
study of atypical development: in addition to their problems with language, do
children with Specific Language Impairment also experience difficulty in the
area of numerical cognition? The goal of this project is to bring these
perspectives together and show that when integrated, these approaches can both
constrain and enrich each other in ways that will further advance our
understanding of the acquisition of language and number.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By focusing on the behavior of expressions containing
number words, this project will shed some light on issues of much broader
theoretical and practical interest. First, two special populations - typically
and atypically developing children - will be used to illuminate core theoretical
issues in the domain of language and number. The inclusion of children with
Specific Language Impairment is of particular importance, as this research will
promote awareness of this developmental disorder and underscore the fact that
the study of typical and atypical development must proceed hand in hand, with
each area informing the other. Second, there is an important practical goal from
a clinical perspective. Gaining insight into the nature of a possible deficit in
the area of numerical cognition will provide a principled basis for future
research on the development of treatment programs for the Specific Language
Impairment population. Finally, the interdisciplinary approach advocated here
will foster intellectual connections among researchers in the fields of
Linguistics, developmental Psychology, Cognitive Science, and Speech &amp;
Language pathology.