* 0830422
* NEESR-II: A Seismic Study of Wind Turbines for Renewable Energy
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Joel Conte, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2012
* USD 380,925.00

This award is an outcome of the NSF 08-519 program solicitation George E. Brown,
Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES) Research (NEESR)
competition and includes the University of California, San Diego (UCSD) (lead
institution) and Harvey Mudd College (sub-award). This project will utilize the
NEES equipment sites at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) and the
University of California, San Diego (UCSD). The research outcomes will allow
engineers to appropriately and economically account for seismic loading on wind
turbines. This will further facilitate expansion of a main source of Green
renewable energy, and ensure minimal disruption to the critical resource that
wind power provides. The project will be conducted in collaboration with
industry representatives in order to further focus the research effort on the
most significant practical needs today. Related educational outreach activities
will allow undergraduate students to participate in the utilization of the
involved NEES world class testing facilities. In addition, the project team will
develop related internet dissemination applications for K-12 and undergraduate
students. In the United States, the 2006 investment in wind turbines was on the
order of $4 billion. This growth shows no sign of slowing with the Department of
Energy (DOE) goal of expanding the number of wind turbines fivefold by 2015. A
significant portion of this growth is in earthquake prone states. For instance,
more than a quarter of the new capacity installed in 2005 and 2006 was in the
seismically vulnerable States of California and Washington. New wind turbines
are also becoming increasingly taller and heavier, standing vertically in excess
of 200 feet (taller than a twenty-story building), and thus increasing the
significance of potential earthquake loads. If seismically vulnerable, numerous
turbines of a given vintage in a large wind farm may be damaged, leading to
substantial economic consequences. In order to address this challenge, the
proposed research will utilize NEES facilities to provide the needed
experimental data and insights for developing validated rational analysis and
design procedures. The NEES equipment operated by UCLA will be used to conduct a
comprehensive field investigation to quantify the dynamics of actual operating
wind turbines. Experiments using the outdoor UCSD NEES shake table will provide
insight into the potential damage modes of wind turbines when subjected to
earthquake shaking. Findings from these tests will be used to construct and
validate computational models that will further extend the testing results.
These models will be used to develop a framework for seismic analysis and design
of wind turbines. Intellectual merit in this effort stems from providing the
first experimentally validated seismic design procedure for wind turbines
worldwide. Data from this project will be made available through the NEES data
repository (http://www.nees.org).