* 0830734
* Geometric Data Structures
* CSE,CCF
* 01/15/2009,12/31/2013
* Diane Souvaine, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 12/31/2013
* USD 240,871.00

Proposal: CCF- 0830734&lt;br/&gt;Title: Geometric Data Structures&lt;br/&gt;PI:
Souvaine, Diane L.&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Tufts
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geometric Data
Structures&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;A data structure is a repository of
information; the goal is to organize the data so that it needs less storage
(space) and so that information can be retrieved quickly (query). A geometric
data structure handles data which has locations attached to it (e.g. addresses
of fire stations in the state of Massachusetts). Geometric data structures have
become pervasive and an integral part of life; and can be queried to produce
driving directions or the name of the nearest Italian restaurant. Since the
space and query time of a data structure depend upon the type of queries it has
to support, it is important to study which tools and techniques are suitable for
which data structures. The ongoing quest for better data structures sometimes
results in improved methods and sometimes results in entirely new techniques.
The goal is to determine optimal data structures with the best possible
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project focuses on creating new
and efficient data structures for geometric queries and geometric decision
problems that close the gaps between known lower and upper bounds. Particular
problems include planar simplex emptiness queries, relative convex hull queries
in dynamic subdivisions, and dynamic vertical ray shooting queries, and the
implementation of the resulting data structures in both the real RAM and word
RAM models. The project also addresses key problems in computational geometry
such as computing spanning trees with low crossing number, constructing minimum
size cuttings in 3-space, and generating convex subdivisions from disjoint line
segments in such a way as to solve plane reconfiguration problems such as the
compatible geometric matching problem. Solutions to these problems will
contribute to the creation of efficient data structures for geometric queries
such as multi-point location, ray shooting, and range searching. These data
structures are fundamental to the field of computational geometry, and have
broad applications in computer graphics, robotics, CAD/CAM, motion planning,
collision detection, and geographic information systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;