* 0830803
* An In-Depth Study of Homomorphic Encryption in Cryptography
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Rafail Ostrovsky, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Angelos Keromytis
* 09/30/2012
* USD 1,100,000.00

In today?s digital age almost all aspects of both federal and commercial day-to-
day operations are cyber-based. This heavy reliance on cyber-infrastructure
requires security, as without security modern networks are susceptible to both
internal and external attacks. This project will result in the advancement of
our state of knowledge and our understanding of a number of fundamental
cryptographic tasks needed for securing cyber-infrastructure. The efficiency of
cryptographic tasks is typically measured in terms of computational load,
communication bandwidth needed, and the number of rounds of interaction
required. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals for this research include a study of
public key encryption schemes that allow one to encrypt functions of private
keys. Another goal is to embark on a broad study of public key encryption
schemes with additional algebraic properties that allow combining cyphertexts
(without knowing the decryption). Yet another goal of this research effort is to
study new techniques for speeding up the computation involved in performing
cryptographic tasks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort will sponsor new students
to join the research program, and it will exercise outreach efforts through
education?including education for minority student and security professionals
and consultants. Additionally, the results of this project will be integrated
into the course curriculum at UCLA at both the graduate and undergraduate
levels.