* 0830997
* Collaborative Research: Soil Climate and its Control on Wetland Carbon Balance in Interior Boreal Alaska: Experimental Manipulation of Thermal and Moisture Regimes
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2008,04/30/2014
* Merritt Turetsky, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 04/30/2014
* USD 557,220.00

In association with recent climatic warming in interior Alaska, water bodies in
some wetland regions are drying, while other regions are becoming wetter. The
goal of this project is to create a replicated field experiment that quantifies
climate controls on carbon dioxide and methane fluxes in Alaskan wetlands. In
multiple sites, plots will be established that include control, drainage and
flooded water table treatments. Within these treatments, replicate open top
chambers will be used to locally increase soil temperatures. Fluxes of carbon
dioxide and methane will be measured regularly on these plots. Models will be
used as tools to understand the dynamics and mechanisms underlying greenhouse
gas responses from high latitude wetlands. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Global warming
is affecting much of the boreal forest region, a region which contains 1/3 of
the world's soil carbon, much of it stored in wetlands. This study will improve
the ability to quantify how responses of greenhouse gases in Alaskan wetlands
may enhance or mitigate future climate warming. The Alaska Peatland Experiment
will continue to provide a valuable venue for graduate and undergraduate
training in field research in northern ecosystems. An interactive website
(http:///www.apex.msu.edu) will provide an accessible resource for teachers,
researchers and children as well as data exchange among researchers and the
general public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;