* 0830702
* Towards Modeling Mobile Wireless Networks -- When Connectivity Meets Mobility!
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Armand Makowski, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2012
* USD 260,001.00

Towards modeling wireless networks -- When connectivity meets
mobility!&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The search for appropriate wireless network
models that capture the effects of node locations and user interferences has led
to the introduction of several classes of random graphs with increasingly
complex notions of adjacency (i.e., one-hop connectivity). In such one-hop
connectivity graph models, the presence of an edge between two nodes captures
their ability to communicate directly and reliably with each other. However,
viewed as systems, networks are "greater than the sum of their parts" -- One-hop
connectivity gives rise to "network connectivity" as network resources
collectively enable end-to-end data transfer between participating nodes.
&lt;br/&gt;When the graph determined by the one-hop connectivities is static (or
slowly changing at the time scales of interest), network connectivity is readily
identified with the usual notion of graph connectivity in the one-hop
connectivity graph. In the presence of mobility, the one-hop connectivity
structure of the network changes over time, graph connectivity may no longer be
suitable to capture network connectivity and other, more appropriate, notions
need to be considered. With this in mind, we introduce the notions of continuous
connectivity and fly-through connectivity: Continuous connectivity requires that
a path exists between every pair of nodes at all times. Fly-through connectivity
only demands that a multi-hop end-to-end path be provided within acceptable
delays, allowing for the possibility that the network is not continuously
connected. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We explore how these different notions of
network connectivity shape resource allocation (e.g., energy) in the presence of
node mobility. Concerning continuous connectivity, emphasis is on (i)
identifying zero-one laws and the attending critical scalings, and on (ii)
determining the existence and width of associated phase transitions. The
approach and methods are probabilistic in nature. Major efforts will be made to
find useful characterizations for fly-through connectivity. Tools from algebraic
graph theory and from the spectral theory of graphs are expected to play a key
role. This should result in more realistic models for wireless networks for the
purpose of designing robust and efficient resource allocation algorithms in the
presence of node mobility, and for evaluating their performance.&lt;br/&gt;