* 0830922
* MOSART-LS: Misconceptions Oriented, Standards-based Assessment Resource for Teachers in the Life Sciences
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Philip Sadler, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 08/31/2012
* USD 1,499,379.00

The Misconception Oriented Standards-based Assessment Resource for Teachers in
Life Science (MOSART-LS) project develops rigorous Distractor Driven Multiple
Choice assessment tools that aid in generating evidence-based measures of MSP
projects' impact on K-8 teachers' life science subject-matter knowledge and
relevant pedagogical content knowledge. The National Research Council's (NRC's)
Science Standards and AAAS Science Benchmarks serve as a framework for the
grade-appropriate content that teachers are expected to master. This work
utilizes peer-reviewed research studies of student conceptions in order to
generate specialized assessments. These assessments measure the degree to which
teachers hold the accepted scientific view represented by each of the 31 K-8
Content Standards in life science. The project is developing 250 valid new items
and gathering data from a nationally representative sample of 8000 students and
their teachers, characterizing the content knowledge of both. Subsets of test
items are organized into instruments and validated by content experts. When
added to the existing test item bank developed as part of earlier efforts that
focused on physical science and earth/space science, these new life science
items also allow for the construction of "general science" instruments to
measure the concepts taught across all NRC content standards at the K-4 and 5-8
grade bands. Incorporation of these tests into the MOSART online assessment
system will make administration easier and allow for the aggregation of data
from participating MSPs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The application of psychometric
models aligned with cognitive research findings are used to establish scales and
subtests that accurately gauge the scientific understanding needed for teaching
elementary school and middle school life science. These instruments are useful
for diagnostic purposes, ascertaining the strengths and weaknesses of
participants prior to professional development. By adding a post-test
administration, changes in teacher knowledge can be measured and characterized.
The project is a direct outgrowth of the proposer's earlier efforts including
the video "A Private Universe" and MOSART.