* 0830100
* Information Theory with Directions: Geometric Structure and Coordinates on the Space of Probability Distributions
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Lizhong Zheng, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2011
* USD 199,899.00

In this research, we study a set of geometric approaches that can be used to
fundamentally extend our methodology of information theoretical analysis. The
conventional approaches to study information transmissions are based on the key
quantities like entropy and mutual information, which can be viewed as a
distance between distributions. Such approaches are particularly useful in
studying static point-to-point communication problems, where relatively few
probability distributions are involved. Facing the challenge of understanding
large dynamic wireless networks, as many distributions with high
dimensionalities are often involved, the conventional approaches often become
cumbersome in solving or even describing the problems. The geometric approach
studied in this work is in a sense a ?calculus? on the space of distributions.
By developing notions of inner products, projections, and coordinate systems in
the space of distributions, we add a sense of ?direction? in information
theoretic analysis. The new insights from this approach often lead to better
understanding and extensions to the existing network information theory
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The geometric approach is mainly used in two sets
of problems. First, by visualizing the relation between multiple distributions,
we develop the notion of divergence transition to describe the information
exchange through general statistical coupling. This approach is particularly
useful in studying mutli-terminal communication problems, in describing and
controlling information contents at different terminals. Secondly, we used this
approach to study error protections in dynamic communication channels. The
conventional wisdom suggests that all information can be converted into bits and
uniformly protected in transmissions, which is clearly inadequate for dynamic
networked applications. In the study of new notions of heterogeneous information
processing and unequal error protections, the geometric approach plays a crucial
role. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;