* 0830666
* Collaborative Research: Distributed Error Correction Strategies in Wireless Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Joerg Kliewer, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2013
* USD 155,000.00

Networked wireless communications over multiple hops is rapidly emerging as the
main architecture of future wireles systems, including multihop extensions of
cellular and WiFi networks, mesh networks, and sensor networks. Common among
these types of networks is that they are not completely unstructured (or ad hoc)
networks, but traffic is routed and accumulated towards a common destination.
Due to this characteristic property, these networks will be referred to as
Networks with Traffic Accumulation, or NETAs. Traffic accumulation creates hot
sposts or bottlenecks around the common destination because of the increased
traffic load and interference. Despite the severity of the hot spot problem,
there is a lack of efficient methods to cope with it. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research addresses the hot spot issue in NETAs by developing new distributed
error correction strategies tailored to two important subclasses- line networks
and tree networks. In line networks, the investigators study fundamental
properties and the design of distributed channel coding protocals using serially
concatenated and protograph-based constructions to strengthen the error
correction capability near the destination without sacrificing badwidth
efficiency. In tree networks, several source nodes may wish to employ a common
relay node to broadcast their information to multiple destination nodes which
may have access to side information from "overheard" source messages. The
investigators explore a novel approach where each source uses a distinctlow rate
code for transmission to the relay, whereas the decoded messages are re-encoded
using a high rate "nested code". In addition, interlayer issues are considered,
in particular the joint design of efficient channel access and routing schemes
together with the porposed coding schemes.