* 0830114
* Symposium: From Cells to Developmental Systems and Beyond: A Symposium Honoring Ernest Everett Just, in the Fall of 2008 at Howard University, Washington, DC
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Walton Byrnes, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 08/31/2009
* USD 18,382.00

PI Full Name: W. Malcolm Byrnes, PhD (Co-PI: Stuart A. Newman,
PhD)&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: IOS-0830114&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: "From
Cells to Developmental Systems and Beyond: A Symposium Honoring Ernest Everett
Just"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract: This NSF award is for a one-day scientific
symposium that coincides with the 125th anniversary of the birth of Dr. Ernest
Everett Just, a pioneering African American biologist who was a faculty member
at Howard University from 1910-1941. The symposium is to be held in the fall of
2008 on the campus of Howard University, a historically black college or
university (HBCU). A number of prominent biologists will be presenting lectures
on a variety of topics, including live cell imaging, the localization of RNA
during egg development, fertilization in sea urchin, physical processes in
development and in the evolution of developmental systems, non-Mendelian aspects
of inheritance, and ecological aspects of developmental biology. The aims of the
symposium are to recognize Just's contributions to biology on the 125th
anniversary of his birth, to emphasize the ways in which early biological
phenomena discovered in Just's day lay the foundation for modern developmental
and cell biology, and to promote "diversity" in biological research. This last
aim will be achieved by broadening participation of scientists and students at
Howard University, as well as from HBCUs and other universities and agencies in
the greater Washington DC area (and elsewhere). One impact of the symposium is
that, by highlighting the work of E. E. Just and showing how it relates to
cutting edge biological research today, it will encourage talented young
minority scientists to likewise pursue careers in science. Additionally, the
symposium will serve to disseminate scientific knowledge and present it in a
historical context.