* 0830450
* Justification Logic and Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Elena Nogina, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 08/31/2011
* USD 374,996.00

Artemov, Fitting, and Nogina will continue their development of Justification
Logic, which offers a possible breakthrough in the quest to create a fundamental
theory of knowledge, belief, and evidence, and has the potential for significant
impact on applications. The celebrated account of knowledge as "justified true
belief," which is attributed to Plato, has long been a focus of epistemic
studies. About a half-century ago, the notions of knowledge and belief acquired
formalization by means of modal logic. However the notion of justification, an
essential element of epistemic studies, was conspicuously absent, and this led
to well-known deficiencies inherent in modal logics of
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Justification Logic extends the logic of
knowledge in three major ways. First, it adds a long-anticipated mathematical
notion of justification, making the logic more expressive. We now have the
capacity to reason about justifications, simple and compound. We can compare
different pieces of evidence pertaining to the same fact. We can measure the
complexity of justifications, thus connecting the logic of knowledge to a rich
complexity theory, etc. Second, justification logic furnishes a new, evidence-
based foundation for the logic of knowledge, according to which `F is known' is
interpreted as `F has an adequate justification.' Third, justification logic
provides a novel, evidence-based mechanism of truth tracking which can be a
valuable tool for extracting robust justifications from a larger body of
justifications which are not necessarily
reliable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Knowledge, belief, and evidence are fundamental
concepts whose significance spans many areas of human activity: computer science
and artificial intelligence, mathematics, economics and game theory,
cryptography, philosophy, and other disciplines. Justification Logic promises
significant impact on the aforementioned areas. In particular, the capacity to
keep track of pieces of evidence, compare them, and select those that are
appropriate would be a valuable new tool.&lt;br/&gt;