* 0830752
* Collaborative Research: Coding for Nano-Devices, Flash Memories, and VLSI Circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Alexander Vardy, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

Over the past 50 years, error-control coding has been employed with spectacular
success by the communications and data storage industries to achieve performance
trade-offs that would have been otherwise impossible. What has been recognized
only recently, however, is that coding theory could be just as useful in
applications other than communications and storage. In particular, this project
is concerned with numerous problems that arise in the area of digital circuit
design. The problems studied come from a wide spectrum of technologies, ranging
from nanoscale circuits and memory chips to more conventional VLSI
architectures. In each case, these problems are inherent to the physics of the
underlying medium or system. In each case, the project aims to show that
sophisticated coding --- based upon methods and ideas deeply rooted in algebraic
and combinatorial coding theory --- offers a significant advantage, thereby
enabling circuit designers to achieve system trade-offs that would have been
otherwise impossible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the research carried
out in this project can be roughly subdivided into the following four focus
areas:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Development of new coding schemes for efficient
addressing and&lt;br/&gt; correction of manufacturing defects in next-generation
memory&lt;br/&gt; nano-devices, in particular the nano-wire
crossbar;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Advanced coding techniques for high-density
flash memories, based&lt;br/&gt; upon ground-breaking recent ideas of floating
codes and rank-modulation&lt;br/&gt; coding;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Development
of coding schemes to reduce power dissipation and to avoid&lt;br/&gt; cross-talk
in VLSI circiuts, with particular emphasis on both on-chip&lt;br/&gt; and off-
chip buses;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Applications to circuit design of the
techniques developed in a range&lt;br/&gt; of well-known combinatorial problems
in coding theory, including&lt;br/&gt; covering arrays, separating codes,
intersecting codes, and qualitatively&lt;br/&gt; independent set
families.&lt;br/&gt;