* 0830287
* DAT: Creating a Patent Collaboration Network Database to Examine the Social Production of Knowledge
* SBE,SBE
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Lee Fleming, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Julia I. Lane
* 09/30/2011
* USD 448,667.00

Despite evidence that innovation has become increasingly collaborative, our
understanding of collaborative creativity and its impact on economic
productivity remains incomplete. For example, how should firms structure the
collaborations of their inventors, given that networks which enhance the
generation of a new idea also appear to hamper the dissemination of that idea?
How does knowledge flow within and between regions and how can policy makers
influence those flows for maximal social welfare? How does investment in
scientific research result in peer-reviewed publication, the diffusion of
knowledge, invention, and patenting, and ultimate gains in economic
productivity? These questions remain unanswered because social network data are
difficult to gather, particularly across time, space, and boundaries. This
proposal allows answering these questions by calculating and posting millions of
relational data, based on all co-authorship ties between inventors of U.S.
patents, from 1963 through the present.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The database
complements the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) patent database by
providing the social networks of patent co-authorships. It creates a standard
social network patent database at the individual inventor and aggregate levels
including organizational, regional, and technological. It reduces barriers to
entry to scholars who lack the requisite programming skills and hardware to
create the data on their own and enables real time graphing of patent co-
authorship networks. It provides a website by which actual inventors can assess
the accuracy of the algorithms used to uniquely identify them in the patent
database. Finally, the project provides data on a public website accessible by
scholars, business analysts, and students. Just as the original NBER database
has unleashed broad and diverse scholarship on innovation (over 500 papers cite
it, according to Google Scholar, by early 2008), the social network database
project will unleash a similar wave of research, focused on collaborative
creativity and the social networks of inventors and their
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The research will publish
social network data from all U.S. patent co-authorships (1963-present) for use
by researchers, students, and business analysts. It will provide real-time
ability to visually illustrate these networks, with a variety of variables
illustrated by color and size of the nodes and co-authorship links. It will
enable answering how managers should structure collaborative relationships and
how information flows across organizational, regional, and technological
boundaries. It will enable tracing the career productivity and mobility of
millions of inventors around the world. In conjunction with other databases on
research grants and scientific publication, it will illuminate the process of
knowledge creation and dissemination at many levels of analysis, from the
individual, to the organizational, and international.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
primary purpose of this project is to make social network data, based on the co-
authorship of U.S. patents from 1963 through the present, available to
researchers and the public at large. The plan, within six months of project
start, is to make the data available from the Harvard MIT Data Center. The data
will also be archived in the Henry A. Murray Research Archive. Raw data and the
source code will be included in these postings.