* 0830615
* Signal Processing on Special Manifolds with Applications to Wireless Communication
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Robert Heath, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2012
* USD 268,939.00

The demand for wireless communication is only growing, as wireless becomes the
dominant means of Internet access. To meet this demand, wireless systems may
employ new concepts such as multiple antennas, multiple user processing,
transmitter coordination, and interference alignment to improve system capacity.
Unfortunately, implementing these communication techniques requires substantial
feedback from the receiver to the transmitter and more complex signal processing
to reap the promised capacity gains. Fortunately, there is special manifold
structure in these signal processing problems that is not yet exploited.
&lt;br/&gt;Manifolds are generalizations of surfaces to higher dimensions and
can be used to capture structure in signals. Special manifolds like the Stiefel
and Grassmann manifolds are of particular interest in wireless communication
systems that use multiple antennas. This research involves developing a suite of
signal processing techniques for analyzing, filtering, predicting, and
optimizing signals with curved manifold structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project applies new manifold signal processing tools to three emerging problems
in wireless communication: multiple user multiple antenna communication,
interference aligned transmission, and coordinated base station transmission.
Each problem requires progressively more sophisticated manifold signal
processing techniques to enable their eventual application in commercial and
military wireless communication systems. The most immediate impact of this
research will be to improve the quality and capacity of wireless communication
links thus impacting their design, implementation and deployment. The long range
impact will be tools and analytical techniques that influence other disciplines
including control theory, optimization, image and video processing, data mining
and manifold learning. Broader impacts of this research program will occur in
education through the training of undergraduate and graduate students and in
industry through rapid dissemination of research results through electronic
preprints.