* 0830484
* 2008 Gordon Research Conference on Geochemistry of Mineral Deposits
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2009
* John Muntean, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 05/31/2009
* USD 20,000.00

This grant will provide financial support for a Gordon Conference on the
Geochemistry of Mineral Resources. Mineral resources have always been an
essential foundation of human civilization. Current and projected economic
growth, especially in China and India, highlight an increasing worldwide need
for metals, as reflected by prices that are near historic highs for a wide range
of mined commodities. Even with greater recycling and substitution, increasing
demand requires that metals and other rare elements will continue to be mined
from ore deposits. Such deposits can only be utilized in an environmentally
responsible manner if the ore elements are highly enriched by natural chemical
and physical processes. These processes operate over a great range of spatial
and temporal scales in the Earth's interior or at its surface, from the earliest
geological records of our planet to the present day. A major emphasis of the
2008 Gordon Conference on the Geochemistry of Mineral Deposits will be on
assessing global-scale processes that generate large metal provinces during
distinct periods of Earth's evolution. Specifically, questions remain regarding
how metal resources can be linked to evolution of the lithosphere, magmatic
processes at convergent plate margins, time scales for the formation of large
ore deposits, and how common crustal fluids and non-conventional fluids may lead
to unexpected types of ore deposits. In this Gordon Conference, it is planned to
identify future directions for research that will not only address the pressing
issue of resource supply, but also will continue to shed light on how ore
deposits act as indicators of large-scale tectonic, magmatic, sedimentary,
metamorphic and other processes in earth?s history. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Gordon Conference will bring together a diverse group of geoscientists from the
resource industry, academia and government. Not only are the leading thinkers in
ore deposits expected to attend, but speakers will include experts in crustal
evolution, igneous petrology and geochemistry, enabling interdisciplinary
discussion on a wide range of processes that lead to ore formation. This
conference provides a unique opportunity for junior scientists and students to
meet and interact with recognized experts to examine cutting edge topics and
discuss future directions of research in an intimate, informal environment,
which is a hallmark of Gordon Conferences. This grant will provide partial
support for participants, particularly students and early career scientists who
can cover only a portion of their expenses from other sources. It is expected
that the enhanced attendance facilitated by this award will help bring a diverse
set of ideas to the meeting and that the interaction of early-career and more
established scientists help forge directions for future research in this field.
The meeting will also provides the opportunity to establish collaborative
projects among researchers.