* 0830589
* CNPq/NSF, RUI: Surface and Volume Meshes for Volumetric Imaging Data
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2008,02/28/2014
* Suneeta Ramaswami, Rutgers University Camden
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 02/28/2014
* USD 228,026.00

Discrete approximations of a surface or volume are necessary in numerous
computational applications that require models of geometric objects. These
applications typically assume that the geometric domain under consideration is
divided into small, simple pieces (typically triangles or quadrilaterals in two
dimensions, and tetrahedra or hexahedra in three) called finite elements. The
collection of finite elements is referred to as a mesh. One such important
application area is medical imaging, where high-quality meshes for modeling
anatomy, represented as voxel-based images, are critical for computer-assisted
clinical analysis of medical data. Meshes made of quadrilateral/hexahedral
(quad/hex) elements offer lower mesh complexity and better solution quality than
their triangular/tetrahedral counterparts. However, the generation of quad/hex
meshes for arbitrary three-dimensional geometries is a difficult problem, and
algorithms to generate meshes with provable guarantees on quality are available
only for some restricted types of input. This research addresses geometric,
combinatorial, and algorithmic questions related to the generation of
quadrilateral surface meshes and hexahedral volume meshes for three-dimensional
geometries obtained from volumetric imaging data.

Tools from digital topology and graph theory will be exploited to design
algorithms to generate quadrilateral meshes of guaranteed quality for surface
representations of voxel-based images. Robust methods for hexahedral mesh
generation for digital volumes will in turn be designed by utilizing
quadrilateral surface meshing algorithms developed as part of this research.
Many fundamental geometric questions related to quad/hex mesh generation remain
unanswered. A formal understanding of these questions for the special types of
geometries determined by volumetric imaging data is critical for the design of
implementable algorithms that provide guarantees on mesh quality. This research
project also involves collaboration with medical imaging experts, who will
provide evaluation and validation of all meshing algorithms via finite element
methods for three-dimensional, non-rigid image registration of volumetric MR
images of human organs. Most image registration methods in current practice
remain two-dimensional. Improved registration accuracy made possible by
guaranteed-quality volume meshes would have enormous impact on clinical studies
of medical data and greatly benefit medical practitioners.

