* 0830462
* Collaborative Research: Collaborative Quickest Detection in Ad hoc Networks with Application in Cognitive Radio
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Huaiyu Dai, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2012
* USD 93,326.00

Quickest detection is an important technique to detect the change of probability
distribution in a random process being monitored. It is widely used in problems
like financial decision making, environmental monitoring and industrial quality
control. With the rapid development of networking techniques, there exist
pressing demands to carry out quickest detection based on observations from many
nodes and make decision at more than one node. Motivated by this demand, this
research studies collaborative quickest detection in ad hoc networks, in which
nodes exchange observation statistics and make local decisions about
distribution change. In contrast to existing theory of decentralized quickest
detection, the collaborative quickest detection does not need a data processing
center, thus avoiding the round-trip time overhead and possible data congestion.
Moreover, collaboration can enhance the agility and robustness of the detection
of change. The research involves aspects of statistical signal processing (e.g.
detection rule), information theory (e.g. source coding) and networking (e.g.
scheduling or broadcast). An important application of collaborative quickest
detection is spectrum sensing in cognitive radio systems. In such a system,
secondary nodes need to monitor the activity of primary users and should quit
the frequency band once primary users emerge. It is essentially a problem of
quickest detection since the secondary nodes need to detect the change as
quickly as possible. Therefore, this research also involves the design of
collaborative quickest detection in cognitive radio networks. Inter-disciplinary
essence of the research also lends itself to cross-disciplinary education. A
one-semester graduate level course will be devised, which introduces quickest
detection, cooperative communication and cognitive radio. This project also
expects to attract traditionally underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;