* 0830428
* Computation Codes - A New Tool for Multi-user Communication
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,11/30/2012
* Michael Gastpar, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 11/30/2012
* USD 275,000.00

A major potential in large wireless networks is cooperation: A transmission from
a single node is overheard not only by the intended receiver, but by all other
nearby nodes; by analogy, any receiver not only captures the signal from the
intended transmitter, but from all other nearby transmitters. The pessimist's
perspective on these facts has shaped communication network designs of the past
decades: Clever algorithms and protocols have been devised to avoid
interference. Recent work, however, has revealed many scenarios under which
interference turns out to be beneficial, provided it is suitably shaped. This is
often referred to as physical-layer cooperation. Most of the cooperation schemes
that have been proposed to date harvest the statistical dependence of the
underlying signals. By contrast, in this project, novel codes are developed that
permit to exploit the algebraic structure of the interference, enabling
efficient and reliable computation of functions of the involved messages. Such
codes will be referred to as computation codes. They are of independent interest
in applications that explicitly call for computation, such as sensor networks.

More generally, the computation coding perspective is used to develop a new
framework for larger networks: Inside the network, judiciously chosen functions
of the messages (rather than the messages themselves) are being passed around.
As soon as a receiver has sufficiently many functions, it can infer the
underlying message (i.e., the bits). This is reminiscent of so-called network
coding, with the important difference that in the new framework, the question of
which functions of the messages should be passed around is decided according to
the actual interference characteristics, which can lead to significant gains.