* 0830354
* Quantifying The Resilience of Industry Innovation Ecosystems: The Impact of Manufacturing Offshore on Firm Technology Trajectories and the Institutional Locus of Innovation
* SBE,SBE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Erica Fuchs, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Julia I. Lane
* 07/31/2011
* USD 208,068.00

Government policy today targets firms rather than firm ecosystems. Given the
increased fragmentation of firm activities and increased technological
interdependency of these firms over the past 20 years, this mode of policy-
making may be outdated. This research leverages a natural experiment in the
converging telecommunications and computing industry to examine the impact on
the innovation ecosystem of removing a critical set of innovating firms. Drawing
on the results, the researchers seek to define characteristics of innovation
ecosystems that could provide resiliency against future
shocks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite extensive study, there is little agreement
within the academic, industrial, or policy communities on the impact of moving
firm activities offshore on innovation back in the U.S. Previous work by the
P.I. has shown that moving manufacturing offshore changes technology development
incentives. Specifically, her results show that when U.S. firms shift production
from the U.S. to developing East Asia, the most advanced technologies that were
developed in the U.S. no longer pay. Production characteristics are different
abroad, and earlier technologies can be more cost-effective in developing
country environment. Building on these results, this project seeks to understand
the impact of manufacturing offshore on (1) the innovative activities of the
firms that moved manufacturing offshore, and (2) the continued advance of the
advanced technologies within the same or other institutions in the U.S. In the
case of the first part of the study, the results demonstrate whether firms which
relocated manufacturing offshore are following a different technology trajectory
from those firms still manufacturing in the U.S. In the case of the second part
of the study, the results shed insight into whether the relocation of
manufacturing offshore has, in the case of the ecosystem of study, shifted the
institutional locus of innovation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: In
recent years, there has been rising concern over the ability of the U.S. to
remain competitive in the global economy. Understanding how innovation
ecosystems react to a set of innovating firms moving activities offshore is
critical to redefining U.S. science and innovation policy and to improving the
resiliency of such systems. The results of this study shed insights into the
significance of institutional location -- small versus large firms,
universities, or government labs -- on the quantity and direction of innovation.
Leveraging these results, the project characterizes critical metrics of
innovation ecosystems that may aid in their resiliency against shocks such as a
large set of innovating firms moving manufacturing offshore. Metrics may include
such units as coupling intensity between manufacturing location and innovative
output, institutional fluidity, firm-university patent-publication
interdependency, and other metrics that emerge from the result of the study.
These metrics can be used immediately by policy-makers to assess ecosystem
resiliency, and will enable academics to build on them in future work
characterizing industry ecosystems. Finally, the particular technology of study
-- optoelectronics -- is critical to advance in communications, computing, and
sensing. Understanding the policy levers to continue technology development in
optoelectronics may be essential to U.S. economic and military leadership.