* 0830260
* Improving Productivity And Innovation Metrics: The Case of Financial Services
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2010
* Carol Corrado, The Conference Board, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 09/30/2010
* USD 240,152.00

This research develops measures of firms? resources devoted to the development
of new products and business models in the financial services industry, an
activity called ?finance R&amp;D.? The work helps fill a vast gap in our
knowledge of the investment and innovation process for a large and important
sector of economic activity in the United States. Traditional R&amp;D spending
captures the cost of the ?work done? by scientists and engineers because the
innovation process in manufacturing is well understood to originate in a
laboratory. But where do financial innovations, such as credit default swaps,
derivatives, electronic payment systems, ATMs, and the like originate? A recent
review of the empirical literature on financial innovation (Frame and White
2004) suggests little is known about the process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The novel
aspect of our research will be to further develop available measures of
intangible investment and capital by exploiting Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS)
employer-based datasets on employment and wages by detailed occupation and
industry. The BLS data will be used in combination with information obtained
from semi structured interviews with industry executives to build estimates of
the ?work done? by the employees (or contractors) who conduct the design and
development activity in (or for) financial services firms. The interviews will
leverage the Conference Board?s extensive network of business contacts to obtain
the required information as well as to generally expand our knowledge of the
innovation process in financial services industries. The resulting industry-
level series for finance R&amp;D will both supplement traditional R&amp;D
measures and enhance the Corrado, Hulten, and Sichel (2006) macroeconomic
estimates of the contribution of intangible capital to U.S. economic
growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The need for better metrics of
innovation and the knowledge economy was underscored by the Advisory Committee
on Innovation established by the Secretary of Commerce. One of its main findings
was to better measure business intangible investments, and another was to
develop a fuller accounting of the sources of economic growth. Our research aims
to advance these two goals by working on a large and from the standpoint of the
empirical productivity literature largely under researched sector of the U.S.
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;