* 0830182
* NEESR-II:  Biological Improvement of Sands for Liquefaction  Prevention and Damage Mitigation
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2013
* Douglas Nelson, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Richard J. Fragaszy
* 07/31/2013
* USD 375,000.00

This award is an outcome of the NSF 08-519 program solicitation ''George E.
Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES) Research
(NEESR)'' competition and includes the University of California at Davis (lead
institution) and Lafayette University (subaward). The project will utilize the
NEES equipment site at the University of California at Davis, which consists of
a state-of-the-art geotechnical centrifuge (http://nees.ucdavis.edu). Our
project vision is to evaluate and establish the potential of a bio-mediated
ground improvement process to increase soil resistance to liquefaction
triggering and to reduce the consequences if liquefaction does occur in the
surrounding soil. The bio-mediated ground improvement process that will be
implemented utilizes the biological activity of naturally occurring microbes to
create the environmental conditions necessary for calcite crystals to form and
bind soil particles together (www.sil.ucdavis.edu). This process is akin to the
natural geologic process of sands and produces similar results, namely
sandstone-like material. A bio-mediated approach is attractive since it is a
naturally occurring process that is simply being accelerated.

In this project we will examine how the treatment of liquefiable soils with the
bio-mediated soil improvement method prevents/limits the occurrence of
liquefaction and the performance of buildings supported on bio-improved soil.
The UC Davis NEES centrifuge facility will be used to create scaled structures
(buildings) supported on liquefiable soils. Zones of the soil directly beneath
the building will be treated. The model will then be subjected to field (real)
scale stress conditions by spinning the centrifuge. During spinning the models
will be subjected to earthquake shaking and the performance of the soil and the
structure will be measured with displacement, pore pressure, and accelerometer
transducers in addition to high-speed video. This interdisciplinary research has
the potential to transform the way in which earthquake-induced damage to civil
infrastructure is mitigated. It also represents a significant contribution to
the field of bio-soil engineering, a new emerging field at the cross-roads of
civil engineering, microbiology, and geochemistry. In addition to providing
direct insight into mitigating hazards associated with liquefiable soils, bio-
mediated ground improvement processes have the potential in the future for dam
and levee safety, tunneling, environmental barriers, groundwater protection,
aquifer storage, energy storage, and geologic CO2 sequestration. The project
will also be involved in the education and training of undergraduate and
graduate students for this new interdisciplinary field. Data from this project
will be made available through the NEES data repository (http://www.nees.org).