* 0830917
* U.S. WELFARE ATTITUDES IN CROSS-NATIONAL PERSPECTIVE
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Ernest Brooks, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 09/30/2011
* USD 175,625.00

[This proposal is part of a funded CRP from the EuroCORES HumVIB
competition.]&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses a new national survey with
which to systematically measure American welfare attitudes in cross-national
perspective. This research has two complementary goals. One is to field for the
first time core items from the highly successful European Social Survey (ESS) to
better enable comparisons between European nations and the United States. Cross-
nationally standardized items are essential to survey measurement, and this
project will build from the ESS data collection, extending measurement of
welfare attitudes to the key case of the United States.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's second thematic goal is to make use of an
experimental design in which hypotheses about causal sources of welfare state
attitudes can be adjudicated. Embedded survey experiments hold considerable
promise in advancing scholarly understanding of attitude and preference
formation. The dual focus of this project is on framing (in which the
description of a social policy or its beneficiaries are varied) and sponsorship
(in which the source of these descriptions are varied). Together, framing and
sponsorship are essential elements of social and historical context that are
typically held constant in opinion surveys. Building from the conventional
social survey, the methodological benefit of survey experiments is to unpack
these elements of context so that hypotheses about specific frames and competing
sponsors can be evaluated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project and data
collection provides American and European scholars with a new survey with which
to evaluate how and why social policy attitudes vary in the contemporary
historical era. It provides for the principal investigator and larger European
research team (of which this project is the United States component) the data
with which to conduct survey based individual and multi-level analysis.
Subsequent research projects are expected to offer novel explanations of why
mass opinion on social welfare continues to differ across the worlds most
developed nations. In fielding embedded survey experiments, this project offers
new insights into mechanisms behind the formation of policy preferences. These
experiments contribute to a firmer understanding of the United States in cross-
national perspective. It is hoped that knowledge generated through these
experiments may stimulate further applications of experimental surveys in cross-
national research.