* 0830214
* Numeric Computing: A High-Order Kinetic-Based Quadrature Moment Method for Gas-Particle Flows
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Rodney Fox, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 08/31/2013
* USD 412,500.00

High Order Kinetic-Based Quadrature Moment Method for Gas Particle
Flows&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research involves
developing and demonstrating a physics-based predictive tool for gas particle
flows. Physical phenomena involving gas particle flows are ubiquitous in
engineering. Spray combustion, pollutant transport, helicopter brownout are a
few such examples. The understanding and prediction of gas particle flows are
critical in engineering design to enhance performance (e.g. improved combustion
efficiency) or mitigate harmful effects (e.g. helicopter brownout). The primary
objective of this project is to develop a tool, which can be applied to a wide
range of gas particle flows, and is fast and accurate enough to impact the
design process. Predictive computational models developed in this work will have
direct applications in the design of automotive and aircraft engines, chemical
processing plants, rocket engines, diesel and spark ignition engines, and
industrial furnaces. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several methods are popular in gas
particle multiphase flows, for example, the Lagrangian method, the volume of
fluid method and the level set method. Although they all achieved success in
some applications, they also possess some fundamental weaknesses. In this
project, the investigators apply the recently developed direct quadrature method
of moments to treat the kinetic equation in an Eulerian framework. Since it is
not necessary to follow and resolve each individual particle, as in the
Lagrangian method, the DQMOM method is several orders faster. In addition, an
unstructured grid based high-order spectral difference method is employed to
discretise the governing equations to achieve higher resolution, and better
accuracy and efficiency for complex configurations than the current state-of-
the-art second-order methods. The developed tool is validated with several
benchmark test problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;