* 0830797
* Explorations in Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Satish Rao, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Balasubramanian Kalyanasundaram
* 08/31/2012
* USD 394,239.00

The study of algorithms has yielded numerous techniques that are
both&lt;br/&gt;interesting mathematically and broadly useful. This ranges
from&lt;br/&gt;linear programming to cryptography to geometry to approaches
for&lt;br/&gt;approximately solving optimization problems. The addition of
a&lt;br/&gt;statistical view of the world to the study of algorithms has also
been&lt;br/&gt;a compelling area of study. This project will study better
algorithms&lt;br/&gt;for linear programming as well as, explore and expand on
recent work&lt;br/&gt;in approximation algorithms, and will explore algorithms
with a&lt;br/&gt;statistical view of the world. Recent breakthrough work
on&lt;br/&gt;solving linear systems as well as developments in online
optimization,&lt;br/&gt;make the development of better algorithms for linear
programming a&lt;br/&gt;tantalizing possibility. This project will pursue this
goal. A second&lt;br/&gt;specific area is the study of approximation algorithms
which has, in&lt;br/&gt;recent years, been a primary focus of algorithms
research. In&lt;br/&gt;particular, problems such as finding sparse cuts,
disjoint paths, and&lt;br/&gt;the traveling salesman problem have been fertile
ground for developing&lt;br/&gt;new algorithmic techniques. The researcher has
done some of this&lt;br/&gt;work, and proposes to study this area further.
Finally, this project&lt;br/&gt;will go beyond the ``we know how to solve it''
case of linear&lt;br/&gt;programming, and the ``we will do as well as we can''
notion of&lt;br/&gt;approximation algorithms, to a ``how do we do on data
generated by the&lt;br/&gt;world'' view of algorithms. This latter view is
especially&lt;br/&gt;appropriate these days with the growing production of
biological data;&lt;br/&gt;This data is generated accordingly to scientifically
validated&lt;br/&gt;statistical models. Quite interesting work has been done in
this&lt;br/&gt;area, but the field is begging for more involvement from those
trained&lt;br/&gt;in algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
this project lies in the further development&lt;br/&gt;of mathematical
techniques for algorithms, and the blending of&lt;br/&gt;traditional ideas with
ideas in statistics. The broader impacts lie&lt;br/&gt;in the many applications
of algorithms for the problems addressed in&lt;br/&gt;this project. Application
areas include network design, molecular biology, recommendation systems, and
optimization. The researcher will introduce ideas from this project into
graduate and undergraduate classes in algorithms as well.