* 0830739
* SING:    Efficient Survivable Routing in Next Generation Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Guoliang Xue, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2011
* USD 256,000.00

This research involves the design and analysis of efficient algorithms for
survivable routing &lt;br/&gt;in next generation networks. Current research in
this area are either heuristic based that &lt;br/&gt;lacks performance
guarantee, or computationally intensive that lacks scalability. The PI
&lt;br/&gt;concentrates on efficient survivable routing in a very important
class of network topologies &lt;br/&gt;known as minimum isolated failure immune
networks. Efficient algorithms will be designed for &lt;br/&gt;survivable
routing in such networks. This transformative research will provide a solid
&lt;br/&gt;theoretical foundation for survivable routing in next generation
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The INTELLECTUAL MERIT of this research lies in
exploring a new dimension of research in &lt;br/&gt;survivable routing in next
generation networks, using combinatorial optimization and &lt;br/&gt;algorithms
as tools of investigation.&lt;br/&gt;The research will extend the frontiers of
knowledge in survivable networks in the following &lt;br/&gt;directions: (1)
improving heuristic based or integer linear programming based algorithms
&lt;br/&gt;for survivable lightpath routing in mesh network to polynomial time
optimal algorithms for &lt;br/&gt;survivable lightpath routing in minimum
isolated failure immune networks; (2) extending &lt;br/&gt;heuristic based QoS-
aware redundant tree schemes to QoS-aware redundant tree schemes with
&lt;br/&gt;provably good performance; (3) extending heuristic based double-
failure protection to &lt;br/&gt;guaranteed double-failure
protection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of BROADER IMPACTS, this research will
lead to (i) integration of research into &lt;br/&gt;educational experiences of
students at the undergraduate and graduate levels, especially
&lt;br/&gt;students from underrepresented groups;&lt;br/&gt;(ii) unification of
seemingly diverse disciplines which have common underlying mathematical
&lt;br/&gt;foundation; (iii) dissemination of research results through
presentation and publication &lt;br/&gt;in high-quality conferences and
journals.&lt;br/&gt;