* 0830254
* Collaborative Research: MOD: Modeling Productive Climates for Virtual Research Collaborations
* SBE,SBE
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Jonathon Cummings, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Julia I. Lane
* 09/30/2011
* USD 199,427.00

An important kind of virtual research organization is the project-based research
collaboration involving researchers from different institutions. The project
provides a scientific grounding for managing, evaluating, and predicting success
in distributed research collaborations. Collaborative success depends on whether
investigators have a productive climate: a social and technical context that
supports performance and innovation. In a productive climate, collaborators
perceive they have resources to collaborate effectively; they see a link between
their achievements and rewards they receive; they experience their group as
flexible and welcoming of innovative approaches; and they note minimal conflict
between the collaboration and their career and their institution's values.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research defines and measures a productive climate of
distributed research collaborations and focuses on a key antecedent of a
productive climate: the institutional environment of the collaboration. One
example of this kind of environment is whether the institutions that employ the
investigators see exceptional value in interdisciplinary research and have
developed practices that support this kind of research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators study the institutional environments of a sample of projects that
were supported by the National Science Foundation. The intellectual contribution
of this work includes documenting the importance of a productive climate for
distributed research collaboration, and tracing the linkages among productive
climate and the institutional environments of these collaborations. This
analysis led to better metrics for measuring and predicting performance and
innovation in collaborations. Identifying the institutional factors that predict
the productive climate and outcomes of research collaborations also permit the
development of models to predict which collaborations are likely to be
successful. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project are to
inform university, agency, and regulatory practices and policies for science and
new forms of interdisciplinary, distributed research collaboration.