* 0830524
* Zero Testing and Sign Determination of Algebraic Numbers
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Qi Cheng, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 08/31/2013
* USD 198,491.00

In computational geometry and numerical analysis, after performing many
algebraic operations and root-takings, one often needs to determine whether the
result is zero, positive or negative. The zero testing problem and sign
determination problem play an essential role in the robust geometric
computation. They are also closely related to fundamental questions in
computational complexity such as polynomial identity testing. While the zero
testing problem can usually be tackled by randomized algorithms, our
understanding of the sign determination problem is very limited. The project
will study derandomization techniques for zero testing problems, their
applications in polynomial identity testing and complexity issues of sign
determination problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational number theory and
algebraic complexity theory often involve deep and abstract mathematical
concepts, which are not covered in traditional computer science courses. However
understanding these mathematical concepts is vital to information security
workforce. The PI has taught cryptography for many years and he will continue
working on issues of introducing number theory topics to computer science
students. Many algorithmic problems on high degree algebraic numbers can be
reduced to questions on integers represented by straight-line programs.
Straight-line programs are procedures to build large integers by additions,
subtractions and multiplications from small integers. The problems about
straight line programs touch the core issues of complex theory in an intuitive
manner. They can serve as an ideal vehicle to attract mathematically talented
students to theoretical computer science. The PI will work on introductory
materials on straight line programs that are suitable for high school students
and undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;