* 0830325
* NEESR-II: Advanced Site Monitoring  and Effective Characterization of Site Nonlinear Dynamic Properties and Model Calibration
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2008,03/31/2014
* Tarek Abdoun, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 03/31/2014
* USD 374,624.00

This award is an outcome of the NSF 08-519 program solicitation George E. Brown,
Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES) Research
(NEESR)competition and includes Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (lead
institution) and Manhattan College (subaward). This project will utilize the
NEES equipment sites at the University of California at Santa Barbara, the
University of Texas at Austin and Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.

Site liquefaction during earthquake excitations is often associated with
significant permanent displacement and lateral spreading that lead to costly
damage to civil systems of all types. However, realtime field measurements of
permanent displacements have eluded researcher and practitioners until recently,
and hindered the development of reliable tools to predict site lateral spreading
and failure. This project proposes a research program to develop a capability to
monitor the cyclic and permanent displacement of field sites and use the
associated measurements to characterize the in situ low and large strain dynamic
properties for soil strata ranging from the ground surface to a depth of about
30 meters. A number of wireless shape-acceleration arrays (WSSA) will be
installed permanently at the NEES@UCSB Wildlife liquefaction site to monitor low
strain response as well as earthquake induced liquefaction, permanent
deformation and lateral spreading. It is anticipated that an earthquake in the
near future will induce large permanent deformation at this site. The installed
arrays would then provide for the first time measurement of the time history of
a site lateral spreading profile. Specifically, this project comprises the
following tasks: (1) development and validation of optimal array configurations
using centrifuge model tests and computational analyses, (2) installation of a
number of wireless shape-acceleration arrays within an optimal configuration at
the NEES@UCSB Wildlife liquefaction site, (3) excitation of the site using the
NEES@Texas T-Rex vibrator, and (4) development of innovative data reduction and
identification tools to estimate the 3-dimensional (small and large strain)
dynamic properties and response mechanisms of the Wildlife site as well as other
field sites that may be instrumented in the future.

This project will have a broad impact on our capabilities to test in situ soil
systems, evaluate their (low and large strain) mechanical properties and
calibrate computational models of these systems, all while avoiding the issues
of soil sample disturbance and limitation of small scale or sample testing. The
outcome of the planned research will contribute to the development of more
robust modeling procedures and predictive tools of soil systems to reduce losses
associated with earthquakes. The proposed curriculum development at Rensselaer
and Manhattan College will accelerate and enhance the emerging new paradigm in
engineering education where hands-on experience is one of the catalysts for
effective transmission of knowledge. Data from this project will be made
available through the NEES data repository (http://www.nees.org).