* 0830314
* TF-SING: Collaborative Research: Reliable Spatial-Temporal Coverage with Minimum Cost in Wireless Sensor Network Deployments
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Jie Wang, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2012
* USD 166,000.00

This research studies new methods for constructing&lt;br/&gt;economical plans to
deploy wireless sensor nodes of&lt;br/&gt;multiple types and form a reliable
wireless sensor&lt;br/&gt;network to monitor, throughout a given time
period,&lt;br/&gt;a large set of targets spread across a
geographical&lt;br/&gt;space. It initiates and carries out a
thorough&lt;br/&gt;analytical investigation on deploying multiple
types&lt;br/&gt;of sensors for constructing a wireless sensor
network&lt;br/&gt;that satisfies, simultaneously, the min-cost,
the&lt;br/&gt;lifetime, the fault-tolerance, and the
connectivity&lt;br/&gt;requirements. It integrates concepts and methods
in&lt;br/&gt;linear programming, convex programming,
reliability&lt;br/&gt;theory, graph theory, and approximation
algorithms&lt;br/&gt;to model these requirements and find efficient
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;Results of this research provide a substantial impact
on&lt;br/&gt;large-scale, terrestrial and underwater, wireless
sensor&lt;br/&gt;network applications and communication protocol
designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, this research seeks
analytical models&lt;br/&gt;to provide, with minimum monetary cost on sensor
nodes,&lt;br/&gt;reliable sensor placements and time scheduling to
hinge&lt;br/&gt;on spatial-temporal information and power
consumption.&lt;br/&gt;Despite failures and limited power supply of
sensor&lt;br/&gt;nodes, the network must guarantee that each
spatial&lt;br/&gt;target be watched by at least one active sensor at
any&lt;br/&gt;given moment during a pre-determined period of
time&lt;br/&gt;required by the underlying application. This
implies&lt;br/&gt;sensor placements must satisfy the spatial-
temporal&lt;br/&gt;coverage, the fault-tolerance, and the min-
cost&lt;br/&gt;requirements for single-hop networks; as well as
the&lt;br/&gt;additional connectivity requirement for multi-
hop&lt;br/&gt;networks, which ensures that each sensor node
is&lt;br/&gt;connected to a base station through a communication
path.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;