* 0830788
* Theoretical Foundations of Collaborative Information Storage and Transmission
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Kannan Ramchandran, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2012
* USD 353,675.00

Abstract

Theoretical Foundations of Collaborative Information Storage and Transmission

This research addresses the theoretical foundations for enabling distributed
information storage and communication in next-generation large-scale
heterogeneous systems. A key theme underlying this investigation is that of
massive collaboration among system nodes in accomplishing this, in contrast to
scaling the network by solely throwing infrastructure at the problem. The
fundamental challenge is to embrace a distributed systems approach that can rely
on the strength of numbers or the system scale itself to build an overall
network that is scalable, robust, and capable of meeting performance guarantees.
The application scope of this research is broad, and includes next-generation
distance learning, and multi-node video conferencing based on peer-to-peer
collaboration that has the potential to reach the masses rather than being
confined to those privileged to have access to expensive centralized
infrastructure.

The basis for this investigation is the development of both the theoretical
foundations and the architectures and algorithms needed to realize a massively
scalable, inherently robust, and quantifiably reliable information storage and
transmission systems. A focal point of the study is that of distributed storage
and collaborative media delivery paradigms, both with and without delay
constraints. In recognition of the bottleneck caused by centralized knowledge
and global coordination, this study embraces a distributed approach involving
local and randomized individual behavior that result in a highly dynamic system
topology. The key challenge is to exploit the scale of the system itself in
guaranteeing reliability and global performance guarantees out of these local
interactions. The focal point of this study will be on distributed storage
systems based on network coding.

