* 0830190
* Collaborative Research:   Data Communication via Particle Velocity Channels - A Paradigm Shift in Underwater Acoustic Communication
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Ali Abdi, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2011
* USD 176,767.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;_____________________________________________________________
________________________&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Research: Data Communication
via Particle Velocity Channels - A Paradigm Shift in Underwater Acoustic
Communication&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over 75% of the earth?s surface is covered
with water, with many resources upon which human life depends. High speed
wireless data communication with acoustic waves among underwater sensors,
deepwater moored instruments, autonomous underwater vehicles, and surface
vessels is of crucial importance in many applications of national interest.
Examples include offshore oil industry, environmental and ocean monitoring to
predict natural disasters such as hurricanes, and so on. However, the underwater
acoustic channel is a complex and highly bandlimited environment, and the
achievable data rates by current systems are much smaller than the
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core novel idea of the research is to transform
the foundation of underwater acoustic communication, by communicating over the
unexplored degrees of freedom of the acoustic field, i.e., the acoustic particle
velocity channels. Over the past few decades, only the pressure channel of the
acoustic field has been used for underwater communication. The key concept in
this research is to take advantage of the vector components of the acoustic
field, such as the three components of acoustic particle velocity. Particle
velocity channels are promising for high speed communication, due to their
possibly smaller delay spreads. The small size of particle velocity transceivers
is another advantage over large pressure-only arrays traditionally used for
underwater communication. In this research the investigators develop a cohesive
framework for high rate underwater communication via acoustic particle velocity
channels. The research objectives fall into two closely-related categories:
channel modeling and transceiver design. Channel modeling objectives aim at
understanding and characterization of particle velocity channels, whereas
transceiver design objectives address new issues encountered at the channel
modeling stage.&lt;br/&gt;