* 0830391
* NEESR-SG: Development of Next Generation Adaptive Seismic Protection Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Jian Zhang, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,591,082.00

This award is an outcome of the NSF 08-519 program solicitation George E. Brown,
Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES) Research (NEESR)
competition and includes Rice University as the lead institution with subawards
to the University at Buffalo, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, University of
California-Los Angeles, and California State University-Fresno. Conventionally
designed structural frame systems develop significant inelastic deformations
under strong earthquakes, leading to inelastic hysteretic behavior, stiffness
and strength degradation, increased interstory drifts, and damage with residual
drift. Passive seismic protection systems in the form of supplemental damping
devices have emerged as an effective approach for reducing response and limiting
damage by shifting the inelastic energy dissipation from the framing system to
the dampers. However, such dampers do not generally provide self-centering
stiffness capability or counter stiffness degradation. Recent investigations
have shown that a combination of adaptive stiffness and damping (ASD) devices
can provide substantial response modification, particularly during near-fault
pulse-type earthquakes. ASD devices offer structural response modification
capability by optimally varying the restoring forces (stiffness) linked to the
frequencies of vibration and dissipative forces (damping) that govern the
behavior of a structural dynamic system. To date, adaptive stiffness systems
have received relatively little attention as compared to supplemental damping
systems and thus represent a significant gap in earthquake engineering. Hence,
development of new ASD devices is necessary to shift the energy dissipation and
associated stiffness variations from the structural system to the ASD devices to
reduce damage in frames, eliminate residual interstory drift, and provide self-
centering capability. The research vision of this project is to develop the next
generation of seismic protection systems by combining a new class of self-
centering adaptive stiffness systems with highly efficient energy dissipation.
The goal is to mimic the behavior of actively controlled devices by developing
self-contained semi-active ASD devices with feedback and passive ASD devices
with internal hydraulic feedback. The core strategy involves a comprehensive
analytical and experimental investigation of potential active, semiactive, and
passive systems followed by the synthesis and development of practical
adjustable passive systems and self-contained semi-active systems for
implementation in practical structures. Such an approach is consistent with that
adopted in the defense industry and is expected to result in widespread
application of ASD systems in civil structures. The project is expected to
advance the state-of-the-art of increased resilience through structural response
modification, contributing to earthquake hazard mitigation and expedient post
earthquake recovery (due to easy replacement of ASD systems). The project will
broadly impact earthquake engineering practice through educational outreach and
wide dissemination of research findings through the project web site.
Additionally, the project will have a significant impact on students from
underrepresented groups through active involvement of a Hispanic Serving
Institution. This project will utilize the NEES equipment site and experimental
facilities at the University at Buffalo to achieve its goals. Following the
experiments, all data from this project will be made available through the NEES
data repository (http://www.nees.org).&lt;br/&gt;