* 0830554
* An Optimization Framework for the Estimation of Material Properties of Deformable Materials from Volumetric Deformation Measurements
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Joseph Teran, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Balasubramanian Kalyanasundaram
* 08/31/2011
* USD 250,000.00

This research involves the development of optimization techniques
for&lt;br/&gt;the automatic determination of the material properties of
deformable&lt;br/&gt;solids via modern imaging and scanning technologies (e.g.
MRI, CT,&lt;br/&gt;etc.) with particular focus on hyper-elastic materials under
large&lt;br/&gt;deformation, high strain rates and often plasticity. Such
materials&lt;br/&gt;are characteristic of biological soft tissues (e.g. muscle,
fat, skin&lt;br/&gt;etc.) and their determination is critical to creating
accurate,&lt;br/&gt;subject specific simulations of the function of these
anatomical&lt;br/&gt;structures. Simulation using modern computational
techniques is an&lt;br/&gt;increasingly reliable tool for answering many
questions in biomedical&lt;br/&gt;engineering ranging from basic functionality
to post-surgical response&lt;br/&gt;of complex regions of the anatomy. However,
reliable results are only&lt;br/&gt;possible when accurate constitutive
descriptions of the simulated&lt;br/&gt;materials are available. Although much
work has been done to develop&lt;br/&gt;and determine constitutive models for
biological soft tissues, most&lt;br/&gt;material parameters have been estimated
from cadaveric specimens or&lt;br/&gt;from a small group of individuals. This is
an unacceptable&lt;br/&gt;simplification given the widely established variation
in material&lt;br/&gt;behavior across subjects and from the material changes
inherent in&lt;br/&gt;cadaveric specimens. This research will establish
techniques for the&lt;br/&gt;near-automatic determination of subject specific
behavior necessary to&lt;br/&gt;continue the relevance and reliability of
biomedical simulation of&lt;br/&gt;soft tissues. Though motivated by biomedical
simulation, the&lt;br/&gt;techniques developed in this research transcend the
boundaries of&lt;br/&gt;biomechanics and will provide a more general framework
for determining&lt;br/&gt;material properties for engineering
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI and collaborators will use their
combined experience in&lt;br/&gt;constitutive modeling, finite element
simulation of soft tissues, mesh&lt;br/&gt;generation, optimization and medical
imaging to formulate and develop&lt;br/&gt;methods for the determination of
constitutive parameters from imaged&lt;br/&gt;behaviors. This task is formulated
as an inverse problem of fitting a&lt;br/&gt;constitutive model to observed
material motion (involving imaging,&lt;br/&gt;segmentation and denoising). The
PI and collaborators will draw upon&lt;br/&gt;their prior experience with
similar techniques for estimating muscles&lt;br/&gt;activation parameters and
muscle material properties from material&lt;br/&gt;deformation. The capstone
problems to be solved involve accurately&lt;br/&gt;tracking material particle
trajectories with imaging technologies and&lt;br/&gt;approximating the Jacobian
of elastic equilibrium configurations of&lt;br/&gt;soft tissues with respect to
unknown material parameters in a given&lt;br/&gt;constitutive model. With this
functionality, the PI and collaborators&lt;br/&gt;will determine the suitability
of established optimization techniques&lt;br/&gt;and develop novel approaches
(both engendered by the successful&lt;br/&gt;solution of previously mentioned
capstone problems).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;