* 0830378
* NEESR II: Mitigating the Risk of Coastal Infrastructure through understanding Tsunami-Structure Interaction and Modeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Daniel Cox, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 09/30/2012
* USD 438,805.00

This award is an outcome of the NSF 08-519 program solicitation ''George E.
Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES) Research
(NEESR)'' competition and includes the Oregon State University (lead
institution), Colorado State University (subaward), and Texas A&amp;M
University, Kingsville (subaward).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current tsunami
evacuation strategy in the U.S. puts large populations at high risk because it
requires everyone to evacuate the flooded areas and does not consider the
possibility of using tall buildings for shelter. Part of the unwillingness to
adopt vertical evacuation strategies stems from an inability to estimate the
damage level in the flooded area for a range of building types, including
reinforced concrete (e.g., modern hotel), unreinforced concrete masonry units
(e.g., older motel, light commercial) and light-frame wood (mostly residential
and some light commercial) structures. The goal of this project is to model
building damage by studying water flow and debris hazard of collapsed buildings
in the flooded areas. This will help us understand the expected damage to cities
and town and to design buildings to withstand these forces.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a first step of this new approach, we will focus on
residential (light-frame wood) buildings which make up 90% of the building stock
in the US and are where people spend approximately half of the hours in their
day, Because of the sheer number of residential buildings in these coastal
communities, understanding tsunami impact on these structures and the expected
damage level is necessary to reduce damage and loss of life.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this NEESR-II project are to (1) develop a
methodology to assess the risk of residential structures to tsunami inundation
and wave forces through a systematic experimental study coupled with a numerical
probability of failure analysis; (2) enable the development of innovative
retrofit products by developing a structural testing protocol that is
representative of hydraulic impact/forces during a tsunami; and (3) refine the
current hydraulic force equation in ASCE 7 based on a series of wave basin tests
to account for building density and other variables. This transformative project
builds on the knowledge base of tsunami inundation at regional scales and the
tsunami-structure understanding at the building scale from other NEESR projects.
This project also integrates new large-scale physical modeling and numerical
modeling efforts to mitigate both structural risk to building damage and loss of
life in a community-wide tsunami inundation event. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
accomplish the project objectives, several large-scale tests will be conducted
over three years at the NEES Tsunami Facility at Oregon State University using
both the Large Wave Flume and Tsunami Wave Basin Facilities. The tests will mark
the first time that large-scale tsunami tests will be conducted for US
residential structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a
collaboration with the Port and Airport Research Institute (PARI), Japan's
premier research center for coastal infrastructure. Currently, the Tsunami and
Storm Surge Division of PARI is developing a series of nested numerical models
that can model tsunami propagation and inundation over a wide range of spatial
scale, including tsunami forces on buildings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will have an important educational aspect by training two graduate students, one
at Oregon State and the other at Colorado State, and one undergraduate research
student per year from Texas A&amp;M University-Kingsville, a minority serving
institution. This research will permeate to basic undergraduate and graduate
engineering courses at OSU, CSU, and TAMU-Kingsville to increase awareness of
the engineer?s role and responsibility in the design of houses and buildings
exposed to the forces of nature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outreach aspects of this
project will also focus on the use of technology to enhance learning via a
hands-on design project related to tsunami-structure interaction for first year
engineering students at universities outside the NEES@OSU site. In addition to
this activity, the project as a whole will reach the general public through
collaborations with two nationally known Museums of Science and Industry: one in
Portland, OR, and the other in Chicago, IL. The project team will help the
Chicago museum develop tsunami content for Science Storms, a high-visibility,
marquee exhibit at the Museum, which welcomes over 1.5 million visitors,
students, parents and teachers each year. The team will work with the Oregon
museum on communicating the importance of engineering research to the general
public. The project also supports one science teacher on the use of technology
to enhance the learning of STEM subjects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data from this
project will be made available through the NEES data repository
(http://www.nees.org)