* 0830547
* Collaborative Research: Patterns of Larval Dispersal and Postsettlement Selection Shaping Connectivity of Oyster Populations Along an Ecotone
* NONE,NONE
* 08/13/2007,03/31/2012
* Matthew Hare, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* David L. Garrison
* 03/31/2012
* USD 793,085.00

Population persistence and the scale of local adaptation are determined by both
larval connectivity and post-settlement selection when habitats are spatially
heterogeneous for growth and/or reproduction. Unfortunately, the relative
importance of factors acting before and after settlement that limit recruitment
and gene flow is still unknown for most species and most marine ecosystems. This
is partly because the interactions between larval behavior and hydrography are
difficult to study, so dispersal constraints are only inferred indirectly. In
addition, many marine species are not amenable to strong spatial tests of post-
settlement selection and these experiments are difficult to accomplish at the
large spatial scales relevant to high dispersal species. Consequently, only a
handful of natural systems have yielded results that distinguish pre- and post-
settlement constraints on gene flow such that our understanding of mechanisms
generating genetic and phenotypic population structure is piece meal.

The intellectual merit of the study is that it achieves this dual goal in an
estuarine species inhabiting semi-connected lagoons along eastern Florida where
there is a latitudinal gradient in environmental variables, community
composition, and potential larval dispersal vectors. Much of the western North
Atlantic coastline includes shallow lagoons enclosed by barrier islands, but
only a handful of studies have measured connectivity among estuaries, and none
among lagoons. This project builds on significant previous research on the
eastern oyster, Crassostrea Virginica to integrate pre- and post-settlement
measurements. High resolution genetic identification of migrants will be used to
construct a connectivity matrix among 30 populations in each of three years.
Statistical associations will be tested between dispersal patterns and
hypothesized dispersal vectors and constraints. Cohort analysis will be used to
test for spatial variation in genotype-specific survivorship along the entire
coast. Also, in each of two years, relative postsettlement survivorship and
performance will be measured in field common gardens in which local individuals,
migrants and hybrids are compared. Finally, fertilization efficiency of within-
and between-population crosses will be compared to test the hypothesis that
gamete incompatibilities limit gene flow. The results will be integrated in
models that describe the spatially and/or temporally dynamic balance between
dispersal and selection, define the spatial scale of local adaptation along the
ecotone, and identify abiotic gene flow constraints that may affect
codistributed species.

The broader impacts of this study derive from its focus on important habitats
for diversity and fisheries management, and on the involvement of
underrepresented groups. The oyster populations under study inhabit eastern
Florida lagoons that possess the highest diversity of any estuary in the United
States, yet this coastline is undergoing rapid development. In addition, the
Cape Canaveral lagoons contain the oldest marine protected area in North
America. Understanding the impact of this reserve on surrounding fished
populations hinges on dispersal across its boundaries and on habitat quality,
both of which are studied here. This study will also support one PhD student who
will focus on the measurements of selection for her dissertation. The graduate
student is a female African-American who endeavors to study marine evolutionary
ecology, a goal spanning two fields with extremely low minority representation.
The P.I. has a continuing interest in attracting the next generation of
scholars. Currently four undergraduates work in the Hare lab on projects related
to the Florida ecotone. Three of the undergraduates are women and the fourth an
African-American. Funding from NSF will allow undergraduate participation to be
expanded to include summer field work in Florida. Previous undergraduates
working in the Hare lab have obtained Howard Hughes fellowships and contributed
to publications (Gaines et al. 2005). The University of Maryland graduates more
African-Americans than any of the top 20 universities in this country. This
provides a large pool of minority candidates for possible recruitment to the
Hare lab. The P.I. has a history of integrating primary research results into
lectures in introductory genetics. Research results are also disseminated via
lab web page postings.