* 0830976
* DataNet Full Proposal: The Data Conservancy (A Digital Research and Curation Virtual Organization)
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Mary Marlino, Johns Hopkins University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Robert Chadduck
* 07/31/2014
* USD 10,085,120.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Data Conservancy, A Digital Research and
Curation Virtual Observatory&lt;br/&gt;PI: Sayeed Choudhury of Johns Hopkins
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Johns Hopkins University (JHU) will create The
Data Conservancy (DC), which will research, design, implement, deploy and
sustain data curation infrastructure for cross-disciplinary discovery, with an
emphasis on observational data. The Data Conservancy project is led by Sayeed
Choudhury, Associate Dean for University Libraries at JHU, which has a strong
track record for leading the research library community in new directions. The
Data Conservancy is creating a new model in which libraries regard digital data
as a special collection that must be maintained and served like their other
collections. Participating organizations include Cornell University, University
of California Los Angeles (UCLA), the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
(UIUC), the National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR), University
Corporation for Atmospheric Research (UCAR), Marine Biological Laboratory
(Encyclopedia of Life), the National Snow and Ice Data Center (NSIDC), Space
Telescope Science Institute, Fedora Commons, Portico, University of Queensland,
and Tessella Support Services. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Besides defining a new role
for research libraries in curating and serving special collections of scientific
digital data, expected contributions of the Data Conservancy include&lt;br/&gt;*
Defining of new educational curricula an other opportunities in data curation;
&lt;br/&gt;* User centered studies that will help the community and NSF better
understand how scientists use, share, and preserve data now and what factors
motivate them to or inhibit them from preserving and sharing
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through collection, preservation and semantic
integration of data that are now very difficult to assemble and analyze
together, the project is also expected to have transformative impact on the
ability of scientists to answer grand challenge questions that are as important
to the nation and the world, such as three that relate to the production of
greenhouse gases: &lt;br/&gt;* What are the current geographical and temporal
distributions of the major pools and fluxes in the global carbon cycle?
&lt;br/&gt;* What are the control and feedback mechanisms - both anthropogenic
and non-anthropogenic - that determine the dynamics of the carbon cycle?
&lt;br/&gt;* And what are the dynamics of the carbon-climate-human system into
the future, and what points of intervention and windows of opportunity exist for
human societies to manage this system?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Data Conservancy
begins with data spanning anthropology, applied mathematics, astronomy,
atmospheric sciences, chemistry, earth sciences, crop and soil sciences,
ornithology, psychology, physics, theoretical and applied mechanics.
International partnerships augment this initial collection. Evolutionary
development of this collection will be guided by the user centered design
process.