* 0830716
* Research, Evaluation and Technical Assistance: Student Outcome Effects of the Appalachian Math and Science Partnership
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2013
* John Yopp, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,703,185.00

Academics and policymakers increasingly emphasize that a key to improving
educational outcomes in the United States is enhancing the quality of teachers.
While the attention to preservice teacher education is important, it will be
many years before today's pre-service teachers constitute a majority of the
teaching workforce. Hence, the focus of teacher quality enhancement efforts in
the near term must be in-service professional development for those already in
the teacher workforce. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project is examining the
Appalachian Math and Science Partnership (AMSP) effects on student learning. A
goal of the partnership is to close the achievement gap in student math and
science knowledge through AMSP activities. This study presents a statistical
method for evaluating the effects of AMSP participation on student learning.
This project employs a research design that involves a two equation model to
estimate the independent effects of teacher participation in AMSP on student
outcomes. A two equation model is used because estimation is complicated by the
fact that teachers and schools voluntarily choose to participate in AMSP. The
first equation of the model corrects for the nonrandom nature of selection of
schools and teachers into AMSP which, when uncorrected, can also bias the
estimates of the program effects. The second equation incorporates the first
stage selection estimates and includes other independent variables that would be
expected to influence test scores. Alternative measures of student achievement
are used.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is significant for two reasons.
First,the project will directly address whether AMSP is improving student
outcomes among participating Appalachian teachers and schools. This project also
makes an important contribution in establishing a scientifically sound method
for evaluating the effects of MSPs and other professional development programs.
Developing statistical and other methodological approaches to studying the
impact of the effects of these programs is important in the national movement to
improve teacher quality and student learning in math and science.