* 0830776
* Steganographic and Steganalytic Methods for Timing Channels with Side Information
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Sean Meyn, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 07/31/2011
* USD 435,419.00

Steganographic and Steganalytic Methods&lt;br/&gt;for Timing Channels with Side
Information&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal addresses dual
problems of steganography (design of&lt;br/&gt;coding techniques for covert
communications) and steganalysis&lt;br/&gt;(design of statistical methods for
detection of covert communications)&lt;br/&gt;applied to timing channels on
asynchronous networks. Hidden messages&lt;br/&gt;are embedded by modulating the
timings of a cover packet stream&lt;br/&gt;(e.g., SSH file transfer data;
keystroke data for instant messaging&lt;br/&gt;or other interactive session)
which plays the role of side information&lt;br/&gt;for the encoder. The encoder
is also subject to causality and latency constraints.&lt;br/&gt;Hence the
objective of this research is to construct and analyze novel
methods&lt;br/&gt;for covert communications over timing channels with side
information,&lt;br/&gt;as well as novel methods for detecting
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is organized around four research
thrusts:&lt;br/&gt;1) Develop mathematical formulations and research the
information-theoretic&lt;br/&gt; limits of timing codes with side information.
The problem formulation&lt;br/&gt; includes a statistical model for the input
packet process (e.g., &lt;br/&gt; a renewal process, or a Markov process),
steganographic constraints&lt;br/&gt; (to guarantee statistical undetectability
of the embedded messages),&lt;br/&gt; causality constraints, and latency
constraints.&lt;br/&gt;2) Develop and analyze a family of practical codes that
satisfy the above&lt;br/&gt; constraints. These codes are nonlinear and
stochastic (they inject&lt;br/&gt; an optimized amount of ``noise'' via a queue)
and&lt;br/&gt; we refer to them as queue-based steganographic
codes.&lt;br/&gt;3) Develop an efficient computational framework for
optimizing&lt;br/&gt; information-theoretic functionals associated with queueing
processes.&lt;br/&gt;4) Construct a steganalysis learning machine (based on
empirical data&lt;br/&gt; and various timing codes) which returns a binary
decision about&lt;br/&gt; the presence of hidden
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad Impact and Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;This
project is highly multidisciplinary and involves a synergy
between&lt;br/&gt;research and educational activities in random processes,
communications,&lt;br/&gt;coding, queueing theory, information theory,
statistics, and learning&lt;br/&gt;theory. The project addresses fundamental
questions with applications&lt;br/&gt;to information protection and
cybersecurity.&lt;br/&gt;Other impact includes computational methods for
queueing processs,&lt;br/&gt;steganographic methods for signal processing and
other timing channels, etc.&lt;br/&gt;Many graduate students are interested in
moving into such an&lt;br/&gt;attractive research area, which combines breadth
and strong emphasis&lt;br/&gt;on fundamentals with practical relevance. We
intend to train these&lt;br/&gt;students for leadership roles in information
technology.