* 0830480
* Theoretical Foundations for Wireless Communication Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Georgios Giannakis, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2011
* USD 300,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In lieu of a formal theory, designing wireless
networks often relies on suboptimum rules that under-utilize the available
resources. The objective of this research is to build on theoretical foundations
of wireless networks by formulating generic optimization problems in a variety
of settings. Questions about these problems are posed and answers are
subsequently translated to fundamental properties. Among possible questions,
this project focuses on the following ones: q1) How difficult are these
optimization problems to solve? q2) What structural properties they possess? and
q3)What solver(s) should be employed ? Answers to q1) determine whether optimal
wireless networking is feasible; addressing q2) translates to architectural
principles, e.g., optimal layered architectures; and responses to q3) lend
themselves to working wireless network protocols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project builds on a preliminary result which asserts that separating wireless
networks into layers is optimal in the presence of random fading. The approach
leverages this principle and related structural properties introduced by fading
to develop a formal theory encompassing algorithmic, performance analysis and
development issues including: i) dual decomposition stochastic optimization
solvers; ii) physical layer innovations in cross-terminal optimization of
interference; iii) convergence of on-line stochastic approximation solvers; iv)
non-ergodic high-mobility wireless networks; and iv) cognitive radio networks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful completion of this research is of immediate
interest to the 802.11 evolution of WLANs and the emerging initiatives in mobile
ad hoc networks. The vision is ubiquitous incorporation of optimally designed
protocols in future generation wireless networks and wireless sensor networks.
In a broader sense, advances in the foundations of wireless networks will impact
the class of stochastic transport networks which includes the power grid, the
water distribution system and the transportation
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;