* 0830685
* Feedback and Learning in Cognitive Radio Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Qing Zhao, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2013
* USD 250,000.00

Cognitive radio is the key enabling technology for future generations of
wireless systems that address critical challenges in spectrum efficiency,
interference management, and coexistence of heterogeneous networks. This
research aims to develop fundamental theories and practical algorithms for
cognitive radio systems. It focuses on three key areas: (i) spectrum opportunity
sensing and cognition; (ii) spectrum opportunity tracking and exploitation; and
(iii) cognitive opportunistic networking. These three areas represent a logical
progression that expands in scope and complexity.

Key innovations of this research include exploiting the heavy tail and self
similar nature of primary traffic processes in the design of cognitive radio
systems. The inevitability of sensing errors, which has mainly been studied in
isolation at the physical layer, is explicitly taken into account in all aspects
of this research, from the investigation of fundamental performance limits to
the design of algorithms and protocols at all network layers. The overall
objective of this research is to gain a rigorous understanding of the role of
feedback and learning in cognitive radio systems, to characterize fundamental
structures and performance limits of opportunistic spectrum access, and to
develop efficient and robust approaches to harvest spectrum opportunities using
networked cognitive radios. An integrative approach is being developed,
integrating recent advances in traffic modeling, distributed statistical
inference and consensus learning, and theories and techniques of dynamic
optimization and stochastic control. This research promotes active learning and
discovery and broadens participation of female students in engineering, from
K-12 girls to undergraduate and graduate students.



