* 0830545
* A Cooperative Game Theoretic Framework for Collaborative Information Processing in Distributed Sensor Nets
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Sudharman Jayaweera, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2012
* USD 201,747.00

CCF- 0830545: A Cooperative Game Theoretic Framework for Collaborative
Information Processing in Distributed Sensor
Nets&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Distributed sensor networks can
be used to monitor or track moving targets, environmental processes, and leaked
chemical or biological agents. When distributed sensor nets are used to monitor
such phenomenon of interest, each node in the network can come up with an
estimate based on its own observation of the process. However, nodes may be able
improve their estimates if they were to share information with each other, by
forming coalitions. The price for such inter-node collaboration can be the cost
of communication resources. Unless only the nodes that are the best candidates
join a coalition, there is the drawback of waste of individual node power as
well as causing unwanted excessive interference to everyone else.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These concerns become critical when we consider, as in
this research, sensor nets formed by battery-powered nodes operating in a
limited bandwidth. But, a.) How do we define best nodes to join a coalition at
any given time in a dynamic sensor net? b.) What should be a fair resource
commitment from each node to a given coalition? In this research we formulate
the above problem of collaborative information processing in distributed sensor
networks as a cooperative game theoretic problem. The research covers different
types of sensor network architectures as well as various fairness criteria among
nodes in a network. By casting in a cooperative game theoretic framework allows
us to apply solution concepts from game theory to achieve different fairness
criteria among nodes, in developing collaborative processing schemes. The
research is carried out in conjunction with an outreach program that focuses on
providing international educational experience to students. &lt;br/&gt;