* 0830525
* Future Directions in Visual Navigation
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2009
* JOHN ALOIMONOS, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Paul Yu Oh
* 04/30/2009
* USD 20,000.00

We propose to organize a two-day workshop on Visual Navigation with invited
speakers covering a broad spectrum of scientific disciplines with emphasis on
visual navigation. The goal of the workshop would be to assess the state-of-the
art in this field and to critically examine future trends. Through presentations
and panel discussions, our goal would be to identify a number of new research
questions surrounding Visual Navigation that have intellectual merit and whose
answers have the potential for broad impact. New ideas have the potential to
come from a number of new developments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One such
development is the discovery of mirror neurons. This opened new avenues because
it means that the motor system of the agent is an important space that is
directly related to perception. Visual navigation involves movement of the
agent. When an agent A observes another agent B perform a task, then agent A
"understands" what agent B is doing because he transfers the movement to his own
motor system. In other words, agents possess representations of their own
actions at an abstract level. Since this abstract level is related to language,
it is possible to envision navigating systems of the future that provide
language descriptions of their environment. Another important development is
what is broadly known in some circles as "Hyper-empiricism". The availability of
gargantuan amounts of data facilitates the "learning" of a number of functions
related to navigation. Lots of interesting questions arise about what to learn
and how, as existing computational learning techniques are inadequate. Other
developments we hope will show up at the meeting.&lt;br/&gt;