* 0830783
* Symbolic Software for Conservation Laws of Multi-Dimensional Continuous and Discrete Nonlinear Equations
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Willy Hereman, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Balasubramanian Kalyanasundaram
* 08/31/2012
* USD 294,000.00

Symbolic Software for Conservation Laws of Multi-Dimensional Continuous and
Discrete Nonlinear Equations

Willy Hereman and Michael Colagrosso

Abstract The aim of the project is to create mathematical methods, algorithms,
and symbolic software for the computation of conservation laws of nonlinear
models from the applied sciences and engineering. Specifically, the research
concerns nonlinear partial differential equations in multi-dimensions, nonlinear
differential-difference equations and fully-discretized lattices. Using
differential-geometric tools and techniques from the calculus of variations, the
algorithms are straightforward to implement in computer algebra languages and
the software will be easy to use by non-experts. Potential users are researchers
concerned with conserved quantities and integrability of nonlinear equations
that arise in soliton theory, dynamical systems, control theory, and
mathematical physics. In particular, the software will gain insight in reaction-
diffusion models, population and molecular dynamics, nonlinear networks, and
chemical reactions. In addition to its use in research, the software will serve
as an educational tool for courses in nonlinear wave phenomena in fluid
dynamics, plasma physics, electrical circuits, quantum chemistry, bio-genetics,
and nonlinear optics.

An essential part of the project is the development of homotopy operator methods
to handle the needed integration and summation by parts on jet spaces. In view
of their versatile applicability, fast algorithms and stand-alone packages will
be developed for continuous and discrete homotopy operators. Adhering to a
calculus-based approach, the generalization of the algorithms to integro-
differential equations and delay differential equations will be pursued. New
mathematical techniques are expected to come from these explorations in
uncharted terrain.

The research fosters collaboration between mathematicians and computer
scientists, creating novel mathematics and quality software, as well as
producing students with good software engineering skills. The software
development process, including design, development, and testing, combines the
strengths of undergraduates, graduate students, and faculty. The comprehensive
software packages are envisioned to have a wide impact with pure and applied
mathematicians, physicists, engineers, and others interested in the analysis of
nonlinear equations, enhancing the productivity of researchers in several
domains.

