* 0830852
* CT-ISG:    Collaborative Research:   Incentives, Insurance and Audited Reputation: An Economic Approach to Controlling Spam
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2010
* Manoj Parameswaran, Santa Clara University
* Standard Grant
* carl landwehr
* 12/31/2010
* USD 75,954.00

The Internet is plagued by security problems including spam, threatening its
legitimate role as the engine of growth in the new millennium. While technology
makes admirable progress against cyber-security problems, the problem is not one
of technology alone. Cyber security is part of a framework that encompasses
technological, economic and social issues. The availability of technological
solutions needs to be supplemented by service providers accepting responsibility
for deploying technologies efficiently. Deployment of solutions and assignment
of responsibility today tend to focus on a network provider's accountability to
its own customers. In the decentralized Internet, allocation of accountability
for potential impact on a remote network is important. This research seeks to
direct investments to minimize impact on destination networks by efficient
allocation of incentives. Security threats render the Internet a risky
environment, and insurance mechanisms can seek to enhance productive and secure
use of the Internet by risk management. This project uses game theoretic models
to study allocation of incentives among mail service providers to reduce global
incidence of spam. This project will develop incentive and insurance mechanisms
with the provision for certifying providers who voluntarily accept
responsibility for damage to rest of the network, conduct empirical studies of
the patterns of spam observed on Internet today for refining the analytical
model, and experimentally test and validate the mechanisms and model. This
research seeks to start an evolution of the Internet into an accountable and
well-organized environment