* 0830983
* DAT: Science &amp; Technology Agents of Revolution (STAR) Database: Linking Government Investment, Science, Technology, Firms and Employment
* SBE,SBE
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2014
* Lynne Zucker, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Mark Fiegener
* 09/30/2014
* USD 646,054.00

This project remedies one of the greatest impediments to rapid progress in the
science of science and innovation policy (SciSIP) both as a field of study and
as a guide to policy: the lack of an integrated database which can trace the
links from government investment in R&amp;D through the path of knowledge
creation, its transmission and codification, and ultimately in many cases to
commercial uses yielding a better standard of living and better jobs.
Specifically, the project completes, validates, demonstrates the utility of, and
makes available to the research community the Science &amp; Technology Agents of
Revolution (STAR) Database which is a transformative platform technology for
analyses in whole or part of the creation, transmission, and use of new
scientific and engineering knowledge, the creation of new commercial
technologies in pre-existing and/or new firms, and the success of those firms as
engines of wealth creation and employment growth. The STAR database integrates
and complements key databases on science and innovation by a system of unique
IDs for firms and other organizations and for individual scientists and
engineers as they appear as principal investigators, authors, dissertation
writers or advisors, inventors, and/or firm officers, directors, and key
employees. Especially the most productive of these scientists ? the ?star
innovators? ? wear many hats simultaneously. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The STAR
database integrates data on government grants, journal articles, dissertations,
patents, venture capital, initial public offerings, and other firm data. It
links to major public databases via widely used financial market identifiers. In
collaboration with the Census Bureau, the STAR and the Census firm and worker
databases are linked by a concordance for use by researchers with access to the
Census data. The STAR database will have three tiers: a public graphics-based
site primarily oriented toward policymakers and the media, a public site
providing access to researchers for downloads and database queries limited to
the public constituent databases or aggregates derived from the licensed
commercial databases, and on-site access at the National Bureau of Economic
Research (NBER) providing researchers access to the complete STAR Database for
building take-away analysis datasets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This
project is designed specifically for broader impact. It will provide a shared
database that will advance discovery, and enable research otherwise impossibly
expensive for nearly any dissertation student or faculty member not located at
one of the few elite institutions where significant parts of the STAR Database
are available. Real data will bring excitement to classroom assignments on
topics that in the abstract can deaden students' interest. Most of the data are
available on-line with the commercially licensed part of the data available for
building take-away analysis data sets at the NBER and for use within all the
Census Bureau?s Research Data Centers. These data enable both academic and
government researchers to build reliable and tested answers to fundamental
administration and Congressional questions about the variety of returns to
government investments in research. Zucker and Darby pursue an active outreach
program to get their results to policymakers and the press in a form that they
can use.&lt;br/&gt;