* 0830556
* Knowledge and Strategic Learning in Multi-user Communications
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2013
* Mihaela van der Schaar, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 09/30/2013
* USD 255,737.00

Multi-user wireless communications systems form competitive environments, where
heterogeneous and self-interested users compete for the limited spectrum
resources. However, the techniques that have recently dominated multi-user
communication research are not well suited for heterogeneous environments,
because they usually assume transceivers that have similar standards and
passively select their actions based on either complete or no knowledge about
the competitors? protocols, utilities etc. Such passive system designs do not
take advantage of the users? ?smartness? and may lead to inefficient spectrum
usage. In contrast, this research characterizes and constructs multi-user
communications systems, where users engage in proactive interactions for
dividing the spectrum. A new multi-user communication paradigm is proposed,
where the interaction between users and their resulting performance is driven
not only by their ability to adapt their communication strategies, but also by
their ability to make optimal decisions about information exchanges based on
their knowledge about their competitors and the environment. The research has
two main research thrusts. First, the investigators determine ?the value of
knowledge?, which are the performance bounds that can be attained, when users
and resource moderators with different amounts of knowledge about the entire
communication system and the competing users interact. Moreover, how strategic
users should proactively accumulate knowledge and improve their utility is also
investigated. Second, the investigators construct operational algorithms that
can approach these performance bounds, by systematically acquiring information
about other users and deploying strategic learning solutions that enable them to
forecast the other users? responses and, ultimately, to optimize their
transmission actions. The ?values of learning?, which capture the performance
gains for various strategic learning techniques requiring various information
overheads and complexity costs, are also quantified.