* 0830347
* Model Discovery and Verification With Symbolic, Hybrid Symbolic-Numeric and Parallel Computation
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Erich Kaltofen, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Balasubramanian Kalyanasundaram
* 08/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

ABSTRACT:

A mathematical model for a natural (e.g., the heart beat of a human) or man-made
process (e.g., the radio wave of a wireless signal) is a mathematical expression
or an algorithm that on evaluation of system parameters (such as a point in
time) yields a model value (e.g., the amplitude of a wave). Models are created
by understanding the process, which suggests the form of the expression, and by
observing and measuring an actual process. From those data points the best model
is fitted by a computation. Erich Kaltofen studies both how to fit to data
certain models, such as fractions of sparse polynomials, and then how to certify
that the computation has produced the best possible model. The algorithms for
creation of best fits and subsequent certification of optimality can be compute-
intensive and require multi-processor computing environments.

Erich Kaltofen and his students and collaborators will design algorithms for
symbolic models such as sparse multivariate rational functions and formulas with
very large and even parametric exponents. Our algorithms can work with both
exact and approximate data, the latter by hybrid symbolic/numeric techniques.
Computation with floating point scalars requires a new kind of probabilistic
analysis when randomization is applied, and we will make use of recent results
on estimating the spectra and condition numbers of random matrices. One
application of such randomization is the efficient solution of highly under- and
overdetermined dense linear systems. A new alternative to error analysis is the
exact validation via symbolic computation of the global optimality of our
approximate solutions. Semidefinite programming and Newton refinement are used
to compute a numerical sum-of-squares representation, which is converted to an
exact rational identity for a nearby rational lower bound. Since the exact
certificates leave no doubt, the numeric heuristics need not be fully analyzed.
We will search for rationalizations that can validate very large sums-of-squares
and hence apply to large inputs. We will develop parallel and distribute
computing tools for the arising symbolic and hybrid symbolic-numeric computation
tasks.

