* 0830161
* Gaussian Beam Methods for Large-Scale Computational Electromagnetics and Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Jianliang Qian, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 08/31/2012
* USD 250,000.00

The Investigators propose to develop and implement novel and&lt;br/&gt;efficient
Gaussian-beam-based computational methods for large-scale
computational&lt;br/&gt;electromagnetics motivated by industrial and military
applications. The project addresses&lt;br/&gt;several fundamental issues in
scientific computing and applied mathematics, such as&lt;br/&gt;multi-scale
modeling, simulation, and inverse problems, which are essential in
material&lt;br/&gt;sciences and nanotechnology. Computational electromagnetics
has become a fundamental,&lt;br/&gt;vigorously growing technology in diverse
science and engineering disciplines, ranging&lt;br/&gt;from radar, sonar,
seismic imaging, medical imaging, lithography processing, detection
of&lt;br/&gt;land mines, submarine detection, stealth technology, remote
sensing, electronics to&lt;br/&gt;microscopy and nanotechnology. The new
methodology resulting from Eulerian Gaussian beam&lt;br/&gt;methods has
substantial impact on computational electromagnetics and
applications,&lt;br/&gt;particularly at high
frequencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research involves large-scale direct and
inverse scattering problems for electromagnetic&lt;br/&gt;wave propagation with
high wave numbers. The Investigators will develop efficient and
accurate&lt;br/&gt;Eulerian Gaussian beam methods for Maxwell's equations in
inhomogeneous media in the high&lt;br/&gt;wave number regime. Furthermore, the
Investigators will apply the new Gaussian methods to three&lt;br/&gt;challenging
and practically important problems for Maxwell's equations: inverse
medium&lt;br/&gt;problems, large cavity problems, and diffraction grating
problems. New Eulerian&lt;br/&gt;Gaussian-beam-based algorithms will be
developed for the first time for these applications.&lt;br/&gt;The Gaussian beam
method will be capable of producing uniform asymptotic solutions
beyond&lt;br/&gt;caustics for wave propagation with high wave numbers. These new
Eulerian Gaussian beam&lt;br/&gt;methods should also provide an efficient tool
for many other applications related to&lt;br/&gt;electromagnetic waves in
inhomogeneous media.&lt;br/&gt;-------------------------------------------------
------------------&lt;br/&gt;