* 0830153
* Collaborative Research:  Next Generation Solvers for Mixed Integer Nonlinear Programs:   Structure, Search, and Implementation
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Andrew Miller, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 12/31/2012
* USD 199,997.00

Collaborative Research: Next-Generation Solvers for Mixed-Integer&lt;br/&gt;
Nonlinear Programs: Structure, Search, and
Implementation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many scientific, engineering, and public
sector applications involve&lt;br/&gt;both discrete decisions and nonlinear
system dynamics that affect the&lt;br/&gt;optimality of the final design. Mixed-
integer nonlinear programming&lt;br/&gt;(MINLP) optimization problems combine
the difficulty of optimizing over&lt;br/&gt;discrete variable sets with the
challenges of handling nonlinear&lt;br/&gt;functions. MINLP is one of the most
flexible modeling paradigms&lt;br/&gt;available, and an expanding body of
researchers and practitioners,&lt;br/&gt;including computer scientists,
engineers, economists, statisticians, and&lt;br/&gt;operations managers, are
interested in solving large-scale MINLPs.&lt;br/&gt;Unfortunately, the wealth of
applications that can be accurately modeled&lt;br/&gt;by using MINLP is not yet
matched by the capability of available&lt;br/&gt;algorithms and software. This
research will address the mismatch&lt;br/&gt;between natural optimization models
and available robust optimization&lt;br/&gt;solvers, developing and delivering
powerful new solvers for&lt;br/&gt;mixed-integer nonlinear programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research thrusts are in three main categories. In the
first thrust,&lt;br/&gt;the investigators study the structure of fundamental
MINLP models,&lt;br/&gt;developing preprocessing techniques and strong valid
inequalities. The&lt;br/&gt;second thrust, search, leverages the results of the
structural analyses&lt;br/&gt;to design search and partitioning strategies for
algorithms. The third&lt;br/&gt;thrust, implementation, focuses on implementing
the resulting&lt;br/&gt;algorithmic frameworks efficiently on modern
computational resources.&lt;br/&gt;The project has the transformative goal of
making MINLP into an area in&lt;br/&gt;which researchers and practitioners can
access robust tools and methods&lt;br/&gt;capable of solving a wide range of
important, commonly occurring&lt;br/&gt;decision support
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;