* 0830141
* IDBR: Genemeter: A Portable DNA Identification Device
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Nader Pourmand, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Cort L. Anderson
* 08/31/2010
* USD 419,332.00

This award is for the development of a "Genemeter," a portable or desktop device
for rapidly detecting and quantifying arrays of specific DNA targets at low
concentrations. This instrument will use Charge-Perturbation Detection (CPD).
CPD involves electronic detection with operational amplifiers circuitry, which
lends itself to miniaturization of the device. The goal is to develop a user-
friendly device that can also be used by non-experts, for example, in high
school educational activities. A desktop version of the device with a 6x6 array
will be developed by integrating a replaceable 6x6 electrode array sensor and an
automated, computer-controlled reagent dispensing system. Combined with a
desktop PC containing the appropriate hardware and software for signal data
acquisition, analysis and user interface, this system will lay the groundwork
for a more portable system developed at a later stage. The label-free electronic
detection method integrated into the proposed multiple-electrode system will
provide rapid and sensitive detection of genetic mutations and identification of
DNA sequences in a sample. The CPD detection system is predicted to be superior
to comparable detection systems in terms of speed, sensitivity, and cost. This
will be a robust and effective biosensor for many molecular research
applications and will constitute a major breakthrough in DNA-based biosensor
technology.

The Genemeter has the potential to profoundly influence the rapidly growing
field of molecular diagnostics in both academic research and healthcare
practice. Development of the Genemeter will be coupled with outreach in several
ways. Device prototypes will be tested in graduate and undergraduate molecular
biology courses at the university and at local Community Colleges. This wider
exposure of the instrument will give more students an opportunity to learn about
molecular biology and how the integration of multiple research fields can
produce exciting new technologies. In addition, some of the discoveries in
genomics and proteomics will be vividly displayed to high school students
through the integration of this low-cost Genemeter into laboratory curricula,
cultivating their scientific interests and helping to ensure the vitality of the
people-power pipelines needed for the nation's scientific enterprise.