* 0830825
* Community-Wide Ecological Displacement and Community Assembly
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2008,10/31/2010
* William Resetarits, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 10/31/2010
* USD 202,262.00

The competitive exclusion principle states that species with similar ecological
requirements will compete for limiting resources, and are unlikely to locally
co-exist. However, different abilities to exploit resources (e.g., different
morphologies) may foster coexistence and enhance local diversity. Differences
among species may pre-exist or may arise in contact with ecologi-cally similar
species. The latter phenomenon, character displacement (CD), is a logical out-
growth of competitive exclusion. Because of its potential for altering existing
biological forms and generating new biological forms, CD is the most important
and least understood ecologi-cal/evolutionary consequence of competition. In
particular, its potential for structuring ecologi-cal communities and for
enhancing local and regional biodiversity has not been thoroughly ex-plored. The
research evaluates the role of CD in species coexistence and local species
diversity arcoss heterogeneous landscapes. Focus of the project on mechanisms
maintaining and generating species diversity is timely given society's vested
interest in the maintenance of species diversity and its role in ecosystem
function. Extensive field sampling and detailed mechanistic experiments are
combined to examine CD in salamander species groups differing in numbers of
species and spe-cies identity at local and regional scales across the S.
Appalachians. Project involves a substan-tial team including post-docs,
undergraduates and graduate students, who get first-hand training in
quantitative ecological methods including quantitative field sampling and
analysis, conceptu-ally-based hypothesis testing, experimental approaches to
questions in evolutionary ecology, de-sign and use of experimental habitats, use
of computers in data acquisition and analysis, and ex-posure to all phases of
the scientific process from conceptualization to publication.