* 0830384
* Southwest  Center for Microsystems Education
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2008,01/31/2010
* John Wood, University of New Mexico
* Continuing grant
* Gerhard L. Salinger
* 01/31/2010
* USD 461,065.00

Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS) and Micro Systems Technology were
developed in parallel with the semiconductor industry, but are now experiencing
global growth on their own. The Southwest Center for Microsystems Education
(SCME) provides skill standards, curricula, educational materials, workforce
development modules, professional development and outreach activities directed
toward increasing the number and quality of technicians who can perform
microsystem design and manufacturing. The Center develops associate degree
programs in microsystem technology with industry-specific concentrations.
Designs and specifications for moderately priced learning laboratories for
educational institutions are produced, as are interactive multimedia
instructional modules for multiple work environments. Materials are designed for
career pathways for secondary school students. The Center works closely with the
University of New Mexico to develop strategies for cross- training technician
and engineering students and providing professional development for faculty and
industrial trainers. Sandia Laboratories provides a loaned executive to the
Center. The Center is also supported by ATE centers in biotechnology and
semiconductor manufacturing as well as other industries and industry
associations. Hispanic students and others from groups underrepresented in
technical manufacturing are made aware of careers in microsystems manufacturing.
A bi-national alliance is fostered to educate faculty at 54 technological
universities in Mexico.