* 0830493
* TF:SING: Exploring the Fundamental Limits of Cross-Layer Optimization in the Next-Generation Internet
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,05/31/2013
* Song Ci, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 05/31/2013
* USD 171,719.00

Although there has been a considerable amount of research done by using cross-
layer optimization, fundamental understandings on the design limits of cross-
layer optimization are still missing. The overarching goal of this project is to
fill this knowledge gap. The objectives are to 1) qualitatively characterize
multi-scale temporal-spatial behaviors of cross-layer optimization; 2) develop a
novel complexity-scalable framework to support cross-layer optimization over
heterogeneous network elements with different computation capabilities; and 3)
evaluate the proposed framework by using extensive simulations as well as field
test based on our existing testbed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits
and transformative significance of this project include: 1) to provide a
theoretical framework to understand major design tradeoffs in cross-layer design
and optimization and 2) to provide a common ground to quantitatively evaluate
and compare different cross-layer design schemes. By developing a new
theoretical framework to quantitatively analyze design tradeoffs in complex
system optimization, the broader impacts of this project are: 1) to benefit wide
applications in social networks, economics, physics, and biology, leading to a
profound impact on all societal levels and 2) to expand the existing
collaborations with industrial partners and enhance the ongoing effort on STEM
education. Results, outcomes, software tools, benchmarks, and educational
materials will be disseminated through a project?s web site as well as journal
and conference publications. The research results of cross-layer optimizations
will also be integrated into courses taught in the PI's university. &lt;br/&gt;