* 0830578
* Collaborative Research: Laplacian-Centered Poisson Solvers and Multilevel Summation Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Luke Olson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2011
* USD 147,999.00

Solvent interactions play a critical role in determining the structure
and&lt;br/&gt;function of biomolecular systems. However, accurate modeling is a
challenging&lt;br/&gt;task due to long-range correlations and vast numbers of
solvent atoms and ions.&lt;br/&gt;For very large systems, one method for
reducing this expense is the application&lt;br/&gt;of an implicit solvent model
which replaces the explicit atoms and ions with a&lt;br/&gt;dielectric
continuum. One of the more accurate implicit solvent models
is&lt;br/&gt;described by a generalized Poisson equation or Poisson-Boltzmann
equation with&lt;br/&gt;point charge source terms. Although the generalized
Poisson approach is&lt;br/&gt;considered in very many cases to be sufficiently
accurate, most current methods&lt;br/&gt;for approximating its solution have
been deemed prohibitively expensive for&lt;br/&gt;very large systems and for
applications requiring rapid repetitive evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project centers on the creation and analysis of algorithms of
unsurpassed&lt;br/&gt;effectiveness for approximating the solution to the
generalized Poisson&lt;br/&gt;equation (GPE) and its extensions. The approach
involves solving for an&lt;br/&gt;"effective charge distribution" given by the
Laplacian of the solution&lt;br/&gt;to the GPE. The corresponding electrostatic
potential can be recovered using&lt;br/&gt;a fast N-body solver. Broader impact
of this project will be realized through&lt;br/&gt;the incorporation of novel
algorithms in simulation software. Better methods&lt;br/&gt;and software in the
hands of scientists will enable biomolecular simulation of&lt;br/&gt;much larger
systems with improved accuracy which will result in contributions&lt;br/&gt;to
society. In addition, this project provides an opportunity for a
graduate&lt;br/&gt;student to engage in research that spans computer science,
physical science,&lt;br/&gt;and mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;