* 0830366
* MOD - Inspiration as Transmission of Creative Insight
* SBE,SBE
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2013
* Todd Thrash, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Maryann Feldman
* 12/31/2013
* USD 376,986.00

Scientists, inventors, writers, and other creators have attested to the
importance of inspiration in the creative process. In contrast, creativity
researchers have generally dismissed the concept of inspiration, arguing that
ascription of creative insight to the intervention of a supernatural source
("muse") is outmoded myth. However, it is possible to reconcile creators'
accounts of inspiration with contemporary science. Specifically, consistent with
creators' accounts, inspiration is posited to be an effect of creative insight,
not its cause; inspiration is posited to be a motivational state that is aroused
in response to a creative insight and that compels the individual to translate
the creative insight into a creative product. This perspective exposes an
important gap in the research literature. Creativity researchers have made
considerable progress in identifying the cognitive, neurological, and contextual
origins of creative insight (thus debunking the notion of Muse) but have largely
ignored the state of inspiration that promotes the translation of creative
insights into creative products. This oversight is striking, because the failure
to translate creative ideas into tangible products is likely to be among the
most important obstacles to innovation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
involves three primary goals. The first goal is to develop methods for the
assessment of inspiration and to provide evidence of their validity. Several
methods of assessment are being developed, including self-report questionnaires
and objective indicators derived, for instance, from digital video of nonverbal
behaviors and from electronic monitoring of the creative process. The second
goal is to demonstrate that inspiration is a robust predictor of creativity and
other socially valued outcomes, including work productivity and efficiency.
Several types of creative activity are examined, including invention, scientific
writing, and the writing of poetry. In each case, creativity is assessed
objectively (e.g., receipt of patents) or through a peer-review process. The
third goal is to establish the functional significance of inspiration by
integrating it with contemporary theories of personality and human motivation.
For instance, the personality traits that predict the creativity of an initial
insight are expected to be fundamentally different from the traits that predict
the tendency to become inspired to actualize the insight. In addition,
mysterious aspects of the subjective experience of inspiration, such as the
feeling that one is functioning as the mouthpiece of a power beyond oneself, are
expected to be explained by the involvement of implicit (unconscious)
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will have important impacts beyond
advancing the motivation, inspiration, and creativity research literatures. For
instance, the findings will be widely disseminated in the form of research
articles, book chapters, and conference presentations; tools for the assessment
of inspiration, known to be predictive of creativity, productivity, and
efficiency, will be available for use in the workplace and in educational
settings; and policy makers and others concerned with societal adaptation to
changing physical and sociopolitical environments will be equipped with well-
validated models of the processes through which innovative and transformative
ideas are translated into concrete products and solutions.