* 0830056
* Assembling the Tree of Life: Phylum Euglenozoa
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2014
* Mark Farmer, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 08/31/2014
* USD 2,582,500.00

An award has been made to Dr. Gregory Buck of Virginia Commonwealth University
for a study of genomic diversity and evolution in the Euglenozoa, a diverse
group of microscopic unicellular protists.. The group includes model organisms
as well as important human parasites. The evolutionary relationships of these
poorly studied unicellular organisms are not well understood. Euglenozoa are
micro-organisms of enormous significance to the environment, the economy, and to
public health. One group, the trypanosomatids, which are responsible for human
and agricultural diseases, have been extensively studied. However, other members
of the phylum have only been loosely characterized, and their taxonomic
relationships are very poorly defined. In this project, the genomes of five
exemplar species will be examined in detail, and a smaller set of genes from
each of several hundred strategically selected species of Euglenozoa will be
also examined and compared for a broad study of the group. The goal is to use
state-of-the-art gene sequencing technologies to elucidate the taxonomic and
evolutionary relationships of group. Novel strategies of computational biology
will be applied to develop new insights into how the diverse feeding and life
history traits of these organisms have evolved.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
project will provide training opportunities for undergraduates, graduate and
postdoctoral trainees at Virginia Commonwealth University, the University of
Georgia, and Michigan State University. Students will be recruited for a summer
program in bioinformatics and bioengineering to conduct independent research
related to this project. High school teachers and students from underrepresented
groups will also participate in the program. Three of the senior research
personnel on the project are Hispanic. The research on Euglenozoa will be
incorporated into several summer workshop programs for high school students, as
well as a graduate level course in evolutionary biology.