* 0830023
* SGER: Sequential Bayesian Decision Making for End-Point Detection and Control in Chemical Mechanical Planarization (CMP) Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Ranga Komanduri, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 06/30/2009
* USD 80,000.00

The objective of this Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) project is to
apply (probabilistic) decision theory to find a quantitative relationship that
connects the measured sensor signal features with the dynamic state and the
material removal rate in chemical mechanical planarization process for end-point
detection and control. The approach will be to use a sequential Bayesian model
to estimate at each time step the state of the process from the measured
vibration and other sensor signals. A utility function (of the process state and
decisions) will be defined, and evaluated at each time step. A decision on
whether to stop the machine or to continue polishing will be made at every time
step based on the alternative that minimizes the expected utility. The research
will combine the complementary expertise of the PIs in chemical mechanical
polishing science, sensors and signal analysis, and Bayesian decision
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the exploratory effort will
introduce a radically new approach, rooted in decision theory, for real-time
prediction and control of quality and productivity in semiconductor
manufacturing processes. This methodology can be extended to prediction and
control of quality and performance in other ultra-precision manufacturing
processes and complex systems. The sensor-networked polishing machine can serve
as a test bed for instruction and training of students as well as industry
personnel. This research will be integrated with the PIs' graduate courses. The
PIs will continue to involve undergraduate and graduate students from
underrepresented groups as part of their research. They will be exposed to
fundamental multi-disciplinary research and industry practices in advanced
manufacturing processes. The research highlights will be made available in the
PIs' website and published in various journals, trade magazines, and conference
proceedings.