* 0830808
* Geometric and Topological Analysis of Higher-Order Tensor Fields on Surfaces
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Eugene Zhang, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 08/31/2012
* USD 404,996.00

This research investigates theories and algorithms for the geometric analysis of
higher-order tensor fields and their applications to efficient surface
remeshing. Remeshing, the process of producing a new mesh from an input mesh to
improve its quality, has many applications that include shape modeling and
manufacturing, medical imaging, solid and fluid simulation, and architectural
design. Remeshing based on the intrinsic symmetries in the underlying surface
can afford more faithful shape representation and greater user control. Such
surface symmetries can be represented by higher-order tensors, whose analysis
can benefit a wide range of applications beyond geometry remeshing, such as
solid and fluid dynamics, electromagnetism, weather prediction, tsunami and
hurricane modeling, aircraft design and testing, biometrics, arts and
entertainment, motion analysis and synthesis, and education.

The project contains three research thrusts. First, the investigator explores
the connections between higher-order tensor fields on a surface and regular or
near-regular rotational symmetries. Second, the fundamental geometric and
topological properties of higher-order tensor fields are studied. Finally, such
knowledge is applied to obtaining efficient and highly controllable geometry
remeshing algorithms. To explore the connection between tensors and symmetries,
the investigator borrows results form existing work in tensor decomposition and
extends them to near-regular and mixed symmetries. Work from vector and tensor
field analysis is extended to higher-order tensor fields, and concepts such as
differential geometry and dynamics systems are applied to higher-order tensor
analysis. As a result of the research, the tensor analysis and remeshing
algorithms are integrated into a system. In addition, the implementations of
these algorithms, especially those supporting higher-order tensor analysis, are
compiled into libraries to facilitate integration into host applications that
requires higher-order tensor analysis. Both the system and its supporting
libraries will be disseminated to the public. With respect to its impacts on
education, the remeshing system and tensor analysis are integrated into the
curriculum for undergraduate students majoring in science and engineering.



