* 0830364
* NEESR-SD:  ExVis Tool and Case Study Implementation for the Visualization, Fusion, and Analysis of Experimental Test Data on Concrete Structural Walls
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2010
* Daniel Kuchma, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2010
* USD 80,000.00

This award is an outcome of the NSF 08-519 program solicitation George E. Brown,
Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES) Research (NEESR)
competition. This project will utilize the NEES equipment site at the University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. New tools for data visualization and analysis
are needed to take full advantage of the density of test data being collected in
NEESR projects. These tools should have similar functionalities as post-
processors for viewing and interpreting the results of finite element analyses
in which users are able to explore all aspects of structural response in the
context of its geometry and considering its material properties. The creation
and extensive use of these types of tools is critical for achieving the NEES
mission of creating more comprehensive and reliable computational models for use
in professional practice and research. As part of a project sponsored through
the National Academy of Sciences (NAS) and led by the PI of this project, a
significant advance was made to create a next generation tool for the
visualization, exploration, and analysis of experimental test data. This tool,
named ExVis for Experimental Visualization, integrates the data from multiple
measurement sources (load cells, displacement transducers, strain gauges, crack
maps, and absolute and relative target displacements) with the full geometry,
reinforcing details, and material properties of prestressed girders that were
load tested to failure as part of this NAS project. ExVis was only developed for
the specific geometry, properties, and instrumentation used in these test
girders and did not provide all desired functionalities for broader
applications. This project will expand and generalize the ExVis program
functionality through its use in providing an in-depth exploration and analysis
of the measured response of reinforced concrete structural walls that are being
load tested to failure at the Illinois NEES site as part of the project NEESR-SG
Seismic Behavior, Analysis, and Design of Complex Wall Systems. With respect to
intellectual merit, the development and use of ExVis will enable a deeper
examination of the measured response of test structures than was previously
possible. This will significantly advance the development, calibration, and
validation of constitutive relationships, behavioral models, and numerical
analysis tools. The project will also begin the difficult task of fusing test
data from multiple measurement sources that have different areas of coverage,
densities, and accuracies. With respect to broader impacts, this project will
illustrate the value of collecting and formatting dense experimental test data,
and thereby encourage researchers to gather more complete information about the
response of test structures. This will be achieved in part by uploading the
formatted experimental test data on the reinforced concrete structural walls to
a central archive and then providing direct access to the ExVis program for
researchers from the United States and abroad to explore this test data for
themselves. By providing this level of access, it will enable and encourage
others to make a critical review and use of test data which is a core mission of
NEES. The ExVis program will be open source as well as designed and documented
so that it can be expanded to provide new functionalities as well as to serve as
a prototype for the creation of even more comprehensive data visualization and
analysis tools. Data from this project will be made available through the NEES
data repository (http://www.nees.org).