* 0830235
* NEESR-SD: Development of a Real-Time Multi-Site Hybrid Testing Tool for NEES
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2009,02/29/2012
* Victor Saouma, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 02/29/2012
* USD 206,000.00

This award is an outcome of the NSF 08-519 program solicitation George E. Brown,
Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES) Research (NEESR)
competition. This project will utilize the NEES equipment sites at Lehigh
University and the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. The goal of this
NEESR-SD project is to develop, examine, implement, and demonstrate robust and
accurate synchronization control tools that provide the capability to conduct
real-time, multi-site experiment and simulation tests within the NEES framework.
The ability to conduct real-time, multi-site experiments and simulation tests
will allow NEES to reach its full potential as a distributed network of diverse
equipment sites. Geographically-distributed, real-time testing between multiple
NEES equipment sites will engage not just the diverse NEES experimental
facilities, all with unique experimental and simulation capabilities, but in
doing so will also bring together stakeholders with diverse backgrounds
throughout earthquake engineering community. This innovative test technique will
allow for larger and more complex experiments to be realized and provide
experimental information from dynamic loading conditions previously not
available. The project will develop simulation control algorithms necessary to
implement real-time, multi-site experiments and examine the sensitivities of
these algorithms to network delays, as well as measurement noise and variability
and uncertainty in model parameters. A series of tests are planned using a
small-scale system to develop and examine concepts and validate these methods
with a fully physical shake table test. A user interface tool, based on the NEES
Real-time Data Viewer (RDV), will be developed to facilitate conducting multi-
site hybrid tests. Large-scale, real-time, multi-site experiments on full-scale
NEES equipment will be conducted to demonstrate the application of these methods
within the NEES network. An Internet-based education and outreach tool that
accesses actual test data from the small-scale and large-scale tests will be
developed to demonstrate the tools and methodologies developed within this
research to the greater community. A training workshop will be held at the
Lehigh NEES facility at the end of the project to promote the distributed use of
NEES facilities through hybrid testing within both the NEES and the structural
control communities. The results will be disseminated through NEES
cyberinfrastructure, including NEEScentral, NEESforge and RDV.