* 0830601
* CAREER: Information-driven distributed coordination of mobile sensor networks in dynamic scenarios
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2008,02/29/2012
* Jorge Cortes, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 02/29/2012
* USD 283,719.00

Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;The emergence of low-cost, highly-autonomous vehicles
equipped with control, communication, sensing&lt;br/&gt;and computing
capabilities is paving the way for the deployment of mobile sensor networks in a
wide range&lt;br/&gt;of applications. Examples include environmental monitoring,
oceanographic research, high-stress, rapid de-&lt;br/&gt;ployment operations,
and health monitoring of civil infrastructure. In these envisioned applications,
many&lt;br/&gt;critical processes occur at temporal and spatial scales that
cannot be effectively sampled with current ap-&lt;br/&gt;proaches. Mobile sensor
networks hold the promise to provide the rich, in-situ spatio-temporal data
needed to&lt;br/&gt;revolutionize the detection, estimation, and monitoring of
dynamic natural phenomena. Controlled mobility&lt;br/&gt;integrated with
distributed data fusion capabilities will enable sensor networks to provide
broad spatial cov-&lt;br/&gt;erage, react to short-lived events in real time,
and track key processes that occur away from fixed sites.&lt;br/&gt;The state of
the art in distributed data fusion only considers static networks, and therefore
is not directly&lt;br/&gt;applicable to ad-hoc, dynamically changing mobile
networks. The state of the art in motion coordination&lt;br/&gt;of networked
systems has only developed centralized approaches to estimation and signal
processing. As a&lt;br/&gt;result of these limitations, current mobile networks
are too rigid to cope with the small-scale features and&lt;br/&gt;the rapid
evolution characteristic of many key physical processes.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit. The major objective of this project is the synthesis of scalable
coordination algorithms&lt;br/&gt;for mobile networks performing spatially-
distributed sensing tasks. Distributed strategies that maximize
the&lt;br/&gt;information content of collected data will allow future sensor
networks to adapt to changing conditions in a&lt;br/&gt;rapid, autonomous and
optimal fashion. To make this vision a reality, this project will address the
distributed,&lt;br/&gt;in-situ aggregation of data collected by mobile networks
in dynamic scenarios, and the information-driven,&lt;br/&gt;scalable
coordination of the network mobility to optimally perform the required sensing
tasks.&lt;br/&gt;The research plan will adopt an ambitious integrative approach
composed of three thrusts: (i) a sound,&lt;br/&gt;unifying framework where
different cooperative strategies can be rigorously formalized and compared.
This&lt;br/&gt;effort will facilitate the modular design of cooperative
strategies for complex sensing tasks via the combination&lt;br/&gt;of simpler
algorithms performing more basic objectives; (ii) system-theoretic tools to
evaluate the correctness,&lt;br/&gt;robustness and scalability properties of
coordination algorithms. To assess the optimal trade-offs
between&lt;br/&gt;performance and energy allocation in combined communication,
motion, and sensing scenarios, this research&lt;br/&gt;will evaluate complexity
measures for cooperative strategies and spatially-distributed tasks; and (iii)
novel,&lt;br/&gt;systematic design methodologies that allow to break down global
sensing tasks into local objectives for&lt;br/&gt;individual agents. This effort
seeks to synthesize fault tolerant, scalable algorithms that sit at the limits
on&lt;br/&gt;the achievable performance, operational time and energy consumption
of mobile networks conducting data&lt;br/&gt;fusion and estimation tasks. The
innovative technical approach builds on a set of very promising results
by&lt;br/&gt;the PI and collaborators, hinging upon disciplines such as
cooperative and topology control, automata and&lt;br/&gt;hybrid systems theory,
robotics, wireless communications, and operations research.&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts. The techniques developed in this work will help design autonomous and
efficient mobile&lt;br/&gt;networks performing critical tasks in homeland
security, industrial processes, health care and the environment.&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will lead to crosscutting and synergistic technologies
applicable to a wide range&lt;br/&gt;of scenarios where real-time information
gathering and data exploitation are important. The results will&lt;br/&gt;be
transferred to oceanographic and disaster management applications in
collaboration with the Monterey&lt;br/&gt;Bay Aquarium Research Institute, and
NASA Ames, respectively.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed educational activities are
integrated into the research plan and consist of the
following&lt;br/&gt;initiatives: (i) involvement of undergraduate students in
research via design projects, summer internships&lt;br/&gt;and engineering
research demonstrations in a newly-created laboratory environment; (ii)
development of an&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate course on \Motion Coordination" and a
graduate course on \Cooperative Mobile Networks";&lt;br/&gt;(iii) offering of a
course on control and robotics in the California State Summer School for
Mathematics and&lt;br/&gt;Science for high-school students, and expository and
research talks at community colleges near UCSC. Re-&lt;br/&gt;search and
educational materials will be made available to high-school teachers, the
scientific community and&lt;br/&gt;the general public via an interactive
website. Regular activities for broad dissemination (journal
publications,&lt;br/&gt;conference presentations, lecture notes) will also be
pursued. The evaluation of the educational activities,&lt;br/&gt;based on the
educational process and the students' outcomes, will be done in collaboration
with the UCSC&lt;br/&gt;Center for Teaching Excellence. Special attention will
be paid to integrate inclusive teaching practices into&lt;br/&gt;the daily
educational activity to address retention issues concerning underrepresented
students.&lt;br/&gt;