* 0830612
* Theory and Algorithms for Exploiting Sparsity in Signal Processing Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Bhaskar Rao, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2012
* USD 536,147.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This research examines theoretical, algorithmic, and
computational issues that arise in signal processing problems where there is a
need to compute sparse solutions. There are numerous signal-processing
applications where sparsity constraint on the solution vector naturally arises.
Brain imaging techniques such as MEG and EEG, sparse communication channels with
large delay spread, high-resolution spectral analysis, direction of arrival
estimation and compressed sensing are a few examples. The generalization and
extension of the sparse Bayesian learning (SBL) techniques considered in this
research will broaden the application domain and provide a very powerful
complement to the existing maximum a posteriori (MAP) methods commonly used and
in some cases even surpass them.&lt;br/&gt;The investigators study extensions
and generalizations of the sparse source recovery problem to greatly broaden the
application domain. A key consideration in the work is developing a rigorous
framework to deal with dependency in the sparsity framework. Motivated by
applications with sparse but local structure, the research considers intra-
vector dependency in the single measurement case, as well as intra-vector
dependency as required in the multiple measurement contexts, among others. The
research also includes the development of connections between multi-user
communication theory and the sparse signal recovery problem to shed light on the
stability with which sparse signal recovery is possible and to develop an
understanding of the limits of suboptimal source recovery methods. To deal with
non-stationary environments, the research develops on-line adaptive algorithms
that exploit the inherent sparse structure of the application. The research also
includes evaluation of the resulting algorithms in several important application
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Level of Effort Statement&lt;br/&gt;At the
recommended level of support, the PI and co-PI will make every attempt to meet
the original scope and level of effort of the project.