* 0830906
* Workshop: 2008 International Water Conference
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2010
* Diego Rosso, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Paul L. Bishop
* 08/31/2010
* USD 49,229.00

Proposal Title: Workshop: 2008 International Water Conference
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Copper, William
J.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of California - Irvine
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No: CBET-
0830906&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt
;The principal objective of this proposed workshop is to review the progress of
two international collaborative research projects on olive oil wastewater
treatment and reuse. Major activities include: (1) to review the technical
details of individual research efforts in the areas of water reuse and
specifically in the treatment of olive oil wastewater for agricultural reuse,
(2) to review results of bench-scale studies of olive oil treatment at the
Egyptian National Research Center and to study the potential of using the center
for long-term research collaboration, and (3) to assess research progress of
utilizing free radical chemistry as an advanced oxidation process for wastewater
treatment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed workshop is a continuation of two
previous workshops held in Jordan in December 2006 and in Egypt in May 2007. The
workshop held in 2007 was funded in part by NSF. The workshop will be held on
Friday afternoon, Dec. 5, 2008 in the Conference Center at University of
California, Irvine. The participants will have participated in the 2008
International Water Conference which will be held at UC Irvine, Dec. 1 - 5, 2008
(ending at noon). During the Conference there will be a session(s) that will
focus on various aspects of water treatment and water reuse and the participants
will be presenting papers in those sessions. The workshop Proper will occur
after the Conference and be open to anyone who attended the conference and that
is interested in this activity. The focus will be to establish path to future
research and collaboration.