* 0830929
* CT-ISG:   Power to the People:   Tools for Explaining Access-Control Consequences
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Daniel Dougherty, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Samuel M. Weber
* 08/31/2012
* USD 206,250.00

Project Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Without their realizing it, end-users
have been turned into authors of access-control policies. Everywhere from Google
to Facebook to Microsoft HealthVault and beyond, these policies are usually
hidden behind simple user interfaces, but ultimately the users are responsible
for setting and then taking responsibility for the consequences of these
policies. Indeed, the apparent simplicity of the interfaces sometimes belie the
significance of the outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because applications are a
black-box to end-users, it becomes difficult for users to predict the
consequences of an action. Users see only their view of the world, but their
access-control decisions affect the views of others. End-users need tools to
determine the effect of their decisions, with special emphasis on the effect of
policy changes. This project is developing user-friendly means to browse and
investigate the details of these effects and changes. The underlying techniques
are firmly grounded in theory, resulting in formal accuracy guarantees rather
than approximate answers. The tools themselves summarize information in ways
that account for the cognitive expectations and biases of
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this project comes from the
focus on end-users rather than programmers and other technical users. Some end-
users are too eager to embrace new technologies without fully appreciating their
consequences, while others are too tentative due to their concern about
(sometimes imaginary) problems they might create. The tools from this project
help the former become more cautious, and the latter more confident. The net
result should be a more savvy, yet vastly more inclusive, Cyber
society.&lt;br/&gt;