* 0830367
* Markov Chain Algorithms for Problems from Computer Science and Statistical Physics
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Dana Randall, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Balasubramanian Kalyanasundaram
* 07/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

Markov chain Monte Carlo algorithms have an astounding variety of applications,
including approximate counting, combinatorial optimization and modeling.
Determining the mixing time of Markov chains is often the vital step in proving
the efficiency of these approximation algorithms based on random sampling. The
primary goals of this project include: identifying problems amenable to this
approach, designing provably efficient algorithms for these problems, and
developing probabilistic arguments for their rigorous analysis. For each of
these goals, theoretical computer science has benefited greatly from
interactions with other disciplines, most notably statistical physics. In this
project, the investigator explores problems at the intersection of computation
and physics. The first half of the project examines computational problems
arising in nanotechnology, cellular-automata, and vision, where proposed
solutions are based on Markov chain Monte Carlo methods. The research examines
whether these heuristics are good solutions, and suggests more efficient
alternatives. The second part of the project explores some fundamental
connections between computer science and physics, including the relationship
between phase transitions in the underlying physical models and slow mixing (or
the inefficiency) of certain local sampling algorithms. In addition, this
research will be supplemented by an ongoing program on Discrete Random Sysstems,
co-organized by the investigator, and held jointly at Georgia Tech and the
DIMACS Center at Rutgers University. Over the next year the program will
conclude with additional workshops and working groups related to scientific
themes emerging from this interdisciplinary research area.