* 0830362
* (DAT) Impacts of Historically Black Institutions' Policies on Science and Engineering Education, Employment, Earnings and Innovation: A "Natural" Experiment
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Catherine Weinberger, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Joshua Rosenbloom
* 06/30/2013
* USD 392,518.00

It is often difficult to distinguish whether the graduates of a challenging
academic program are successful because of their educational experiences, or
whether the program simply selected individuals destined for success into the
program. It is usually impossible to conduct a true experiment with random
assignment of students to educational opportunities. However, large-scale shifts
in policy can serve as "natural experiments" that change the way students are
matched to educational programs and allow us to identify causal consequences of
education. The specific research question addressed by this project is: Do
institution-level shifts in the number of science and engineering degrees
conferred lead to measurable changes in graduate outcomes?for example: higher
earnings, increased participation in the science and engineering workforce, or a
larger probability of filing patents?relative to similar earlier graduates? And
how does the research inform the science of science policy?

Writing in 1994, William Trent and John Hill described a concerted effort by a
group of Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) to expand
educational opportunities in engineering, computer science and other technical
fields, "to prepare their students for expanded career choices." Preliminary
evidence suggests that a shift in the relative participation of black college
graduates in occupations related to engineering, math, computer science, or
physical sciences (EMS) occurred at about the same time. Furthermore, growth in
EMS college majors was particularly strong among students most likely to attend
HBCUs: those who attended high school in the South. The initial phase of this
project is designed to distinguish whether the growth was driven by HBCU
policies, or by change at other southern institutions. The second phase involves
assembling more than 30 years of data on the number and type of degrees
conferred by each U.S. institution of higher education (collected annually by
the U.S. Department of Education), analyzing the data to find other examples of
large institution-level (or state-level) shifts in the number of science and
engineering degrees conferred, and combining this information with data from
other sources to discover the resulting educational and economic impacts.

The initial phase of this research is designed to reveal the institution-level
processes underlying recent expansion of science and engineering participation
by a persistently underrepresented minority group. More generally, the research
project expands knowledge about the extent to which exposure to science or
engineering education at the undergraduate level changes the set of skills
college graduates bring to the labor market, and whether that change is
substantial enough to affect a whole host of outcome measures including
earnings, occupation, and patent activity.

Broader Impacts The knowledge gained from this research project informs
individual-level career-path choices as well as educational and workforce
policies. Educational materials appropriate for middle school or high school
students are intended teach fundamental mathematics concepts while they convey
motivating information-- derived from this research-- about the economic value
of pursuing academically challenging educational programs.