* 0830289
* TF-SING: Energy-Efficient Design in Wireless Networks Using Cooperative Communication
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,07/31/2009
* Jie Wu, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Eun K. Park
* 07/31/2009
* USD 277,000.00

This research involves one of the key challenges in wireless networks: how
&lt;br/&gt;to take advantage of new advances at the physical layer to push for
new &lt;br/&gt;design at the upper layers. The approach used is hitchhiking-
based cooperative &lt;br/&gt;communication (CC) that takes advantage of the
physical layer design that &lt;br/&gt;facilitates the combining of partial
information. A node can receive several &lt;br/&gt;partial signals and combine
these signals to retrieve the complete signal. &lt;br/&gt;Through effective use
of partial signals, a packet can be delivered with fewer &lt;br/&gt;nodes and/or
less transmission power at each node. The investigator proposes &lt;br/&gt;a new
weighted graph model that can capture the nature of CC. One key concept
&lt;br/&gt;proposed is the new notion of ?link? and ?path? on which other graph
&lt;br/&gt;terminologies can be defined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on this new
graph model, the research focuses on two types of &lt;br/&gt;power-efficient
design under CC: (1) Power saving protocols that put wireless &lt;br/&gt;nodes
into periodical sleep states while maintaining global ?domination? of
&lt;br/&gt;active nodes. (2) Power control for transmission energy consumption
by &lt;br/&gt;adjusting transmission ranges while maintaining global
?connectivity?. &lt;br/&gt;With these, this research presents a promising and
unique way of applying this &lt;br/&gt;graph model to energy-efficient design in
wireless networks. This research also &lt;br/&gt;involves the design of a
general methodology of localized solutions and applies &lt;br/&gt;it to address
various energy-related optimization problems under CC. The central
&lt;br/&gt;theme of this research fits well with the objective of the SING
program on &lt;br/&gt;fundamental theoretical and algorithmic studies involving
coordination and &lt;br/&gt;communication. The insights and results of this
research are expected to &lt;br/&gt;provide guidelines for energy-efficiency for
a wide range of wireless network &lt;br/&gt;applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;