* 0830368
* Open Patent
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Beth Noveck, New York Law School
* Standard Grant
* Joshua Rosenbloom
* 09/30/2012
* USD 399,075.00

Meritorious patents are a principal currency of an innovation-driven society.
They create an incentive for the production of novel inventions. But the
integrity of the patent system is compromised when, as the Commissioner of
Patents has noted, the United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) lacks
optimized informational resources to determine if a patent application reflects
a new and non-obvious invention, as the law requires. To date, scientific
researchers have been unable to help the USPTO find the information it needs.
The arcane language of patent applications conveys insufficient information to
enable effective communication among patent professionals and the community of
scientists and others in the public who would otherwise provide valuable
information and insight to the USPTO.

Tagging and visualization, two software-driven techniques that are used to
enhance access to digital information, are in common use in commerce, but they
have yet to be applied to a vast store of scientific information in the public
sphere, including patents. Tagging is the process by which a keyword is assigned
to an item of information; it describes the information and allows it to be
readily searched (e.g. labeling photos on web-based photo-sharing services). By
tagging different information with the same tag, associations can be made.
Visualization refers to a variety of techniques for graphically representing
relationships (e.g. graphical representations of census data or voting patters).
These two tools of tagging and visualization open great opportunities for using
science to unlock essential information and make it available in a useable form
that will benefit government, the scientific community and the public.

The Open Patent project, based at New York Law School's Center for Patent
Innovation, studies the application of tagging and visualization tools in the
context of patents. This project builds on New York Law School's Peer-to-Patent
pilot program, which it created in 2006, and launched in 2007, in cooperation
with the USPTO to improve the quality of information available to patent
examiners through on-line public participation. Using social networking tools,
the Peer-to-Patent website enables self-selecting technical experts to identify
and submit bibliographic information, known as prior art, relevant to examining
the claims of the patent application. Data from the first year of Peer-to-Patent
demonstrates that the public can, and does, contribute information that assists
patent examiners in more effectively determining patent eligibility.

Using data developed through the Peer-to-Patent project, the Open Patent project
takes as its premise that, for the patent system to continue to promote science
and innovation, new scientific tools are necessary to enable: patent examiners
to understand the claims of an application for which a patent is sought;
competitors to know the scope of a granted patent in order to innovate around
it; and the scientific and technical public to find and discuss patents related
to their research.

The Open Patent project takes advantage of information generated by reviewers in
the Peer-to-Patent project to study the effects of user-generated tagging and
visualization on the exchange of information in the patent process. Experts from
law, political science, information and computer science, library science and
design are engaged in developing user interfaces for the development of these
tags. The new approach should enable patent examiners and the participating
public to readily define and perceive patterns of association among information
relevant to patents. The hypothesis to be tested is whether enabling public
tagging of patents and applications will: 1) enable scientific research
communities to develop knowledge bases of patents relating to their area of
research; 2) produce a demonstrable increase in rates of public participation by
the scientific community in the USPTO public patent review program; and 3)
enable patent examiners to identify more relevant information to assist with the
patent examination process.

Broader Impacts: This research has ramifications for improving the quality of
issued patents and the exchange of information between a government agency and
the scientific public, on an international basis. In addition, this research
develops new models, analytic tools and datasets that can also be applied in the
science policy decision-making process in many other domains.