* 0830174
* Variables versus Size: Tradeoffs in Descriptive Complexity
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2008,01/31/2012
* Neil Immerman, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 01/31/2012
* USD 149,997.00

This project will develop a prototype system whose ultimate goal is to
automatically determine the complexity of a given combinatorial problem. Many
researchers have observed that naturally occurring problems tend to be complete
for one of a small handful of important complexity classes. Furthermore, they
are complete for these classes via the weakest imaginable reductions, namely
quantifier-free projections (qfps). It was shown by the investigator and his
coauthors that problems complete for the same class via qfps are isomorphic.
What this means is that although there is an arbitrarily rich class of different
computational problems, in practice we often encounter problems that look
different, but are essentially one of a handful of fundamental complete
problems. Now that SAT solvers have become so fast, this project will show that
it is feasible to use them to check whether or not (small) qfps exists between
all (small) instances of a given pair of computational problems. In this way, we
will often be able to automatically check whether reductions exist and thus
determine the complexity of a given computational problem. This research will
add to our understanding of the fundamental complexity of problems. In the
longer term, it will lead to improved algorithms that automatically derive
efficient data structures and algorithms for given computational problems.