* 0830730
* Collaborative Research: Research in Computational Complexity
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2010
* Vinodchandran Variyam, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 07/31/2010
* USD 104,086.00

Computational complexity theory focuses on understanding capabilities of
resource bounded computations. The broad goal of this project is to make
original contributions to certain topics in computational complexity theory.
Specifically, fundamental questions regarding the nature of unambiguous
computations and average-case complexity will be investigated. In the topic of
unambiguous computations, the role of unambiguity in small space computations
will be investigated. In average-case complexity, the relations between average-
case and the worst-case complexity of NP and various complexity classes that lie
in the Polynomial-time Hierarchy, will be
investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project addresses
several basic questions in computational complexity theory. The results from
this project will further our understanding of the nature of efficient
computation. Since the notion of efficiency is central to all other areas of
computing, this research has potential to scientifically impact these areas.
Research results from this project will be published in peer-reviewed journals
and will be presented at national and international conferences, thus enabling
broad dissemination of the the results to enhance scientific understanding. New
courses will be created and taught along the themes of this project, thus
integrating teaching and research. The grant will also be used for various human
resource development activities such as supporting and mentoring graduate
students and inviting visitors.&lt;br/&gt;