* 0830340
* Collaborative Research - MOD: The R&amp;D "Lab" of the Future: Foundations for Modeling the R&amp;D/Innovation Planning Process
* SBE,SBE
* 10/01/2008,03/31/2011
* Mariann Jelinek, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Julia I. Lane
* 03/31/2011
* USD 155,648.00

This project examines the information seeking and using behaviors of decision
makers who face decisions about their future R&amp;D investments. A number of
trends have made these decisions more uncertain, notably "Open Innovation," the
globalization of science and technology, increasingly diverse sources of
technical and scientific information, as well as the global outsourcing of
research to developing economies. There is substantial evidence that industrial
decision makers lack needed information; are unaware of available information;
or need a more inclusive model of appropriate decision processes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study sheds light on whether and why industry decision
makers choose global R&amp;D over U.S. R&amp;D. It does this by examining how
firms that are global innovators use information about scientific and technical
resources, together with other innovation-related data, to shape their
investment decisions and competitive strategies. The project is based on
collaboration with the Center for Innovation Management Studies and the
Industrial Research Institute (IRI), whose 250 members collectively fund and
conduct about 75% of U.S. industrial research. These firms' day-to-day R&amp;D
investment decisions are transforming traditional company-owned R&amp;D
laboratories into the "Laboratory of the Future" (LOF). Each firm's own "LOF"
may consist of a traditional laboratory, a collaborative laboratory, a virtual
laboratory or a network of external resources, including university researchers
in the U.S. or abroad, as well as government or private labs, collaborative
strategic partners, or simulation tools thus augmenting or even replacing
company owned physical labs. LOFs are highly likely to vary by industry and by
the competitive environment of the firm. The study examines participants'
discussions of these decisions and the information resources they use to decide
how to build their future innovation capabilities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
project analyzes the LOF discussion to reveal how R&amp;D managers think long-
term and strategically about what they do. The project documents information
seeking and information using behavior as exhibited in an on-line discussion by
the decision makers about the R&amp;D "LOF". In addition the research opens a
window into decision makers' rationales for their investment
commitments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Corporate R&amp;D executives
are making decisions now that will, in the aggregate, shape the LOF and affect
U.S. national innovation system. This project documents how they are making
those decisions, what information they are presently using, and what kinds of
data might be desirable for robust decisions. The project results inform both
decision makers in industry and policy makers about data and information sources
presently used, not used, and data not presently available but desirable for the
future.