* 0830288
* MOD and DAT:  Patent Pools and Biomedical Innovation
* SBE,SBE
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2014
* Josh Lerner, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Maryann Feldman
* 09/30/2014
* USD 400,000.00

ABSTRACT: The United States over the past two decades has seen an explosion of
patent awards across a wide variety of technologies, and a dramatic increase in
the volume of patent litigation between rivals. Numerous commentators have
suggested that the proliferation of these awards, known as "patent thickets",
has had socially detrimental consequences since overlapping intellectual
property rights may make it difficult for inventors to commercialize new
innovations. Patent pools, which can be defined as formal or informal
organizations where for-profit firms share patent rights with each other and
third parties, have been proposed as a way in which firms can address these
"patent thicket" problems. Patent pools have been most plentiful and well
established for decades in the information technology and communications
industries. In the past few years, the biomedical research community has
expressed increasing interest in patent pools as a potential solution for
increasingly prevalent patent licensing issues in biotechnology-related fields.
This project builds on the existing work on patent pools, trying to understand
how the issues faced in the biomedical industries are similar and different to
the issues in information technology and communication. The project combines
empirical and theoretical research in this endeavor in an academically rigorous
manner. The project is deepening our understanding of a crucial "knowledge-
sharing organization", an institution, like a standard-setting organizations or
open source project, where firms can strategically share knowledge.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS For scientists and others interested in
innovation policy, this project advances understanding of how patent thicket
problems can be addressed, and the strategies that are most likely to be
effective (as well as more problematic approaches). The project leaders are
ensuring that the findings of the study are diffused in a variety of outreach
efforts, in order to insure that the ideas can have the most impact. This takes
several forms. First, the project leaders are involving practitioners as well as
life scientists in the academic conference that is being organized on this
topic. As in earlier projects, the project leaders are participating in the
public policy process, explaining their findings. Finally, the project leaders
are disseminating the ideas more broadly through outreach to the popular press.