* 0830897
* USUCGER Workshop 2008: Research and Education Priorities for the Geotechnical Engineering Community; Sacramento, California; May 15, 2008
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2008,04/30/2010
* Anand Puppala, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 04/30/2010
* USD 35,858.00

&lt;br/&gt;This award funds a workshop to be held in May, 2008 to bring
together leading researchers and educators in geotechnical engineering. The
workshop is partly sponsored by the United States Universities Council on
Geotechnical Education and Research (USUCGER). The main objective of the
workshop is to foster interaction between participants for exchange of knowledge
and ideas and to develop specific plans for research and educational
collaborations. The workshop will be held be held on Sunday May 18, 2008 in
Sacramento, California to immediately precede the ASCE Geotechnical Earthquake
Engineering and Soil Dynamics IV Conference, also scheduled for Sacramento. This
will allow for maximizing the participation as well as the&lt;br/&gt;exposure of
the workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will have the general theme of
identifying geotechnical research and education priorities and fostering
relations to promote effective collaborations on these topics. Research,
education, and mentoring panel sessions that include leading experts from a
variety of perspectives will highlight this theme. For the research panel,
speakers/representatives from NSF/NEES, Industry, Geo-Bio area, transportation
area, energy area, and one of the contributors to the NRC report "Geological and
Geotechnical Engineering I n the New Millennium: Opportunities for Research and
Technological Innovation?. For the education panel, general issues that will be
addressed include: assessment, Body of Knowledge (BOK), broad dissemination of
geotechnical modules to other supporting disciplines, improving recruitment and
retention of underrepresented groups in geotechnical engineering, and the
implications of ASCE Policy 465 on graduate geotechnical education. A mentoring
session will also be held that addresses young faculty members? issues such as
tenure; funding; and education, research, and service issues. Sufficient time is
permitted in the workshop schedule to allow for open discussion among workshop
participants, questions, and exchange of ideas among workshop
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will bring together prominent
researchers, educators, students, and practitioners from U.S. institutions.
Significant advancements can be made in identifying research and education
priorities, challenges, and opportunities in geotechnical engineering.
Incorporating knowledge from other disciplines (geo-bio, transportation, and
energy) on emerging issues will increase the awareness of the attendees in these
areas for developing effective research plans. The technical and educational
outcomes of the workshop will be disseminated through reports, presentations,
and the USUCGER website. Advancements in geotechnical engineering provide
improved safety and functionality of infrastructure, better environmental
protection, and overall improved the well being of the public at large. Societal
outcomes of the workshop also include positively influencing participation of
underrepresented groups in science and engineering, developing education
opportunities for graduate and post-graduate students, and establishing baseline
curricula for undergraduate and graduate geotechnical education for
2008.&lt;br/&gt;