* 0830186
* MOD:  Funding R&D when Ideas are Scarce
* SBE,SBE
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Suzanne Scotchmer, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Joshua Rosenbloom
* 08/31/2011
* USD 369,513.00

The investigators study R&D environments where opportunities to invest are
constrained by imagination as well as by resources. This simple and realistic
premise has many implications for the design of intellectual property, as well
as for other institutions that support R&D.

First, since ideas for investments do not arrive simultaneously, there is a
tradeoff between preserving options and the cost of delay. Investing early can
preempt investments in better ideas that arrive later. An incentive problem
arises because a private recipient of an idea may not reap the social benefit of
preserving options. This leads to the question of how to organize incentives so
that recipients of ideas take account of social options.

The investigators characterize a socially optimal threshold for accepting an
idea rather than discarding it. The threshold is on the net social value. They
prove that the threshold should become less discriminating as time passes
without filling the market niche. They then study how reward mechanisms can (or
cannot) achieve that outcome.

Patents are an imperfect tool because their private value cannot be tailored to
R&D cost. Patent value does not scale with social value. In the special case
where ideas differ only in the quality of the innovation, but not in R&D cost,
patents will over-encourage low-cost ideas with low quality, and under-encourage
high-value ideas that also have high cost. Prizes might do better, for example,
when ideas differ only in their R&D costs. The prize should increase with delay.

Second, because ideas must be compared in order to find the best one, it may be
optimal to collect ideas, as venture capitalists do. The investigators
illuminate the tension between the social benefits of allowing venture
capitalists to collect and screen ideas, and the competitive goals of the patent
system. They show that the optimal reward system must be more generous when
ideas are aggregated in the hands of a few venture capitalists than when widely
dispersed.

Third, the scarcity of ideas explains the open-source movement in a new way. In
many arenas, there cannot be ideas for further advance unless previous
technologies are disclosed. If ideas are scarce, the relevant disclosure cannot
be accomplished under contract, because it is not known where the next idea will
surface. The disclosure and sharing obligations of the open source community
overcome this problem.

Finally, the scarcity of ideas has implications for public funding. Unlike
patents and prizes, public support can be given when the innovator actually
needs it, which is before investing. However, giving the money in advance
creates a problem for knowing which researchers to fund, especially when the
researchers have different idiosyncratic ideas, and different idiosyncratic
capabilities. The investigators characterize the optimal blend of pre-screening
and experience rating, especially when it is understood that even good ideas may
fail.

The project brings economic theory into closer contact with the R&D experience
of recent decades. For example, the scarcity of ideas should lead to economic
profit, as it did in Silicon Valley in the 1990s, rather than to the profit
dissipation predicted by patent races.

The project's broader impact is on the design of programs for funding R&D.