* 0830949
* Collaborative Research:   CT-M:   Privacy, Compliance and Information Risk in Complex Organizational Processes
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* Andre Scedrov, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 08/31/2014
* USD 250,000.00

Modern organizations, such as businesses, non-profits, government agencies, and
universities, collect and use personal information from a range of sources,
shared with specific expectations about how it will be managed and used.
Accordingly, they must find ways to comply with expectations, which may be
complex and varied, as well as with relevant privacy laws and regulations, while
they minimize operational risk and carry out core functions of the organization
efficiently and effectively. Designing organizational processes to manage
personal information is one of the greatest challenges facing organizations
(see, e.g., a recent survey by Deloitte and the Ponemon Institute [TI07]), with
far-reaching implications for every individual whose personal information is
available to modern organizations, i.e., all of us.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project responds to these challenges by developing methods, algorithms and
prototype tools for integrating privacy, compliance, and risk evaluation into
complex organizational processes. It explores, articulates and characterizes
formally the scope and nature of privacy-expectations of stakeholders as well as
those of key regulations, such as HIPAA, GLBA, COPPA, BASEL 2, and Sarbanes-
Oxley (SOX). It incorporates the diverse perspectives and areas of expertise of
its multidisciplinary research team, which includes three computer scientists,
one philosopher, and collaborating researchers from IBM. This industry
connection facilitates interaction with product teams that have served complex
organizations concerned with business process integrity, information security,
privacy, and information risk management. The research builds on "contextual
integrity" (a philosophical account of privacy) as well as language and risk-
based methods for privacy policy specification and enforcement. Extensive
training and educational opportunities are provided to undergraduate and
graduate students and research results integrated into courses at CMU, NYU,
Stanford, and UPenn. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;