* 0830207
* TLS- Measuring and Tracking Research Knowledge Integration
* SBE,SBE
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Alan Porter, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Joshua Rosenbloom
* 08/31/2012
* USD 402,530.00

Enhanced Science of Science and Innovation Policy depends on better metrics. You
can't manage what you can't measure. This is particularly true for
interdisciplinary research, which currently has few generally agreed-upon
measures with acceptable degrees of accuracy. Researchers at the University of
Sussex have begun to address this problem by developing a conceptual framework
to gauge research diversity. The current project builds upon that conceptual
framework to empirically test metrics that gauge the interdisciplinarity of
particular bodies of research. One proposed key measure assesses the degree to
which particular research papers, or collections of such, integrate research
knowledge from diverse research domains. A second measure determines the degree
of specialization of collections of research papers (e.g., those published by a
particular research center or those of a research area such as quantum dots).
The resulting measures help track and characterize the emergence of new
(interdisciplinary) research areas.

The project described in this proposal seeks to generate analytical algorithms
for indicators of interdisciplinarity. It also seeks to visually depict
knowledge interchanges among areas of research activity. Such science maps can
help identify and characterize focused areas of research--domains--that are
sources of knowledge used by other domains. They can also show the extent of
intellectual and social networking among both domains and contributing
institutions. This project will, through US-UK collaboration, develop effective
means to apply and test these new metrics.

The proposed project focuses on nanoscience and nanoengineering ("nano"), an
emergent research domain of considerable significance that extends well beyond
traditional disciplinary boundaries. Georgia Tech has assembled a substantial
nano dataset that will serve as the main testbed for computing and assessing
indicator variations. The research team will generate indicator sets and maps of
selected nano sub-topics (e.g., molecular motors research). These indicator sets
and maps will be shared with researchers and R&D managers to gauge their
validity and utility. Taking into account feedback, the research team will then
develop a taxonomy of nanotechnology research activity based on identification
of coherent research sub-areas.

Broader Impacts: These tools better enable scientists, science managers, and
Federal science and regulatory agencies to gauge and track cross-domain
knowledge transfers. Failure to recognize the full extent and complexity of
these patterns could result in major funding and regulatory mistakes. The new
indicators and accompanying maps help identify leverage points likely to spark
advances in science, technology, and innovation. They can also facilitate
graduate education by identifying convergent knowledge domains - potentially
emerging "interdisciplines." Better understanding of research landscapes can
help orient graduate curricula and spotlight promising dissertation topics. More
accurate interdisciplinarity measures also contribute to an ongoing National
Academies initiative to bolster interdisciplinary research across the US.