* 0830780
* Collaborative Research:  Matrix-Model Machine Learning:  Unifying Machine Learning and Scientific Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Heng Huang, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2012
* USD 115,983.00

Collaborative Research: Matrix-Model Machine Learning: unifying machine learning
and scientific computing&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To analyze the ever-growing
massive quantities of data for pattern recognition and knowledge discovery,
effective machine learning models and efficient computational algorithms are
essential tools. The goal of this research is to establish a theoretical
foundation for solve challenging machine learning problems utilizing
matrix/tensor computational methodologies, leveraging over the success of
scientific computing over recent decades - including well-developed algorithms
and mature, freely-available software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research begins
with a critical connection between machine learning and scientific computing: an
effective global solution to K-means clustering algorithm is provided by the
principal component analysis which is based on singular value decomposition
(SVD). This fundamental relationship will be systematically extended to
matrices, tensors and multi-relational data, to deal with increasingly higher
dimensions, multiple indexes and data types. The key goal of this research is to
establish that well-known scientific computing techniques such as SVD, matrix
and tensor decompositions can be directly utilized for pattern discovery, and
further develop these computational methodologies for semi-supervised learning,
clustering and classification. The focus will be on multi-index data (tensors,
such as a sequence of weather maps or a sequence of traffics over a network) and
multi-relational data (multiple pairwise relations, such as protein domains ?
proteins ? pathways or words ? documents ? authors). Applications in genomics,
text mining, and computer vision will be investigated. &lt;br/&gt;