* 0830261
* MOD - Dynamics of Creativity and Innovation in Virtual Scientific Commons
* SBE,SBE
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Levent Yilmaz, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Joshua Rosenbloom
* 09/30/2012
* USD 315,029.00

Scientific communities in cyber-enabled infrastructures are socio-technical
innovation systems that exhibit the characteristics of self-organizing complex
adaptive systems. Using empirically grounded and conceptually valid agent
simulation models of science, the project explores minimal structural and
behavioral conditions, that is, the simplest set of assumptions, for the
emergence and sustainment of creativity and innovation in Scientific Commons
(SCs). The computer-aided ethnography software, called SC Browser, facilitates
ethnographic observation of the social and technical networks in communities
such as CreativeCommons, Scholarpedia, CollabRX, and OpenWetWare. Inspired by
the Actor-Network Theory that focuses on translation networks involving human,
symbolic, and physical actors, SC Browser is an advanced analytical tool that
aggregates views of interaction among actors and at the same time preserve
access to raw research material data sets for qualitative analysis and
foundational hypothesis generation to construct computational simulations and to
study co-evolution of scientific knowledge, community, and domain practices in
the context of systems model of creativity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The simulation
study (1) considers the discourse of scientific activity, including the
contribution of new knowledge in virtual scientific commons, growth of the
domain knowledge, and the clustering of research into specialties, (2) views
science as an autonomous and self-regulating socio-cognitive system through the
introduction of motivation and competitive nature of knowledge production, and
(3) explores the impact of alternative community cultures (e.g., exploration-
oriented, service-oriented, and utility-oriented), peer evaluation styles (e.g.,
centralized, decentralized) on the sustainability and innovation potential of
SCs. Besides advancing the socio-technical and cultural understanding of cyber-
enabled innovation communities, the project produces an integrated and
customizable agent simulation framework, called SciSIM, for science policy
mechanism design and decision analysis for virtual scientific communities to
improve sustainable innovation. Using SciSim, the project demonstrates how
social networks and market mechanisms provide a sound formal basis to study
dynamics of scientific communities using reliable and valid structural and
organizational climate metrics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
project aims to facilitate training of students to develop computational
thinking skills in Science and Technology (S&amp;T) studies. As such, this
research is expected to advance the state of the art in S&amp;T curriculum via
introduction of computational models as pedagogical instruments. Furthermore,
the simulation environment and its associated models can be used by NSF
administration for use as a computational laboratory for science policy
analysis. Along with the findings of earlier work on Open Source Communities,
this project aims to derive of common unifying principles innovation in
scientific commons and their documentation via a book on the topic of
Sustainable Creativity and Innovation in User Innovation
Communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;