* 0830173
* NEESR-SG: Performance-Based Design and Real-time Large-scale Testing to Enable Implementation of Advanced Damping Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2010
* Billie Spencer, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 02/28/2010
* USD 1,200,000.00

This award is an outcome of the NSF 08-519 program solicitation George E. Brown
Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES) Research (NEESR)
competition and includes Washington University (lead institution), Lehigh
University (subaward), the University of Illinois Champaign-Urbana (subaward),
City University of New York City College (subaward), and the University of
Connecticut (subaward). This project will utilize the NEES equipment site at
Lehigh University. Advanced damping systems have demonstrated great promise for
seismic hazard mitigation. The adaptability of structures using these versatile
devices to severe loading conditions is expected to facilitate major advances in
the ability to achieve performance-based design of structures. However, such
innovative systems have been slow to be used in practice due to a lack of
appropriate design procedures and adequate testing methods to validate these
systems. Effective implementation of this technology will require establishing
and validating performance-based design methodologies that best exploit their
unique damping capabilities. Large-scale testing for model validation and
performance assessment can best be achieved through pseudo dynamic (PSD) test
methods on large scale structures. However, when these dampers are integrated
into a structural system, they exhibit several types of complex behaviors that
cannot adequately be reproduced at less than real-time. Recently developed real-
time hybrid testing methods allow greater abilities regarding the types of
structures and systems that can be tested. These methods need to be validated
for complex structural systems. These are compelling reasons for conducting an
integrated study focusing on large-scale testing of structures equipped with
such damping devices to: i) demonstrate a typical performance-based design
methodology for a structural system employing advanced damping devices; ii)
validate an appropriate large-scale testing technique for validation and
acceptance of new damping systems; iii) validate novel real-time PSD testing
methodologies for large-scale structural systems in this class; and iv) educate
practitioners and students on these technologies, enabling implementation of
advanced damping systems in the United States. Magnetorheological fluid devices,
a particularly promising damping system, will be used in the experiments to
leverage prior funding. With proper use, these devices can also mimic a wide
variety of passive damping systems, allowing for establishment of a testbed for
future researchers. This project will result in the development of appropriate
performance-based design procedures and simulation capabilities regarding
advanced damping systems, as well as validation of such damping technologies for
civil engineering applications, realizing the fundamental vision behind NEES.
The successful validation of an effective real-time PSD testing method for
large-scale, complex structures will break down the barriers currently
preventing the validation of such innovative systems at large-scale, and will
enable real-time PSD testing throughout NEES, leading to the possibility of
sophisticated testing of more complex structures than have ever been tested
before. International partnerships with researchers in Europe, Japan and China
are established to draw upon relevant expertise and to enhance the impact of
this integrated research and education program. Industrial collaborators will
provide the perspective of and needs for the practicing engineering community.
Education and technology transfer plans are focused on targeting a diverse
audience at all levels including: graduate and undergraduate students through
research, course modules, and training on testing procedures and equipment;
regional K-12 students through existing partnerships; and practicing engineers
through a NEES webinar. To further increase the participation of
underrepresented students in these research and educational opportunities, City
College of New York (a minority institution, a Hispanic serving institution and
LSAMP member) is a partner in all aspects of this effort. The project website
will house educational outcomes and information for interested researchers,
practicing engineers and students. NEES tools and capabilities will play an
integral role in conducting the experiments, project execution, and archiving
and sharing the data. Data from this project will be made available through the
NEES data repository (http://www.nees.org).