* 0830680
* TF-SING: A Theoretical Foundation of Spatio-Temporal Mobility Modeling and Induced Link-Level Dynamics
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Wenye Wang, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2012
* USD 270,000.00

The usage of wireless devices unavoidably induce user mobility in diverse
settings over multiple space/time scales, ranging from traditional cellular
phone users and Wi-Fi users in moderate-to-dense networks, to nomadic users and
mobile robots/sensors in multi-hop wireless ad-hoc networks and
delay/disruption-tolerant networks over larger space/time scales. As mobile
communications go to large-scale and social networks, there is an acute and
timely demand for exploring fundamental principles in mobility-induced link-
level dynamics, which has not been studied systematically, but have tremendous
impact on a wide range of research areas, such as theoretic limits of
algorithms, and protocols in mobile networks, optimization techniques for
performance analysis and estimation, network architecture and topology control,
distributed sensor-actuator networks, and modeling of social
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to develop a
theoretical foundation for wireless mobile networks, through characterization of
link-level dynamics by stochastic analysis approach. Specifically, the research
focuses on (i) modeling, analysis, and statistical characterization of mobility-
induced link dynamics, (ii) spatio-temporal dynamics in mobility modeling in
multiple space/time scales rather than being dependent on networking
environments a priori, and (iii) scaling limits for link-level metrics under
various network operating regimes. The theoretical foundation of mobility
modeling, which integrates multidisciplinary characteristics, will be used as an
experimental concentration area to initiate innovative curriculum design of
network science. The investigators develop new courses on networking theory,
starting from graduate-level and transit to under-graduate level, by
demonstrating the charm and rigorousness of theoretic work in tangible,
attractive wireless mobile applications to undergraduate students and K-12
students.&lt;br/&gt;