* 0830328
* NEESR-SG: Understanding and Improving the Seismic Behavior of Pile Foundations in Soft Clays
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2013
* Steven Vukazich, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,188,411.00

&lt;br/&gt; This award is an outcome of the NSF 08-519 program solicitation
"George E. Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES)
Research (NEESR)" competition and includes the University of Oklahoma (lead
institution), Iowa State University, San Jose State University (a predominately
undergraduate institution), Earth Mechanics, Inc., and Advanced GeoSolutions,
Inc. This project will utilize the NEES equipment sites at the University of
California, Davis and the University of California, Los Angeles.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Pile foundations are an integral part of many civil
engineering structures. The seismic behavior of pile foundations is a very
complex problem with interactions between soils (solid skeleton, pore water, and
pore air), piles, and superstructure. This complexity is further exacerbated
when weak soils such as soft clays and liquefiable loose sands surround the pile
foundation. The behavior of pile foundations in liquefiable sands has been
studied extensively; however, similar investigations for soft clays or seismic
response of piles in improved soils have been rarely performed. The current
seismic design practice calls for avoiding inelastic behavior of pile
foundations by restricting their lateral displacements because it is difficult
to detect damage to foundations following an earthquake. Limiting the lateral
displacement of a pile foundation is relatively easy to achieve in competent
soils. In the case of weak soils, the current practice is to use an increased
number of more ductile, larger diameter piles that are difficult to design and
expensive to construct. An innovative, and perhaps more cost-effective, solution
to this problem is to improve the soil surrounding the pile foundation. For
structures undergoing seismic retrofit with existing pile foundations in weak
soils, in certain instances, improving the soils may be the only option to
improve the seismic behavior of the foundation. This technique is not widely
used in seismic regions due to lack of fundamental understanding of the behavior
of improved and unimproved soils and the interactions between them as well as
with the piles during earthquakes. As a first step in a long term objective of
understanding and improving the seismic behavior of pile foundations in all weak
soils, the proposed research will focus on soft clays. Soft clays are quite
prevalent in earthquake prone areas of the U.S., but have received little
attention from the research community. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; Following are
some of the unanswered research questions that have to be addressed before
ground improvement can be used as a viable option to enhance the seismic
response of pile foundations in soft clays in routine design practice: (1) What
are the effective techniques for improving soft clays around pile foundations
for both seismic design and retrofit? (2) How can we analyze, simulate, and
design pile foundations in soft clays with ground improvement for earthquake
loads? (3) How do individual piles and pile groups, with and without ground
improvement, behave during seismic events and how can we validate our analysis
and simulation tools and designs? And (4) how can we translate our understanding
into a useful design methodology to benefit the broader earthquake engineering
community? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The intellectual merit of this work is that
the above mentioned research questions will be systematically addressed using a
multidisciplinary team consisting of structural and geotechnical engineers and
industrial partners who have extensive experience in ground improvement
techniques and seismic design of pile foundations. Innovative centrifuge and
full-scale field tests using NEES facilities and equipment, simplified analysis
methods, and sophisticated fully coupled simulation techniques will be utilized
to understand and improve the seismic behavior of pile foundations in soft
clays. The research results will be translated into a useful design methodology
and tools that will benefit the entire earthquake engineering community
immediately as well as influence the long term practices. Simple analysis
methods will serve the immediate needs of the industry while sophisticated
simulation techniques are expected to show the limitations of the simple
analysis methods and impact the long term industry practices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; In addition to benefiting the earthquake engineering
community, the broader impacts of the proposed project include the integration
of the proposed research into education at K-12 and undergraduate and graduate
levels using the knowledge gained from innovative curriculum projects currently
underway or already implemented. The proposed education plan includes a seismic
design project that spans multiple courses for undergraduate and graduate
students, a web-based simulation competition for high school students, and an
adventure scenario based learning module for middle and elementary school
students. Data from this project will be made available through the NEES data
repository (http://www.nees.org). &lt;br/&gt;