* 0830939
* NECO:   Protocol Design for Distributed Delaunay Triangulation and Its Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Simon Lam, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 08/31/2012
* USD 400,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;NSF NeTS-NECO Proposal 0830939: Protocol Design for Distributed
Delaunay Triangulation and Its Applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Delaunay triangulation (DT) of a set of points in
Euclidean space has many applications in different fields of science and
engineering. A distributed DT can be used to improve performance for a variety
of networks (e.g., P2P, overlay, sensor, and wireless networks) as well as
simulation-type applications, including distributed virtual reality systems and
multiplayer online games. The discovery of a necessary and sufficient condition
for a correct distributed DT is the basis of protocol design in this project for
a dynamically changing system of nodes (in d-dimensional space, d &gt; 1) to
construct and maintain a distributed DT. In addition to correctness and
efficiency, accuracy is used as a performance metric because it is impossible to
maintain a correct distributed DT continually (correctness of a distributed DT
is broken as soon as a join, leave or failure occurs). A suite of protocols is
designed that recovers quickly from incorrect system states such that a system
that has been under ?churn? converges to 100% accuracy quickly after churning
stops. Expected results include (i) the design of an improved protocol suite
that is an order of magnitude more efficient than existing protocols and still
satisfies requirements of correctness and accuracy, and (ii) protocols to
construct a distributed Euclidean minimum spanning tree for systems under churn.
Network application protocols are also designed for greedy routing, finding the
closest node, broadcast, multicast, geocast, and clustering. The performance of
these protocols for network nodes with inaccurate (or virtual) coordinates is
being investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigator: Simon S.
Lam&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;List of Active Grant Awards&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. NSF
NeTS-NECO Proposal 0830939: Protocol Design for Distributed Delaunay
Triangulation and Its Applications, 9/1/08 to 8/31/11&lt;br/&gt; Support for
Simon Lam from this grant: 1 summer month (2009, 2010,
2011)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. NSF CNS-0434515: NeTS-NR: A Novel Technique to
Detect Shared Congestion and Applications, 10/01/04 to 9/30/08.&lt;br/&gt;
Support for Simon Lam from this grant: none (grant expires on
9/30/08)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. NSF CNS-0627020: Collaborative Research: NeTS-
NBD: Traffic Engineering in an Uncertain World, 9/1/06 to 8/31/09.&lt;br/&gt;
Support for Simon Lam from this grant: 1 summer month
(2009)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;