* 0830402
* Geometric and Combinatorial Algorithms for Optimal Surface Segmentation in Medical Images
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Xiaodong Wu, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 08/31/2012
* USD 178,121.00

Efficient detection of globally optimal surfaces representing object boundaries
in volumetric images is fundamental and remains challenging in modern computer-
assisted medical diagnosis and treatment and many other important medical
applications. This research deals with specific problems of detecting optimal
single and multiple interacting surfaces in volumetric image datasets. It
permits identification of optimal surfaces of terrain-like shapes, cylindrical
shapes, and complex shapes. Image data sets we consider have various different
image features, such as edge, texture, and shape. The essence of these problems
is to solve a number of important geometric optimization problems belonging to
the fundamental topics of computational geometry, such as surface
identification, geometric partitioning, geometric k-means clustering, and metric
labeling. The research focus of this project is on developing efficient
algorithms and novel techniques for solving these crucial problems with a
provably global optimality. The application of geometric and combinatorial
techniques to medical problems is intellectually deep and can result in advances
in both theoretical computer science and medicine. The proposed image analysis
methods allow evaluating the image data objectively in a quantitative manner,
promising to substantially impact image-based clinical care. An important goal
of this research is dissemination of implemented algorithms in software to
application domains. In doing this, it helps to bring together the computer
science and the medical community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: We
expect this project to make a number of theoretical contributions: (1) providing
new algorithmic techniques for solving a set of crucial computational problems
confronted by current medical research and applications; (2) introducing fresh
and theoretically interesting problems and algorithms to geometric and
combinatorial optimization, enriching and prodding further development of the
field; (3) presenting new challenging problems and new approaches to other
theoretical areas such as graph algorithms and operations research, and bringing
new applications to these areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
successful completion of this project will result in methodologies that greatly
accelerate the pace of 3-D and 4-D medical image processing. The automated image
segmentation software will be platform independent and will directly address the
needs of a broad base of end users across a wide range of disciplines from basic
research to clinical medicine. The proposed image analysis tools will provide
clinicians with the means to assess diseased organs in 3-D and 4-D, rather than
in 2-D as is typically done in conventional practice. In addition, infusion of
the research results into the classroom provides students with a unique
opportunity to study and practice in the emerging important interdisciplinary
area involving computer science and modern medicine, promotes interdisciplinary
learning, and enables the training of more versatile
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;