* 0830233
* DAT The Rise of International Co-Invention:  A New Phase in the Globalization of R&amp;D
* SBE,SBE
* 09/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Francisco Veloso, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Joshua Rosenbloom
* 09/30/2012
* USD 285,687.00

The geography of innovation is shifting, and emerging economies in areas like
China, India, and Eastern Europe are poised to play an increasingly important
role in the global innovation system. While this shift is currently at an early
stage, its reality is increasingly accepted by economists, corporate R&amp;D
managers, and policymakers. The shift has raised profound scientific questions
as well as significant policy concerns. Standard theories view the emergence of
innovative capacity in frontier technologies as one of the final stages in a
development process that usually stretches over decades. China and, especially,
India are still in the early stages of this conventional development process,
yet they are already hosting R&amp;D centers sponsored by the world?s
technologically elite firms. Is the conventional understanding now obsolete?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tracking patents granted by the patent agencies of the
United States and Europe to inventors based in emerging economies provides a
useful way of measuring the shift in R&amp;D to these regions. Investigation of
these patents highlights the importance of a phenomenon that may partially
explain this shift. A large and growing fraction of these patents result from
international coinvention ? that is, teams of researchers based in different
countries combining their skills and knowledge to generate patented inventions.
Analysis of coinvented patents suggests the R&amp;D process can increasingly be
disaggregated into multiple stages, which are then each located where they can
be undertaken at lowest cost. This project combines quantitative and qualitative
techniques to assess the degree to which an international division of R&amp;D
labor is emerging, from which both developing and developed nations can benefit.
The project also measures the degree to which international coinvention has
driven growth in the quantity and quality of research activity in emerging
regions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Implications for U.S.
Technological Leadership. The shift in the geography of innovation will have
significant implications for the United States, an economy whose prosperity is
largely built on its technological dynamism. Is American technological
leadership threatened by these developments? What are the appropriate policy
responses? Exploration of the role of international coinvention sheds useful
light on these issues. Because growth in invention in emerging economies has
been heavily reliant on research inputs from Western firms, it poses less of a
direct threat to the economic welfare of advanced industrial countries than has
been supposed. In fact, by improving the efficiency of the R&amp;D process and
allowing firms to explore more technological opportunities with a given level of
expenditure, international coinvention can generate net positive effects on U.S.
economic growth and end up reinforcing American technological leadership rather
than undermining it. The insights associated with the investigation of the
coinvention phenomenon and its impacts will also help research managers consider
and leverage this approach towards improving their R&amp;D productivity, and
economic impact.