* 0830419
* Collaborative Research:   Optimal Changepoint Detection and Identification Algorithms with Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,05/31/2013
* Alexander Tartakovsky, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 05/31/2013
* USD 267,692.00

Changepoint problems deal with detecting anomalies or more generally changes in
patterns. In the sequential setting, as long as the behavior of observations is
consistent with the ``normal state," one is content to let the process continue.
If the state changes, then one is interested in detecting that a change is in
effect, usually as quickly as possible. Any detection policy may give rise to
false alarms and attempting to avoid false alarms too strenuously will lead to a
long delay between the time of occurrence of the change and its detection. The
gist of the changepoint problem is to produce a detection policy that minimizes
the average detection delay subject to a bound on the false alarm rate.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the quickest changepoint detection problem has been
studied for over fifty years, there has been remarkably little prior work on
theoretical extensions to general stochastic models that go beyond independent
and identically distributed observations in the pre- and post-change modes, and
to the distributed sensor setting. The goal of this project is to investigate
the properties of known changepoint detection procedures and to develop novel
procedures for change detection and classification under general system models
that are relevant in practical applications, as well as to provide an analytical
framework to predict their performance. The usefulness of the theoretical
advances will be demonstrated through two key application areas: (a) the rapid
detection of intrusions and disruptions in computer networks, and (b) the
efficient monitoring of critical infrastructures. In both cases, the
distributions of the noisy observations change, and this change occurs at an a
priori unknown point in time. Also, in both cases, the detection should be
performed in a timely manner, while keeping the false alarm rate at an
acceptable level. Our results will be validated using simulations as well as
real data (to the extent possible).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;