* 0830846
* SFS Cybersecurity Scholars Program
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2015
* David Naumann, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 12/31/2015
* USD 1,185,636.00

Computer Science (31)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project funds three two-year
student cohorts. This project produces graduates who are committed to enter the
federal workforce. The project includes both undergraduate and graduate
students. All students in the program graduate with a Masters degree, as
undergraduate students participating in the program are enrolled in a five-year
combined Bachelors and Master program.&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate students are
primarily in the interdisciplinary cybersecurity degree program or in the
computer science department with a focus on cybersecurity. Graduate scholars
mainly pursue a security-related concentration program in computer science or
computer/electrical engineering. Exceptionally qualified students with a
security-related focus from other departments are also considered. Special
attention is paid to hands-on activities that translate theory into practice.
All students participate in research in their final year. The project consists
of three phases: (1) recruiting students, (2) educating and mentoring the
students, and (3) working with the students, OPM, and the federal agencies
directly to ensure appropriate internship and permanent placements for the
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The wide range of
cybersecurity courses provides students with an education that prepares them
thoroughly for careers as information assurance and computer security
professionals. The PI team has strong technical credentials in computer security
and industrial research experience that makes them particularly well-suited to
run the program. This project builds upon two NSF SFS capacity building grants:
one that supported the establishment of interdisciplinary degrees in
cybersecurity and one that developed a hands-on cybersecurity lab and associated
course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: In addition to the direct and
obvious benefits provided to the scholarship recipients and the federal agencies
that hire them, the increased support for and attention to security also
benefits other students and provides additional workforce development for both
the government and private sectors. This project works with existing college
support programs and engages in outreach activities with partner colleges and
local K-12 schools.