* 0830798
* Collaborative Research:  Depth Distribution of Anisotropic Fabric in the Oceanic Mantle
* GEO,OCE
* 03/13/2008,03/31/2015
* Dayanthie Weeraratne, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Continuing Grant
* Candace Major
* 03/31/2015
* USD 175,084.00

The Earth's surface is divided into a small number of tectonic plates that move
as units. The cold, upper part of the earth, called the lithosphere, is stiff,
enabling the plates to move without significant internal deformation above a
deformable, softer layer called the asthenosphere. Thus, it is the physical
properties of the lithosphere that control the surface expression of convection
within the Earth's interior, enabling plate tectonics. Despite its fundamental
role in governing tectonics, the thickness of the lithosphere is difficult to
measure. We propose to measure the azimuthal anisotropy of Rayleigh wave
propagation within two ocean-bottom seismometer (OBS) arrays in the western
Pacific as a means of unambiguously determining the thickness of the old oceanic
lithosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thermal models of seafloor subsidence indicate
that the oceanic plates should be ~ 90 - 125 km thick, with temperatures
approaching steady state in very old seafloor. In contrast, seismic surface wave
studies indicate that velocities continue to increase as a function of age, with
the velocity changes occurring at depths greater than the thickness of the best-
fitting cooling slab models. The most direct and unambiguous way to determine
the thickness of the lithosphere and to resolve this controversy is to map the
transition from static structure frozen in the plate to actively deforming
fabric in the convecting, deforming asthenosphere. This change should induce a
change in anisotropic fabric associated with the alignment of the mineral
olivine in a deforming Earth, which we propose to detect by measuring the
variation of azimuthal anisotropy of Rayleigh waves as a function of
period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a relatively small area of the western Pacific
in seafloor approximately 155 million years old, there are major changes in the
direction of spreading in seafloor of the same age and similar spreading rate.
Thus, the fossil component of anisotropy in the lithosphere should change
direction dramatically, but the asthenospheric component due to flow beneath the
plate should be nearly constant. With a deployment of arrays of OBSs where the
spreading directions change, it should be possible to clearly distinguish the
fossil component of anisotropy from the dynamically maintained component in the
asthenosphere. We will collect continuous seismic records of earthquakes
occurring around the world. In addition to measuring the azimuthal anisotropy of
Rayleigh waves as a function of period, we will look for lateral heterogeneities
in velocity within and in the vicinity of the arrays, measure shear wave
splitting, P and S delays, and study the regional propagation of surface waves
in the oldest parts of the Pacific.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. An
important component of the proposed activity is education of students and
communication with local public schools. Graduate students will be supported at
Brown and at CalState Northridge and undergrads will work as assistants. At
least four students will participate in each of the two seagoing legs; a good
way to introduce oceanography as a field to students. Student participants will
be expected to visit local elementary and middle schools before and after the
cruise to communicate the excitement of going to sea and to prepare a daily
weblog on board to communicate with the classes they have visited. We expect
that of the Brown University participants, at least 50% will be women, and we
will attempt to recruit underrepresented minorities from the CalState Northridge
student body.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to presentations at scientific
conferences and publication in professional journals, we will work with our
local press officers to prepare press releases to communicate findings to the
general public. Data gathered will be archived at the IRIS Data Management
Center and made available to seismologists and the general public.&lt;br/&gt;