* 0830583
* CCF- Unified View of Multiterminal Source Coding
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,10/31/2010
* Richard Blahut, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* richard brown
* 10/31/2010
* USD 198,883.00

In a variety of applications, such as weather monitoring, smart buildings, and
manufacturing systems, a network of sensors, each with a communication
constraint, is remotely deployed with the goal of making collective inference.
However, the governing principle, as well as the performance limit, of such
sensor (information source) networks is not well understood. Consequently, most
practical systems are designed conservatively, allowing significant room for
future improvement and cost reduction. In this backdrop, the investigators
identify certain fundamental principles underlying network (multiterminal)
source coding, and study performance bounds in the spirit of Shannon. This
research entails several benefits: (1) attractive economic returns on research
investment due to design benchmarking; (2) unified conceptual understanding of a
large class of network coding problems; (3) development of academic materials
and courses for training engineers in design and maintenance of distributed
systems. The investigators give a canonical theory characterizing the asymptotic
performance bound for a broad class of multiterminal source coding problems. In
particular, they employ a unifying distortion-independent coding strategy, which
manifests distortion only upon suitable post-processing. Importantly, the
ubiquitous notion of single-letter description is connected to a certain
graphical representation; existence of such description is guaranteed if the
corresponding graph admits no cycles. As a consequence, the investigators find a
single-letter solution to the hitherto-open single-helper problem. On the
contrary, graphs with cycles, seen, for example, in the famous Berger-Tung
problem, likely admit no single-letter solution. Accordingly, the Berger-Tung
bound is conjectured to be loose, and work towards a conclusive answer is in
progress. However, in absence of a single-letter description, the canonical
theory still provides a general road map towards a computable description, and
tractable computational algorithms.