* 0830387
* SciSIP (MOD): A Comparative Assessment of Models for Integrating Societal Impacts Concerns into the Peer Review of Grant Proposals
* SBE,SBE
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Warren Burggren, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Joshua Rosenbloom
* 09/30/2012
* USD 393,688.00

Public science and engineering (S&E) funding agencies worldwide rely on the peer
review of research proposals to make their funding decisions. Scientific and
technical experts are best qualified to judge the scientific and technical
merits of proposed research projects. Increasingly, however, society is
requiring that S&E funding agencies demonstrate a return on the public
investment in S&E research. In response, S&E funding agencies worldwide have
incorporated considerations of broader societal impacts into the proposal review
process. But asking scientists and engineers to assess the potential societal
impacts of proposed research projects takes them beyond the realm of their
scientific and technical expertise.

The fundamental question of this three year research project is: What is the
best way to incorporate societal impacts considerations into the grant proposal
peer review process? This research focuses on the ways in which different models
of peer review incorporate the broader societal impacts of proposed research.
The study assesses five different models of peer review across three US federal
agencies: the National Science Foundation (NSF), the National Institutes of
Health (NIH), and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA);
and two non-US contexts: the Natural Science and Engineering Research Council of
Canada (NSERC), and the Dutch Technology Foundation (STW). Using both
qualitative and quantitative methods (data mining, literature review, surveys,
and semi-structured interviews), this research develops usable knowledge by
constructing a comparative matrix and analysis of these five models of peer
review.

The Broader Impacts of this project include: (1) funding 2 graduate research
assistants, thereby laying the foundation for continuing work in the Science of
Science and Innovation Policy; (2) integrating this research with teaching at
the undergraduate level (in UNT's Ethics in Science course); (3) expanding the
network of researchers exploring the Science of Science and Innovation Policy;
(4) enhancing the understanding of the process of grant proposal peer review by
informing all stakeholders in the peer review process (scientists and engineers,
funding agency officials, policy makers, and members of the general public) of
the project's results; and finally, (5) improving the peer review of grant
proposals, especially in terms of the capacity of various models of peer review
to assess the societal impact of proposed S&E research. This project benefits
society by improving the connection between the funding decisions rendered
through proposal peer review and the societal impact of the funded research.