* 0830024
* Horizontal gene transfer and among phyla relationships
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2014
* Kenneth Noll, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 12/31/2014
* USD 2,507,500.00

A tree has been the organizing image to explain the relationships among living
creatures since before Darwin's explanations for natural descent. The modern
practice of comparing DNA and protein sequences to discern these relationships,
however, has revealed complexities in the process of descent never before
imagined. Organisms, particularly microbes, evolve by horizontal as well as
vertical inheritance of traits with different groups of organisms exchanging
genes, in addition to passing them down to the next generation. This research
project addresses the question: Can the large scale structure of the tree/web of
life be discerned? While the current data may be interpreted to mean that the
depiction of life's history as a single bifurcating tree is incomplete, this
should not be seen as justification to give up on reconstructing life's history.
The working hypothesis underlying this research is that a reconstruction of
life's early history is indeed possible, provided care is taken to guard against
artifacts and that new, informative molecular characters are added to the
analyses. Four complementary approaches will be used to address the question
through analyses of microbial genome sequences. (1) Genome sequence data will be
examined to find ancient horizontal gene transfer events that created useful
taxonomic characters. An automated genome analysis pipeline will be developed to
find these events, and these characters will be incorporated into new
examinations of evolutionary relationships. (2) Complete genome sequences allow
comparisons of all the genes of an organism with those of others to measure
their evolutionary relatedness. However, the impact of horizontal acquisition of
genes on these analyses is unknown. Computer simulations and genome sequences
from two unrelated groups of microbes that have undergone extensive horizontal
gene transfer, the Haloarchaea and the Thermotogales, will be used to gauge the
extent to which different phylogenomic approaches are impacted by highways of
gene sharing between different groups of organisms. (3) A public database will
be constructed to store information on all putatively identified gene transfer
events. This database will be a valuable resource for the wider scientific
community to trace the role of gene transfer in the assembly of metabolic
pathways and to examine the adaptation of organisms to new ecological niches.
(4) The nature of the last common ancestor of all living creatures, the trunk of
the tree of life, has been difficult to discern given all the changes in
nucleotide composition that have occurred during evolutionary time. A
compositional analysis will be used to detect the remaining signal of the
genetic code's expansion that occurred early in life's history in order to
"root" the tree of life. These in-depth analyses of several prokaryotic and
eukaryotic genomes will offer insights into the impacts of horizontal gene
transfer on genome evolution and phylogenetic reconstructions, as well as
identify natural groups in the tree of life and help to resolve its deep
structure. Unraveling the structure of the tree of life will have percussions in
all fields of biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program and its
associated education activities will provide an ideal training ground in which
high school, undergraduate, and graduate students along with postdoctoral
fellows can learn about genome and organismal evolution. Plans are for three
postdoctoral fellows, nine graduate students, and about twenty undergraduate and
high school students to be trained through computational and laboratory research
experiences. The goal is to train computer scientists and biologists to become
experts in their respective disciplines and to become effective in trans-
disciplinary communication; thereby enabling successful interdisciplinary
collaborations. Results from the proposed research will be introduced into
related courses on three campuses and will be accessible through an integrated
database, which also includes a forum for public discussions on topics related
to gene transfer and organismal evolution.