* 0830582
* Collaborative Research: Laplacian-Centered Poisson Solvers and Multilevel Summation Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Robert Skeel, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 08/31/2011
* USD 2,000.00

Solvent interactions play a critical role in determining the structure and
function of biomolecular systems. However, accurate modeling is a challenging
task due to long-range correlations and vast numbers of solvent atoms and ions.
For very large systems, one method for reducing this expense is the application
of an implicit solvent model which replaces the explicit atoms and ions with a
dielectric continuum. One of the more accurate implicit solvent models is
described by a generalized Poisson equation or Poisson-Boltzmann equation with
point charge source terms. Although the generalized Poisson approach is
considered in very many cases to be sufficiently accurate, most current methods
for approximating its solution have been deemed prohibitively expensive for very
large systems and for applications requiring rapid repetitive evaluation.

This project centers on the creation and analysis of algorithms of unsurpassed
effectiveness for approximating the solution to the generalized Poisson equation
(GPE) and its extensions. The approach involves solving for an "effective charge
distribution" given by the Laplacian of the solution to the GPE. The
corresponding electrostatic potential can be recovered using a fast N-body
solver. Broader impact of this project will be realized through the
incorporation of novel algorithms in simulation software. Better methods and
software in the hands of scientists will enable biomolecular simulation of much
larger systems with improved accuracy which will result in contributions to
society. In addition, this project provides an opportunity for a graduate
student to engage in research that spans computer science, physical science, and
mathematics.

