* 0830799
* Biomedical Innovations Using Implementation-Aware Agile Sensing and Signal Processing
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Andreas Spanias, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 07/31/2012
* USD 375,000.00

Title: Biomedical Innovations Using Implementation-Aware &lt;br/&gt; Agile
Sensing and Signal Processing&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Medical condition
diagnosis is heavily based on sensor measurements &lt;br/&gt;and their
processing. These measurements correspond to waveforms &lt;br/&gt;that propagate
over the complex body environment and are transformed &lt;br/&gt;linearly or
nonlinearly according to the characteristic environment properties.
&lt;br/&gt;However, the medical community does not fully exploit the potentials
of &lt;br/&gt;advanced processing matched to nonlinear structures or modern
sensor &lt;br/&gt;technologies such as waveform agility that leads to
significant estimation&lt;br/&gt;performance improvements. This research
exploits advanced &lt;br/&gt;implementation-aware sensing and processing
techniques to improve &lt;br/&gt;medical diagnosis by: (a) efficient processing
using compressed sensing &lt;br/&gt;and nonlinear time-varying spectral methods;
(b) estimation of environment &lt;br/&gt;descriptors and disease state
parameters combined with waveform-agile&lt;br/&gt;sensing; and (c) mapping
estimation and waveform-agile sensing algorithms &lt;br/&gt;onto field-
programmable gate arrays. This framework brings revolutionary
&lt;br/&gt;advances in diagnosing, treating, and tracking disease states that
are &lt;br/&gt;otherwise difficult to obtain as advanced processing techniques
are either &lt;br/&gt;not available or too costly. The investigators also design
on-line software &lt;br/&gt;toolboxes with sensing experiments for use in
outreach programs to recruit &lt;br/&gt;and retain freshmen and underrepresented
student populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research integrates advanced
signal processing, stochastic Bayesian &lt;br/&gt;estimation, and waveform-agile
sensing with implementation-aware &lt;br/&gt;algorithms to improve estimation of
disease states. The investigators study&lt;br/&gt;time-frequency techniques
matched to nonlinear structures to process biomedical &lt;br/&gt;data.
Compressive sensing methodologies are developed that reduce the&lt;br/&gt;number
of required measurements and allow for alternative computational
&lt;br/&gt;algorithms. Mathematical descriptors are designed to model disease
states using&lt;br/&gt;time-varying transfer functions. Sequential Bayesian
techniques and waveform &lt;br/&gt;adaptation are used to estimate information.
Algorithm reconstruction procedures &lt;br/&gt;are developed that trade high
performance for reduced implementation cost. &lt;br/&gt;Finally, the
investigators design algorithms cognizant of complexity and memory
requirements.&lt;br/&gt;