* 0830675
* TF: Network pricing with uncertainty: risk aversion and incomplete information
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Richard La, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Balasubramanian Kalyanasundaram
* 07/31/2013
* USD 300,394.00

Designing suitable network pricing mechanisms is important for both (i)
recovering the cost of providing existing network services and (ii) encouraging
deployment of new services and expansion of network capacities. Since service
providers are often selfish private entities, the problem of network pricing is
studied using tools from economics, in particular, game
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When there exists uncertainty regarding the payoff
(i.e., profit) of the service providers, called players, recent findings show
that risk averse players can behave very differently and change the interaction
among the players considerably. As a result, even a pricing scheme that seems
rather natural can provide them with an incentive to lie about their private
information. This in turn causes a loss in the overall benefit and a significant
drop in the profits to the players, discouraging the deployment of new services.
Thus, this calls for a careful look at the consequences of uncertainty in
payoffs and risk aversion by players on the overall social welfare and the
payoffs to the players.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to take
the first step towards identifying suitable frameworks for designing efficient
and fair network pricing mechanisms: The first part of the project will carry
out a thorough investigation of the impacts of uncertainty in payoffs of the
players and risk averse players on likely equilibria in a set of well formulated
and targeted scenarios and their implications on the design of pricing
mechanisms. The second part will examine how much of social welfare can be lost
due to the selfish nature of the players and the uncertainty and aims to find
suitable bounds when possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Expected outcomes from the
project will help service providers identify more suitable pricing schemes that
will encourage the deployment of new services through fair profit sharing and
improved efficiency. This will promote collaboration among selfish service
providers and bring more network services and lower prices to the consumers,
while increasing the overall social benefits/welfare.&lt;br/&gt;