* 0830294
* NEESR-SG: Smart and Resilient Steel Walls for Reducing Earthquake Impacts
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2014
* Larry Fahnestock, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2014
* USD 1,552,870.00

This award is an outcome of the NSF 08-519 program solicitation, "George E.
Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES) Research
(NEESR)" competition and includes the University of Washington (lead
institution), University of Minnesota (subaward), and University at Buffalo,
SUNY (subaward). This project will utilize the NEES equipment sites at the
University of Minnesota and University at Buffalo and has strong international
collaboration with large-scale experiments to be performed at the National
Center for Research in Earthquake Engineering (NCREE) in Taiwan. The goal of
this project is to develop a smart and resilient steel plate shear wall (SR-
SPSW) system with the potential to transform seismic design in areas of moderate
and high seismicity. The system strategically combines the benefits of self-
centering and steel plate shear wall technologies to create a robust, ductile,
and easily repairable system that will reduce life-cycle costs for buildings.
Most traditional seismic load resisting systems will suffer structural damage
during seismic events; the cost and downtime associated with repair of that
damage has led to staggering economic losses. The proposed SR-SPSW system could
drastically reduce those losses. SPSWs are excellent candidates for the
application of self-centering technology; they have high strength and elastic
stiffness and require low re-centering forces. The buckling and yielding
behavior of the web plate will also be leveraged to develop self-sensing
concepts such that post-event decisions regarding web plate replacement can be
made with minimal disruption. SPSW behavior under earthquake loading is highly
nonlinear, and complex component interactions exist; of particular complexity
are the interactions between the web plate tension field action and the forces
in the re-centering mechanisms of the proposed SR-SPSWs. Large-scale testing
using advanced experimental techniques and instrumentation will generate data to
be used to develop numerical models anchored in physical behavior. Application
of those tools in parametric analyses of SPSW systems will provide a new level
of understanding of the system response and help to eliminate overly
conservative design processes. To ensure that the new SR-SPSW system will be
implemented, and to increase the use of conventional SPSW systems, this research
will also seek to fill critical knowledge gaps in SPSW system behavior including
the understanding of coupled SPSW behavior and the expected distribution of
yielding in multistory SPSW. The project also includes a series of activities
that will advance the NEES education, outreach, and training goals. Through
collaboration with Seattle-MESA, the project will engage high school students
from underrepresented minorities in structural engineering and laboratory
experimentation, ultimately helping to promote diversity in engineering and
science. The project team also includes faculty and undergraduates from Seattle
University, a predominantly undergraduate institution, who will contribute to
the research endeavor. The project will excite K-5 students about science and
engineering through the development of the Wicked Walls program; a hands on
learning activity showing students the benefits of walls for seismic resistance.
Finally, outreach to practicing structural engineers will occur through the
Seismic Provisions committee, conference presentations, and seminars with the
cooperation of AISC. The research team experience in developing national and
international codes ensures that research outcomes will have an immediate impact
on design practice. Data from this project will be made available through the
NEES data repository (http://www.nees.org).