* 0830490
* Learning and Adapting to Spatio-Temporal Anomalies
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Clayton Scott, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2012
* USD 683,154.00

Anomaly detection is essential for a broad range of security, surveillance, and
monitoring problems in areas ranging from health care and environmental
protection to homeland security and manufacturing. However, because of the
increasing complexity of systems and data, as well as the increasing
sophistication of adversaries, traditional methods of anomaly detection are no
longer sufficient. These methods assume that anomalies look substantially
different from normal measurements, or that their characteristics remain
constant over time. In many practical applications of interest, however,
anomalies are only distinguished by subtle spatio-temporal characteristics. For
example, a network security event may involve a sequence of traffic patterns,
each of which is innocuous in its own right, but which occupy a localized or
lower-dimensional spatial domain when viewed together. Alternatively, anomalies
may exhibit temporal structure caused by a slow but steady drift from normal to
abnormal behavior. This project develops new theoretical and algorithmic
approaches to detecting such spatio-temporal anomalies. The research will impact
the monitoring of a wide range of critical infrastructures and application
domains, including environmental systems, health care networks, power grids, and
communication networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on spatio-
temporal anomalies that (1) have significant spatial overlap with the nominal
distribution, (2) are distributed on a manifold of lower dimension than nominal
measurements, and (3) have time-varying distributional characteristics. The
research applies and extends techniques from statistical machine learning,
including transductive, manifold-adaptive, and online learning, to the anomaly
detection setting. &lt;br/&gt;This framework allows the investigators to address
several difficult and long-standing challenges such as optimal tracking of
drifting anomaly distributions and efficient relaxations of combinatorial graph-
based inference algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;