* 0830476
* Efficient Distributed Approximation Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2008,03/31/2010
* Gopal Pandurangan, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Beigel
* 03/31/2010
* USD 100,000.00

The goal of this project is to advance the state of the art in the design and
analysis of efficient distribution approximation algorithms for various
important network optimization problems. The emerging area of distributed
approximation algorithms lies at the intersection of two well-established
theoretical computer science areas: distributed computing and approximation
algorithms. Distributed approximation algorithms tradeoff optimality of the
solution for the amount of resources consumed by the distributed algorithm.
Besides a fundamental theoretical interest in understanding the algorithmic
complexity of distributed approximation, there is also a practical motivation in
studying distributed approximation algorithms. Emerging networking technologies
such as ad hoc wireless sensor networks and peer-to-peer networks operate under
inherent resource constraints such as energy, bandwidth etc. A distributed
algorithm which exchanges a large number of messages and takes a lot of time can
consume a relatively large amount of resources, and is not suitable in a
resource-constrained network. Also, the topology of these networks can change
dynamically. Communication cost and running time is especially crucial in a
dynamic setting. Hence it becomes necessary to design efficient distributed
algorithms for various network optimization problems that have low communication
and time complexity, even possibly at the cost of a reduced quality of
solution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project lies in
the development and analysis of new efficient distributed approximation
algorithms for important network optimization problems including the minimum
spanning tree and other spanning substructures, the minimum Steiner tree and
related problems, the shortest paths problem etc. These are fundamental problems
in distributed computing and are widely used primitives in distributed
communication networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first part of the project
focuses on static networks, i.e., networks whose topology doesn't change with
time. The project will design and analyze distributed approximation algorithms
that give efficient performance, in terms of both time and message complexity,
for a given approximation ratio. An important ingredient of the research is
identifying appropriate graph parameters that capture the distributed complexity
of the problem at hand. Such parameters serve as natural lower bounds and
facilitate the design of optimal algorithms. An overarching goal is to develop
uniform approaches to design efficient distributed approximation algorithms for
a wide variety of problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second part of the project
focuses on design and analysis of distributed algorithms for dynamic networks,
i.e., networks whose topology changes dynamically. The goal is to study
efficient distributed dynamic algorithms to construct and maintain near-optimal
solutions for important spanning substructure problems. The algorithms will
exploit locality and will be designed to work well on dynamic network
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this project is the potential
to impact algorithm design in emerging communication networks, in particular,
sensor networks and peer-to-peer networks. The project will yield efficient and
scalable distributed algorithms with provable performance guarantees. The PI
will collaborate with applied researchers to maximize the impact of the
theoretical results to practical applications. The proposed research is a great
opportunity for theory to continue to have a practical impact, and a valuable
addition to the curricula in both algorithms and networks. The PI will develop a
new course on distributed approximation algorithms that is closely related to
the research. The course will also aid in disseminating mathematical tools and
techniques needed for this research to a wider audience. The PI's research
group, Network Algorithms and Analysis Laboratory, will train both graduate and
undergraduate students to tackle a variety of algorithmic problems that arise in
distributed networks, emphasizing use of randomization in designing efficient
distributed algorithms, and probabilistic modeling and analysis of
networks.&lt;br/&gt;