* 0830472
* Fundamental Bounds on Decentralized Adaptive Detection in Hidden Markov Models
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Yajun Mei, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2012
* USD 183,817.00

Abstract for ?TF08: Fundamental Bounds on Decentralized Adaptive Detection in
Hidden Markov Models? (PI: Yajun Mei, NSF proposal #0830472)

In modern information era, the advance of sensor, computing and communication
technologies offers promising opportunities for the decision makers and
organizations to make effective decisions quickly in many areas of real-world
applications of sensor network systems. However, without timely updating or
adaptation to reflect the changing environments, even the best decision-making
methods are irrevocably vulnerable in applications such as threats detection in
bioterrorism and hacking. The challenges become more difficult due to the
complex spatio-temporal correlations among sensors and the constraints on
communications, energy and computing.

This research is concerned with the development of a general and systematic
foundation and methodologies for decentralized adaptive detection when sensor
observations are from hidden Markov models, with the focus on deriving the
fundamental information limitation on the ability to reliably detect the
changes. The investigator studies decentralized adaptive detection in hidden
Markov models for two scenarios of sensor network systems. The first is the
system where sensors do not have access to their past observations, in which the
research topics include (i) optimal stationary quantizers; (ii) lower bounds on
adaptive detection; (iii) robust detection via tandem quantizers; and
(iv)adaptive detection with censored sensor observations. The second is the
system where sensors have access their past observations, in which the research
investigates: (i) universal information bounds; (ii) computing-friendly,
effective schemes; (iii) schemes with controlled detection delay; and (iv)
blockwise transmission.