* 0830228
* NSEC: CENTER FOR PROBING THE NANOSCALE
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Kathryn Moler, Stanford University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Mike Cavagnero
* 08/31/2015
* USD 7,665,000.00

The Center for Probing the Nanoscale (CPN) addresses five overriding
goals:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1.To develop novel probes that dramatically improve
our capability to observe, manipulate, and control nanoscale objects and
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2.To educate the next generation of scientists
and engineers regarding the theory and practice of these
probes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. To apply these novel probes to answer
fundamental questions and to shed light on technologically relevant
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4. To disseminate knowledge and to transfer
technology so that other research scientists and engineers can make use of the
advances, and so that corporations can manufacture and market the new novel
probes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;5. To inspire thousands of middle school students
by training their teachers at a Summer Institute.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CPN
includes thirteen core faculty-level Investigators (including three IBM
Investigators who also serve as Consulting Professors at Stanford), twenty-eight
affiliated faculty members and dozens of students and postdocs in eight academic
departments: Applied Physics, Art and Art History, Electrical Engineering,
Chemistry, Materials Science and Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, and
Physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research at the Center is focused on five Theme
Groups: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plasmonic Scanning Tunneling Microscopy. The
plasmonic scanning tunneling microscope will perform spatially localized
combined electronic and optical imaging and spectroscopy. The pivotal goal is to
combine the exquisite spatial resolution inherent in high-resolution scanning
tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy with the detailed information on high-
frequency excitations of materials yielded by optical channels.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoscale Electrical Imaging. Lithographically-patterned
structures such as transistors now commonly have electronic properties that vary
on scales of nanometers to tens of nanometers. The goal is to develop and apply
a suite of techniques to measure electronic properties such as dielectric
constant, conductivity, and carrier density of materials at the 10 nm scale,
with sensitivity to variations deep beneath a sample
surface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Individual Nanomagnet Characterization. The
volume, shape, and structure of magnetic nanoparticles lead to a number of
present and proposed applications in biology and medicine. This theme will
develop and advance a variety of nanoprobes with the spatial resolution and
magnetic sensitivity to detect and characterize individual nanomagnets for
nanobiotechnology applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoscale Magnetic
Resonance. Recent work sponsored by CPN has proven that magnetic resonance force
microscopy (MRFM) can achieve three dimensional imaging with spatial resolution
below 10 nm. Research in the second five years will focus on extending MRFM
resolution to below 1 nm - or roughly an order of magnitude improvement over
today's capability. If sub-nanometer can be achieved, then MRFM?s true 3D
imaging capability, lack of radiation damage and elementally specific contrast
could make it a powerful tool for structural
biologists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BioProbes: Nanoscale Cantilevers. The objective
of the BioProbes theme is to measure the forces, mechanical stiffness,
electrostatics, and sequence of biological processes on cell membranes. Our
theme will adapt unique cantilever designs for aqueous solution, based on
recently invented torsional and dual-cantilever AFM cantilevers that have
extremely high force sensitivity together with kHz sampling frequencies, ideal
for biological samples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoprobes are arguably the
enabling technology for all of the scientists and engineers working to realize
the vast potential of nanotechnology. CPN research and outreach activities
combine to broadly impact science, technology and education. The programs span
graduate education, K-12 teacher development, academic courses, ethics for
scientists and public scientific literacy. CPN intellectual contributions are
widely disseminated through publications, on-line resources, conferences,
workshops, and institutes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The following activities
constitute the educational and outreach programs:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate
and Postdoctoral Fellowships. Research students learn nanotechnology and
precision measurement techniques as well as the fundamentals of their field. CPN
Fellows are strongly engaged in Center events and outreach. The
interdisciplinary Center provides a broader and deeper education for students
than traditional graduate study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CPN Prize Fellowships
Program. CPN Graduate Prize Fellowships are competitively awarded on the basis
of advisor recommendations and student-written proposals, and provide graduate
students with a full stipend to initiate a novel nanoprobe research project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Summer Institute for Middle School Teachers (SIMST).
Middle school teachers participate in an intensive week-long program of content
lectures, hands-on activities and curriculum development exercises. Teachers
apply their new knowledge to create nanoscience lessons that are shared among
participants for use during the school year and will be compiled for broader
dissemination through workshops and online education resources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CPN Annual Nanoprobe Workshop. The Annual Workshop
provides an excellent opportunity for academic and industrial scientists to
exchange knowledge and ideas and to broaden the horizons of the students.
&lt;br/&gt;Industrial Affiliates Program. The CPN Industrial Affiliates Program
builds partnerships between CPN researchers and companies that have a strategic
interest in nanoprobe development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborations.
Collaborations with local institutions greatly enhance the impact and diversity
of programs such as the Summer Institute for Middle School Teachers. Partners
such as SRI International and the Exploratorium contribute curriculum and
teaching best-practices, while collaborations with the National Hispanic
University and the Latino College Preparatory Academy (LCPA) allow the Center to
engage a diverse group of under-served students and teachers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Curriculum. Probing the Nanoscale (AP275) is a graduate
survey of scanning probes that draws on the expertise of CPN Investigators.
Lecture videos are publicly available online as a rich source of information
that has been accessed by people throughout the world.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Workshop on Professional Ethics for Students in Science
and Engineering. A Workshop on Professional Ethics for Graduate Students in
Science and Engineering was over-enrolled and reviewed very positively by the
participants. This workshop will be offered annually during the renewal period.