* 0830154
* Future Internet Network Design Meeting 2008
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2008,03/31/2009
* John Wroclawski, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 03/31/2009
* USD 57,524.00

This is a workshop meeting of the NSF Future Internet Design (FIND) program that
the PI will host and coordinate on April 8-9 in Los Angeles, California. This
meeting is a chance to bring both the FIND-funded researchers and externally
funded researchers with related projects together. The goals are to learn about
each others' work and to develop concepts for large scale network architecture
and systems. Large scale network architecture and systems increasingly seems as
though it is an emerging field, and the researchers are trying to come to grips
with its possibilities for transformative research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
intellectual merit of the proposal is the provision of the meeting, because the
meeting will result in community building for the emerging future internet and
large scale network architecture and systems field, and in researcher
contribution and understanding for FIND Phase 2. This is a very important
contribution that can benefit networking research at large.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The FIND programmatic area of the NeTS program requires
that PIs attend three FIND meetings per year. This will be the fifth of these
meetings, taking place at the midpoint of most of the PIs? three year grants for
Phase 1 of the FIND program. The goal of this meeting is a deep discussion of
the nature of a second phase of FIND, in which researchers will go from
exploring future internet design without constraints or assumptions from the
present Internet to researching and designing large scale network architecture
and systems using the same degrees of freedom. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The FIND meetings encourage the FIND research
community collectively to rise to the challenges of creating new internet
architectures for societal demands of the 21st century. Both the FIND-funded and
externally funded researchers are actively engaged with broader impacts. Phase 2
of FIND will create larger internet architectures and these will address such
pressing demands as 1. security and privacy that work, because trust in the
network must underlie so much future development; 2. availability for critical
communications, because inexorably critical infrastructures have complex
dependencies on our fallible internet systems; and 3. evolvable capabilities
that enable economic models and that allow economic growth that the present
internet may currently block. There are many areas of potential broader impact
of future internet design. The meeting's discussions of Phase 2 and of large
scale architecture and systems design will bring the FIND program closer to its
realization of broader impacts.