* 0830320
* Collaborative research: Leveraging low-dimensional structure for time series analysis and prediction
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Michael Wakin, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2012
* USD 222,911.00

Title: Collaborative Research: Leveraging Low-dimensional Structure for Time
Series Analysis and Prediction&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Christopher J. Rozell,
Georgia Institute of Technology&lt;br/&gt;co-PI: Michael B. Wakin, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Predicting the behavior of complex
systems is central to many tasks of great scientific and national importance,
including arenas such as meteorology, financial markets and global conflict.
Modern science is ingrained with the premise that repeated observations of a
dynamic phenomenon can help in understanding its driving mechanisms and
predicting its future behavior. The investigators study methods for improving
our ability to characterize and predict such systems even when they are very
large (i.e., with many interacting factors) or appear highly unordered (i.e.,
chaotic systems). This research leverages new mathematical results that enable
analysts to efficiently capture the simple structure that is often present even
in systems that appear very complex. These results lead to improvements and
performance guarantees for heuristic prediction methods based on artificial
neural networks, which are often used in practice but can sometimes fail
inexplicably.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Time series prediction is often approached by
postulating a structured model for a hidden system driving data generation. This
project borrows from recent advances in low-dimensional signal modeling to
advance the state of the art in time series analysis and prediction tools when
similar low-dimensional structure is present. For linear systems, this research
develops efficient estimation strategies that improve upon classical techniques
by encouraging sparse solutions. For nonlinear models, this project builds upon
Takens' Embedding Theorem, which states that the image of an attractor manifold
can be reconstructed using a sequence of time series observations, to guarantee
a quantifiably stable embedding of the attractor manifold. Furthermore, this
research aims to improve upon and make performance guarantees for reservoir
computing methods, where randomly-connected neural networks have been identified
as effective mechanisms for predicting chaotic time
series.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;