* 0830081
* NEESR-II: Evaluation of Seismic Levee Deformation Potential by Destructive Cyclic Field Testing
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2008,03/31/2013
* Scott Brandenberg, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 03/31/2013
* USD 429,526.00

The Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta levees are critical components of California?s
water distribution system. The Delta supplies fresh water to 22 million people
in southern and central California as well as eastern portions of the San
Francisco Bay area and directly supports $400 billion/year of economic activity
within the State of California. The ?islands? circumscribed by the network of
levees are commonly 3 to 5 meters below sea level, and are protected by only
about 1 to 1.5 meters of freeboard at high tide. A breach in a levee causes
water from the channel to flow into the island thereby inundating farmland and
wildlife habitat, and drawing saline water from the San Francisco Bay into the
Delta. This is a potentially catastrophic scenario, as saline contamination
could halt water delivery to central and southern California, removing the sole
water source for many communities. This scenario is unlikely in the event of an
individual levee breach caused by burrowing animals and other local hazards
because the existing emergency response system can respond to a single breach
within a matter of hours and affect repair within a matter of weeks. On the
other hand, seismic hazard is an extraordinary threat because of the potential
for multiple simultaneous breaches inundating many islands within the Delta.
Such widespread system failure has been forecast to cause up to 28 months of
time during which fresh water deliveries from the Delta would not be possible.
Some in fact question whether such a sequence of breaches might permanently
change the regional morphology such that either alternative water sources would
need to be identified or major sectors of the California economy/population
would need to be reconfigured or relocated. The influence of earthquake shaking
on the behavior of the levees is uncertain because the cyclic deformation
potential of the underlying peaty organic soils not well understood, and there
is an urgent need to investigate the behavior of these
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit and Scope: This award will
support full-scale testing of an existing earth embankment (very similar in
geometry to a levee, but not currently holding water) to investigate the in situ
deformation potential of peaty organic foundation soils under realistic stresses
and boundary conditions. The test conditions and instrumentation will be
designed to measure the deformation mechanisms that can result in a critical
loss of freeboard leading to a breach. Data of this sort is essential for the
development of more rational analysis tools for assessing the seismic
vulnerability of levees. The field testing will be supplemented by an extensive
laboratory testing program to further investigate key material response
characteristics such as soil strength loss and volume reduction caused by
shaking. The improved knowledge of levee seismic vulnerability will be broadly
applicable wherever these earth structures are founded on organic soils. Testing
activities will be closely coordinated with engineers at the California
Department of Water Resources to identify a suitable site. Insights gained from
this project could fundamentally alter the manner in which Delta seismic risk is
assessed and retrofit decisions are made. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
The most important societal impact of this research will be improvement of
seismic risk assessment in the Delta, which in turn will result in better
informed retrofit and/or construction decisions and a water delivery system that
is more likely to maintain functionality during and following earthquake
shaking. This award will also support development of education modules that
leverage NEES resources to contribute to the broader NEESinc goals for
education, outreach and training (EOT). The modules will teach about the current
water delivery system, the network of levees in the Delta, the link between
water delivery and the levee network, the engineering properties of these
levees, the potential seismic failure mechanisms of the levees, and the
consequences on the availability of water for drinking and irrigation. Included
with the modules will be a study guide containing suggestions regarding
implementation of the modules at different levels (i.e., undergraduates and
K-12). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data from this project will be made available
through the NEES data repository (http://www.nees.org)&lt;br/&gt;