* 0830098
* Heat Transfer from Nanoparticles to Liquids
* ENG,CBET
* 02/07/2008,02/28/2010
* Gang Chen, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 02/28/2010
* USD 154,282.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Thermal Energy Transport from Nanoparticles to Liquids
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was received as an unsolicited submission to
the Chemical and Transport Systems Division and was funded by the Thermal
Transport and Thermal Processing Program. Incorporating nanoparticles in thermal
engineering is a rapidly growing technology. A typical example is a
nanoparticle-engineered coolant, which exhibits a significantly higher cooling
rate than traditional coolants compared with coolants without nanoparticles
added, a feature crucial for thermal management of microelectronics. Nano-
biotechnology is another example: heating nanoparticles bonded to biological
molecules allows localized heating on the selected molecules, thereby achieving
precisely-controlled biochemical reaction without affecting neighboring
molecules. For these applications, it is extremely important to understand the
mechanisms involved in the transport of thermal energy from the nanoparticle to
the surrounding media in order to guide the design of nano-thermal systems. The
Intellectual Merit of the research project is to develop a fundamental
understanding of nanoscale thermal transport from single nanoparticles to
surrounding liquid medium. The research plan includes the development of
techniques to precisely measure the temperature distribution of the nanoparticle
and its surrounding medium, and the characterization of nanoparticle-liquid
structure using advanced photon sources. Advanced modeling of the physical
structures of nanoparticles, nanostructures of liquid molecules close to the
interface, and thermal energy transport will be developed and applied. The study
will reveal how hard materials (solid particles) and soft materials (liquid
molecules) are bound together to form different nano- intermediate structures,
and how thermal energy is transferred through the nanostructure in hard-soft
material systems. It will advance measurement techniques for thermal properties
of nanomaterials, and modeling techniques for nano- thermal systems, and
ultimately further our fundamental understanding of nanomaterials. The broad
impact of the research spans multiple disciplines, including thermal
engineering, molecular structure and transport, and bioengineering. The research
will also have significant impacts on education. The education plan includes
development of new courses on nanotechnology, and recruiting high-school
students, undergraduate students, underrepresented students and graduate
students to work on the project.&lt;br/&gt;