* 0830269
* Interaction and Migration in the Sonoran Desert, A.D. 900-1300
* SBE,BCS
* 03/07/2008,07/31/2010
* Margaret Beck, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2010
* USD 16,180.00

The National Science Foundation will support research on prehistoric ceramic
manufacture and exchange in southern Arizona, advancing knowledge about Native
American migrations and population interactions before European contact. Dr.
Margaret Beck is studying the relationships between sedentary Hohokam
agriculturalists (related to the modern O'odham) and more mobile Lowland Patayan
groups (perhaps related to Yuman-speaking groups such as the modern Maricopa).
The territories of these groups overlapped along the Hohokam western frontier,
near what is now Gila Bend, Arizona. Current archaeological evidence suggests
that after A.D. 1000-1100, Patayan groups may have migrated into traditional
Hohokam territory to the east, contributing to the formation of the multi-ethnic
communities seen in the historical and modern periods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this study, Patayan population movements will be identified through the spread
of Patayan potters into Hohokam territory, who would have manufactured Patayan
vessels using local materials. The primary hypothesis is that that many of the
Patayan ceramics recovered from Hohokam territory were manufactured there,
reflecting resident Patayan potters, and were not imported from western Lowland
Patayan territory. In order to see patterns of regional exchange and migration,
the places of manufacture for Patayan and other ceramics will be determined
using chemical composition analysis specifically, instrumental neutron
activation analysis (INAA) for 350 ceramic fragments and 20 natural clay
samples. These data will be combined with data from a large regional INAA
database to trace ceramics to their place of manufacture, and will create a
still-larger database for future researchers. The INAA patterns will be combined
with other lines of evidence from other studies, including ceramic, shell,
obsidian, and petroglyph distributions, to better understand regional exchange
patterns and the extent and significance of eastward Patayan
migration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Patayan-Hohokam relationships are of
anthropological interest as another potential case of interaction,
interdependence, and kinship ties between two groups with visibly different
settlement patterns and economies. Such relationships have been documented
worldwide between foragers or other relatively mobile groups and adjacent
sedentary food producers, although the nature and intensity of these
relationships varies. The late prehistoric social landscape studied here also
sets the stage for later developments in the region. Patayan migration into
Hohokam territory in the Middle Gila, Salt, and Santa Cruz River valleys
contributed to regional social and cultural change in the last few centuries of
prehistory. Their experience is important to our understanding of interactions
between groups of different social and economic complexity, habitation and
adaptation in the Papagueria of southwestern Arizona, the changing cultural
landscape in the Hohokam Classic period (ca. A. D. 1150-1450), and the
development of historical-period and modern Native American groups in the
region. The roots of historical-period territories and interactions in the
southern Southwest lie in the prehistoric period addressed by this study. This
project can significantly contribute to a larger discussion between professional
archaeologists, Native American communities, and the general public about
regional interaction in the late prehistoric and protohistoric
periods.&lt;br/&gt;