* 0830389
* Modeling Innovation Chains Using Case-Based Econometrics: Nano-electronics and Biotechnology Applications
* SBE,SBE
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Kenneth Flamm, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joshua Rosenbloom
* 08/31/2012
* USD 374,221.00

Much of the literature on technological innovation focuses on analyzing measures
of the scientific, technical, or commercial productivity of specific types of
innovation-related activities in isolation, and does not consider the overall
productivity of the linked sequences of these activities that constitute an
innovation chain, from scientific discovery through commercialization. There
currently is a gap in understanding of how different types of individual
innovative activities come to be linked sequentially in a chain of events that
ultimately may produce new commercial products or processes. Similarly, little
is known about the organizational and institutional determinants of the overall
productivity of linked sequences of such innovative events over time and space.
This project analyzes the economic, organizational, and institutional
determinants of the probability of a successful transition between such
innovative events, and ultimately, toward commercially successful innovation, at
each stage along the innovation chain. Data gleaned from patents, scientific
publications, literature and patent citations, licensing agreements, research
funding, and collaborative agreements are being used to construct a novel
database of spatial and temporal linkages between activities and entities at
each stage along an innovation chain, and to develop qualitative and
quantitative indicators of knowledge and technology flows within these chains of
linked events. The database is being constructed using case studies of nano-
electronic innovations in the semiconductor industry, and applications of
biotechnology innovations in the pharmaceutical industry. This research focus is
inspired by efforts within these two mature high technology industries to
experiment with novel strategies to integrate emerging technologies into their
innovation pipelines. The variety and breadth of organizational, institutional,
and funding strategies used to coordinate innovative activities in these
industries provides a rich and varied set of data to be used in developing
indicators and understanding of knowledge and technology flows.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Although this research focuses on the
semiconductor and pharmaceutical industries, the analysis should also have a
broader impact in the development of more generally applicable stylized facts
about determinants of the innovative process. The indicators of knowledge and
technology flows being constructed are available for use as data in estimation
of econometric models of determinants of the probability of a given R&amp;D
project successfully transitioning to various possible types of successor
projects along an innovation chain, and ultimately, resulting in
commercialization. Analysis of this database using a structural model provides
empirical insights into the economic, organizational and structural factors that
maximize the probability of success for innovation-related projects. These
insights are a significant contribution to the development of a science of
science and innovation policy. Further, decision makers in both the public and
private sectors should be able to use these results to help choose among
different possible organizational, institutional, and funding strategies, and
improve the odds of successful innovation resulting from supported
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;