* 0830809
* Interference Management and the  Capacity of Wireless Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Syed Jafar, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2012
* USD 269,761.00

Project Summary: Interference Management and the Capacity of Wireless
Networks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interference is believed to be the principal
barrier to achieving higher data rates in wireless networks. The recent
emergence of the idea of interference alignment has shown that the capacity of
wireless networks can be significantly higher than prior estimates. The key idea
is to design signals cleverly to occupy half the bandwidth in such a manner that
they cast overlapping shadows at each receiver where they constitute
interference, while they remain distinct at the receivers where they are
desired. The surprising conclusion is that "everyone gets half the cake", i.e.,
regardless of the number of users competing for the same wireless spectrum,
potentially every user is able to access half the bandwidth with no interference
from other users. This research integrates the interference alignment
perspective into the existing array of wireless network capacity results and
uses the collective insights, tools and techniques to develop optimal
interference management algorithms. The integrated view of interference
management resulting from this research is a significant contribution to both
the theory and practice of wireless network design. It contributes analytical
insights that are pivotal in not only estimating the performance limits of
wireless networks but also in finding efficient ways to approach these limits.
Understanding the capabilities of wireless networks is essential for the
industry, the academia, the government agencies and the society in general to
have realistic expectations from the wireless networks of the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators adopt a layered approach with the
following three thrusts - (1) Capacity characterizations for elemental
scenarios, (2) Generalized degrees of freedom characterizations for different
classes of networks, and (3) Distributed interference management algorithms for
large networks. At the microscopic level, the research explores the capacity of
a parameterized continuum of elemental networks that capture the transitional
regime between scenarios where interference alignment is capacity optimal and
the classical strong interference, very strong interference and noisy
interference cases. On a coarse but larger scale, capacity approximations are
obtained in the form of generalized degrees of freedom characterizations for
wireless networks, including the impact of relays, feedback and cooperation. The
third stage takes a macroscopic view of wireless networks and combines the
insights obtained from the capacity and degrees of freedom perspectives into
distributed interference management algorithms. The stability of network
management algorithms and their robustness to channel uncertainty is also
investigated.&lt;br/&gt;