* 0830080
* PASI  Microscopy Techniques for Nanomaterials; Cancun, Mexico, August 11-22, 2008
* O/D,OISE
* 01/16/2008,02/28/2009
* Miguel Jose Yacaman, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 02/28/2009
* USD 95,030.00

This Pan-American Advanced Studies Institutes (PASI) award, jointly supported by
the NSF and the Department of Energy (DOE), will take place August 11-22, 2008
in Cancun Mexico. Organized by Dr. Miguel Jose Yacaman of the University of
Texas-Austin, this PASI will include lectures, hands-on laboratory modules, and
poster sessions for postdocs, graduate students, and junior faculty from the
American continent. Participants will include 25 students and junior researchers
from the United States and 25 from Latin American institutions, as well as 15
lecturers. Lecture topics will include: tomography, diffraction, and calculation
methods, confocal and other techniques that will increase familiarity with new
nano-characterization microscopy-based methods. In addition to the lectures,
activities will include hands-on instruction and discussion of new optical
microscopes, as well as presentations of advances and holographic techniques for
nanostructures characterization, all with the goal of providing participants
with an up-to-date review of this field of research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
PASI on microscopy techniques for the characterization of nanomaterials will
provide the participants with knowledge of the latest transmission electron
microscopy (TEM) techniques and will increase the quality and impact of their
research. The PASI results will be disseminated through the web and in CDs to
promote the advance of microscopy in the Americas.