* 0830224
* Scholar's Award Proposal for Investigating the Origins and Evolution of the 'Basic Research' as a Political Symbol
* SBE,SBE
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Roger Pielke, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Julia I. Lane
* 08/31/2011
* USD 41,378.00

&lt;br/&gt;Understanding symbols in political discourse is important because
symbols shape how policy problems and options are framed. This project focuses
on understanding the origins, evolution, and dynamics of the concept of "basic
research" in science policy discourse. The exact phrase can be seen as a
political symbol representing a concept that has otherwise been characterized as
pure research, fundamental research, and transformative research, among other
terms. The term "basic research" did not exist prior to the 1920s and currently
appears to be falling out of favor. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The topic is of
current interest because science policy discussions in Europe and the United
States are now characterized by changing language and symbols, and the concept
of "basic research" appears to be a causality of this change. In Europe the
phrase "fundamental research" has gained some traction whereas in the United
States, particularly in the NSF, the phrase "transformational research" has some
traction. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The broader impacts of the
proposed research are varied. The origins of the concept of "basic research"
will be of interest to scholars of science and science policy, but will also
inform understandings of the evolution of science policies and contemporary
debates. An obvious example of the practical implications of such understandings
is how R&amp;D budgets are accounted for in the United States. For many years
these budgets have been categorized based on a framework where projects are
categorized according to the concepts of basic and applied research. If the
language of science policy changes to disfavor "basic research" as an important
concept, is this change merely cosmetic? Or are there substantive implications
for how we organize and think about the domains of science and innovation
policy? These questions cut to the core of organization and policy in the
National Science Foundation, but also other agencies of government that support
R&amp;D, including science agencies in countries across the world. The research
will be broadly disseminated and prepared in such a manner so as to contribute
to education and contemporary policy discussions.&lt;br/&gt;