* 0830895
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Holocene Hunter-gatherer Plant Use and Foraging Choice, a Test from Minas Gerais, Brazil
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2008,02/28/2010
* Michael Jochim, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2010
* USD 15,000.00

The doctoral research of Myrtle Shock focuses on the analysis of plant remains
from two excavated archaeological sites in the Brazilian savanna. Plant remains
are usually poorly preserved at ancient habitations of hunter-gatherer
populations. However, the archaeological sites considered in this study have
excellent preservation of plant remains because they are in limestone rock
shelters in northern Minas Gerais, Brazil. Since the sites have multiple,
discrete depositional layers of human habitation dating back to 11,500 BP, the
data collected will provide a window into hunter-gatherer diet and diet changes
from 11,500 to 2500 BP, when agriculture was introduced to the area.

Supervised by Dr. Michael Jochim of the University of California, Santa Barbara,
Ms Shock is working in collaboration with Brazilian scholars. The two
archaeological sites furnishing data for her research have been excavated by Dr.
Ándre Prous and Dr. Renato Kipnis. These scholars' excavations and analysis of
sites in northern Minas Gerais provide the radiocarbon chronology and a basic
understanding of these hunter-gatherer occupations. This research project builds
upon their investigations by considering an aspect of site analysis which has
not previously been considered, the analysis of botanical remains. The analysis
of the remains of plants is integral to understanding subsistence, both what
people ate and its origin. One of the current interpretations of hunter-gatherer
behavior in central Brazil is that over time mobility, the area over which
groups roamed, decreased. Decreased mobility is evidenced from previously
documented changes in settlement patterns and the use of stone tools. Among
other hunter-gatherer groups decreased mobility resulted in dietary changes. The
analysis of animal remains from the sites in northern Minas Gerais did not show
the expected dietary changes accompanying decreased mobility. The analysis of
plant remains by this project will contribute to understanding about
subsistence, incorporating both plant and animal use into a full picture of the
diet of hunter-gatherers through the 9000 years represented in the excavation
stratigraphy. Changes in plant use over time may help explain how the hunter-
gatherer groups adapted to decreased mobility, including changes in human
resource use and foraging choices. Furthermore, understanding the timing and
mechanisms of dietary change is a step toward the overall interpretation of
cultural change.

Analysis of plant remains for this project will be conducted in Brazil where Ms
Shock will have the opportunity to consult with Brazilian botanists, work
alongside other archaeologists, and train Brazilian students in the
archaeobotanical specialty. Plant analysis is an emerging research topic in
Brazilian archaeology. Preliminary consultation with the Brazilian national
herbarium has interested the curators in how important plant seed collections
could be to archaeology. This project will train individuals in northern Minas
Gerais to collect specimens for a botanic reference collection, increasing their
awareness of the potential value of local native plants. The reference
collection will be donated to the Museum of Ethnography and Archaeology at the
University of São Paulo for future archaeobotanical studies.