* 0830349
* Collaborative Research:  DAT and MOD:  The Division of Innovative Labor
* SBE,SBE
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2013
* Ashish Arora, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 09/30/2013
* USD 387,755.00

Innovation is becoming more open, often involving multiple organizations in a
division of innovative labor (DoIL). The division of innovative labor in the
economy is conceived of as the distribution across firms and other organizations
of the following steps in the innovation process: 1) research/idea generation;
2) development; and 3) commercialization. Despite its importance, there is
little broad-based, systematic evidence on the extent or nature of the DoIL, nor
on its impact on firm performance or the rate of technical advance. The project
collects the first systematic data on the DoIL for the United States by
surveying over 20,000 firms in manufacturing and selected service industries,.
The collected data quantifies key features of the DoIL. It also provides the
basis for developing and empirically testing models of the DoIL and its effects
on innovative performance. The project addresses a number of important
questions, such as the extent to which startups, as compared to established
firms, are generators of new ideas, the importance of universities as sources of
industrial innovation, and the extent to which firms' use of external knowledge
inputs increases their innovative performance. Finally, the research advances
the economics of innovation by generating formal models that capture the DoIL
and testing those models empirically.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This
project is the first national effort to collect data on innovative activity
generally, going beyond R&amp;D and patenting. It is an important addition to
the data infrastructure required for a science of science and innovation policy.
By generating new data on innovative activity, creating new metrics, and
developing new models of the innovation process, the research also informs both
public policy and firm strategy. The research should contribute to deliberations
on intellectual property policy and policies on standards and cooperative
research and development agreements that potentially affect the growth of
technology markets and the DoIL. By highlighting the role of small firms,
startups, and universities in the innovation process, the findings should also
help inform federal support to university research and new firm formation. The
project findings should also contribute to the federal government's ongoing
efforts to improve its collection of data on industrial R&amp;D and innovation.
The research also contributes to the management of innovation by highlighting
the returns to extramural knowledge sourcing, or strategic alliances formed to
develop or commercialize new technologies.