* 0830550
* Collaborative Research:   CCF-TF:   Computing Geometric Structures of 3-Manifolds
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Xianfeng Gu, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 06/30/2012
* USD 239,994.00

0830550&lt;br/&gt;Gu, Xianfeng&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the solution of
Poincar´e's conjecture and Thurston's geometrization conjecture, it has been
proven in theory that all closed 3-manifolds can be decomposed to pieces which
admit one of eight canonical geometries. Geometric structures of 3-manifolds
play fundamental roles in geometry and topology. The proposal focuses on
inventing practical algorithms to compute geometric structures of 3-manifolds.
The geometric algorithms combine both numerical and symbolic methods to compute
the canonical Riemannian metrics on discrete 3-manifolds. These algorithms will
lay down the foundations to tackle many important and long lasting open problems
in engineering fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All shapes in real life are
volumetric. The computational algorithms on shapes are based on geometric
structures of 3-manifolds, either explicitly or implicitly. It is important to
understand various geometric structures on 3-manifolds and to design rigorous
computational framework to approximate them. The proposal focuses on computing
canonical Riemannian metrics on 3-manifold using triangulations, angle
structures and the volume functional. In discrete setting, Riemannian metrics
are represented as edge lengths, the curvatures are represented as dihedral
angles. The symmetry of volumes of tetrahedra induces special volumetric energy
form. The critical points of the volume energies correspond to the desired
canonical metrics. For hyperbolic 3-manifolds, the volume energy is convex. The
global minimal point is unique and reachable using Newton's method. In general
3-manifolds, the volumetric energy is more complicted, there may exist
topological obstructions. The proposal studies the formation of the
obstructions, and designs different strategies to modify the triangulation to
remove the obstruction and reach the canonical metric solutions. The geometric
structure of 3-manifolds can be directly applied in comuter graphics, computer
vision, geometric modeling and medical imaging and many other fields. The
practical computational tool will be helpful for mathematicians and physists in
studying low dimensional topology. The visualization tools will be valuable for
teaching and propogating the knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;