* 0830165
* Universities, Innovation and Economic Growth (MOD)
* SBE,SBE
* 10/01/2008,11/30/2012
* Larry Leslie, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Joshua Rosenbloom
* 11/30/2012
* USD 404,999.00

ABSTRACT: Studying the contributions of U.S. universities to the innovation
process and National Income is important to understanding how our current
economic status has been achieved and to how our international competitiveness
may be maintained or increased. This project models a key component of the
innovation system, particularly creation and deployment of knowledge and the
flows of financial resources. The objectives of this work are to produce
estimates of the contributions of various combinations of university resources,
especially those of STEM units, to outcomes that represent intermediate steps in
the innovation process and that contribute to NI and thus to U.S.
competitiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key insight of the project is that
universities produce multiple outputs--for example supplies of highly skilled
labor and new knowledge. The importance of this labor and technological
development to the national economy has been well established in both classical
and evolutionary economic theory. In addition, universities serve as support
institutions for firms and industries. Universities contribute to intermediate
outcomes that stimulate innovation processes and fuel the national economy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary emphasis is to use data to develop new models
explaining the relationships among resource deployment in U. S. universities and
intermediate (to National Income growth) university outcomes, particularly in
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM). These are outcomes that
are important to U.S. economic growth and ultimately to international
competitiveness and hence the models can be used to inform science and
technology investment decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project builds a
relational meta data base that examines the relationships among resource
deployment in U.S. universities and intermediate university outcomes related to
innovation and economic growth. The data for the project are derived from a
variety of sources at the institutional, departmental, and individual levels.
Intermediate and final outcomes include wages paid, the production of graduates,
patents, licenses, start-up and spin-off companies, consultancies, joint
industry-university grants and contracts, job-training programs for firms?
employees, and importantly, research papers. ?Inputs? related to these outcomes
include various university resources: e.g., the human resources of university
faculty, staff, and student workers; the time allocations of these individuals
across teaching, research and service; and the allocation of the university?s
own financial resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: The benefits
include advancing understanding of the relationships among resource deployment
in U. S. universities and intermediate university outcomes in STEM fields. These
are outcomes that are important to U.S. economic growth and ultimately to
international competitiveness. Thus, the models can be used to inform science
and technology investment decisions.&lt;br/&gt;