* 0830661
* Polyhedral Frameworks for Approximation Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Ojas Parekh, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Petros Drineas
* 08/31/2010
* USD 100,000.00

Linear programming (LP) and polyhedral formulations have earned an unparalleled
reputation in the last 60 years as a unifying framework for both practically and
theoretically attacking discrete optimization problems, ranging from resource
allocation and scheduling to routing and VLSI design. From a theoretical
perspective they are the basis of most known approaches to constructing generic
approximation algorithms for NP-hard problems. Despite LP's distinguished
status, the PI feels that the full impact of polyhedral techniques on computer
science has yet to be realized. The PI aims to address this gap by (1)
developing frameworks for designing approximation algorithms that better
leverage the structure that polyhedral formulations provide, and, as an
ambitious long term goal, (2) developing a complexity theory based on polyhedral
formulation size.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, the PI proposes an
iterated packing technique for rounding packing problems that enjoys many of the
benefits that the elegant and powerful iterated rounding method offers for
covering problems: iterated packing is conceptually simple, and large fractional
components facilitate rounding. One may view LP as a bona fide model of
computation, with formulation size as a measure of complexity. This perspective
has the potential of inducing different types of separations than traditional
complexity measures; for example, although matching is a fundamental problem in
P, there is no polynomial-sized polyhedral formulation known for it. The PI also
seeks to unearth connections between traditional and polyhedral complexity. For
any discrete optimization problem, the PI suggests a canonical decision problem
and conjectures that the optimization problem is solvable in polynomial time if
and only if the associated decision problem is in NC^1.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
broader goal of this inherently interdisciplinary research is to forge deeper
connections between the operations research and theoretical computer science
communities: LP is a foundational component of the former, and the PI seeks to
elevate the status of LP beyond that of just a tool in the latter. The PI will
attempt to engage collaborators from both communities, and the research
conducted will be disseminated in venues visible to both communities.&lt;br/&gt;