* 0830128
* Identification and Sensitivity Analysis of Complex Interaction Networks
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2012
* John Goutsias, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 06/30/2012
* USD 349,158.00

Identification and Sensitivity Analysis of Complex Interaction Networks Complex
networks, consisting of interacting elements linked together with processing
units, are ubiquitous across many disciplines of modern science and engineering.
Examples include biochemical reaction networks, cellular networks,
epidemiological networks, social networks, organizational networks, power
distribution networks, as well as internet and mobile cellular networks.
However, knowledge of the organizational structure and functional properties of
most networks is very limited. Due to high complexity, elucidating the physical
principles and structural mechanisms underlying interaction networks is a very
difficult task, which requires collection and systematic analysis of large
amounts of data. As a consequence, there is a general consensus that the
development of a scientifically rigorous approach to studying interaction
networks is urgently needed. The main goal of this research is to develop a
general statistical signal processing methodology for model-based identification
and analysis of complex nonlinear interaction networks from incomplete and noisy
observations. The investigators study rigorous theoretical and computational
techniques for estimating the structural and dynamic properties of interaction
networks by state-of-the-art identification and model selection methodologies,
and for studying network robustness via probabilistic sensitivity analysis. To
achieve computational efficiency, a ?two-phase? approach to network
identification is employed, guided by sensitivity analysis. This approach
effectively exploits the fact that complex interaction networks are robust to
most parameters. The objective of the first phase is to quickly estimate the
values of the unknown network parameters from available measurements without
much concern for their accuracy. The objective of the second phase is to use
sensitivity analysis to accurately estimate the values of a small number of
?influential? parameters by using more informative observations of network
behavior obtained by selective perturbations.