* 0830398
* SGER: Direct Cross-Slope Ventilation of the ACC at the Western Scotia Ridge
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2010
* Laurence Padman, Earth and Space Research
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 04/30/2010
* USD 49,806.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;PI: Laurence Padman&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
0830398&lt;br/&gt;Title: SGER: Direct Cross-Slope Ventilation of the ACC at the
Western Scotia Ridge&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The Antarctic
Ocean &amp; Atmospheric Sciences Program funded this Small Grant for Exploratory
Research project entitled Antarctic CRossroads Of Slope Streams (ACROSS). This
study will be a US contribution to the larger context of the International Polar
Year (IPY) Synoptic Antarctic Shelf Slope Interactions (SASSI) theme. SASSI is
an organizational structure to integrate studies around the Antarctic continent
that pertain to the shelf slope interactions including those that pertain to
formation of Antarctic Bottom Water. Antarctic Bottom Water drives the lower
limb of global meridional ocean circulation that helps to regulate global
climate. Interactions on Antarctic shelves form dense water which sinks or
ventilates the deep ocean in a variety of ways. Available information suggests
that the Weddell Sea region contributes about 50% of Antarctic Bottom Water.
ACROSS will specifically explore the importance of direct ventilation in the
vicinity of the South Scotia Ridge of the deep Antarctic Circumpolar Current
(ACC) relative to indirect ventilation through upward mixing of bottom-trapped
outflows of dense Weddell Sea Deep Water. (Complementary efforts by others in
the region will provide information linking the deep ACC to AABW formation.)
Until now, it has been presumed that the indirect mechanism of ventilation holds
but hydrographic evidence from previous regional studies (e.g. international
DOVETAIL, 1997-2000 and UK ALBATROSS, 1999) suggests the possibility of the
direct processes. Furthermore, inverse modeling and estimates from acoustic and
hydrographic measurements implicate extraordinarily high (by 2-3 orders of
magnitude) diapycnal mixing rates in this region. Elevated mixing may be driven
by wind stress or the interactions of abyssal currents with topography or tides
with topography. Determining which ventilation mechanisms prevail is important
for understanding global climate change since the hypothesized direct
ventilation mechanism should respond quite rapidly to changing shelf conditions
such as the spectacular loss of a 3200 km2 section of the Larsen B Ice Shelf
over one month in 2002. This project will entail direct small scale turbulence
measurements from which diapycnal mixing can be determined and factors driving
that mixing can be evaluated on a 30 day cruise of the Argentine RV Puerto
Deseado in early 2009. Established tidal models for the region will help guide
sampling, which in turn should help to resolve the reasons for inconsistent
magnitudes between the models. Hydrographic and lowered acoustic Doppler current
measurements as well as augmentation of moorings funded by the Spanish to
achieve quantification of the Antarctic Slope Current contribution to direct
ventilation are covered in a separate complementary project (Alejandro Orsi
NSF-0818061). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This SGER project will take
advantage of an extraordinary field opportunity that leverages a broad array of
international shelf-slope ocean circulation studies being carried out during the
IPY. Cooperative Argentine (ACROSS), Spanish (E-SASSI) and Brazilian (SOS)
efforts are focused in the specific region of this study. The cooperation
affords broader regional coverage and includes a tracer program that will help
to quantify the net ventilation rates of AABW as well as biological studies.
ACROSS is further complemented by several US IPY investments in broader region
including the US Diapycnal Isopycnal Mixing Experiments (DIMES) that is joint
with the UK, an intensive study of the dynamics and transport of the Antarctic
Circumpolar Current in the Drake Passage and a SASSI study in the Palmer Long
Term Ecosystem Research (LTER) site on the western dies of the Antarctic
Peninsula. There are numerous other international efforts that are underway as
part of the SASSI umbrella. Such efforts are being coordinated the international
Antarctic Zone (iAnZone) group, which is a SCOR/SCAR (Scientific Committee for
Ocean Research/Scientific Committee for Antarctic Research) affiliated program.
A female technician will be supported by this proposal to run the profiler at
sea and to process the data. The ACROSS microstructure data will be processed
and made available to national and international collaborators via the
international SASSI and WOCE Southern Ocean Atlas web sites. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;