* 0830380
* Collaborative Research : Approximate Fictitious Play for the Optimization of Complex Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Archis Ghate, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 07/31/2011
* USD 83,404.00

The prevalence of advanced computing technology has resulted in&lt;br/&gt;&gt;
increasingly complex simulation models of manufacturing,&lt;br/&gt;&gt;
telecommunication, logistic, transportation, supply chain and
other&lt;br/&gt;&gt; engineering systems. Such models often lack mathematical
properties&lt;br/&gt;&gt; that have traditionally been essential to the
development of efficient&lt;br/&gt;&gt; computational procedures for determining
an optimal system design.&lt;br/&gt;&gt; Consequently, the need arises to
develop new optimization algorithms&lt;br/&gt;&gt; that remain efficient even in
the absence of simplifying mathematical&lt;br/&gt;&gt; structures. This research
investigates the analytical and practical&lt;br/&gt;&gt; potential of
computationally efficient variants of Fictitious Play&lt;br/&gt;&gt; (FP), an
iterative technique from the mathematical theory of learning,&lt;br/&gt;&gt; as
an optimization paradigm to achieve this goal.&lt;br/&gt;&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&gt; The
key idea is to model the optimization problem as a game of common&lt;br/&gt;&gt;
interest between artificial "players" that correspond to components
of&lt;br/&gt;&gt; a carefully chosen partition of the design variables. The
shared&lt;br/&gt;&gt; interest of these players is to optimize the metric of
system&lt;br/&gt;&gt; performance. Theoretical justification for this approach
is rooted in&lt;br/&gt;&gt; the well-known fact that for games of common
interest, limit points of&lt;br/&gt;&gt; FP are Nash equilibria and thus may be
viewed as a type of local&lt;br/&gt;&gt; optimum. The research builds on the
investigators' earlier work on&lt;br/&gt;&gt; Sampled Fictitious Play (SFP), a
modification that replaces the&lt;br/&gt;&gt; exceptionally demanding expected
utility calculations in FP with their&lt;br/&gt;&gt; sampled approximations
while still preserving FP's theoretical&lt;br/&gt;&gt; properties. The work will
culminate in a powerful and rigorous suite&lt;br/&gt;&gt; of algorithms the
investigators term Approximate Fictitious Play&lt;br/&gt;&gt; (AFP), where the
"players" interact with one another by calculating a&lt;br/&gt;&gt; best
response to a sample of strategies independently and adaptively&lt;br/&gt;&gt;
chosen from a probability distribution over their history of past
best&lt;br/&gt;&gt; responses. A major computational benefit of AFP is that the
best&lt;br/&gt;&gt; response subproblems are embedded in and significantly
smaller than&lt;br/&gt;&gt; the original optimization problem, leading to a
dramatic increase in&lt;br/&gt;&gt; efficiency compared to finding jointly
optimal strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&gt; Traditionally, simulation models of complex
systems have been employed&lt;br/&gt;&gt; as descriptive tools to test "rule-of-
thumb" alternatives suggested by&lt;br/&gt;&gt; a knowledgeable user. The AFP
paradigm promises to make these models&lt;br/&gt;&gt; prescriptive as its
convergence and optimality properties do not rely&lt;br/&gt;&gt; on regularity
conditions that such systems and models are unlikely to&lt;br/&gt;&gt;
exhibit.&lt;br/&gt;