* 0830672
* Multi-platform Synthetic Aperture Imaging in Complex Environments via Microlocal Techniques
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Margaret Cheney, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2013
* USD 527,107.00

Multi-platform Synthetic Aperture Imaging in Complex Environments via Microlocal
Techniques Multiple advances in diverse fields are expected to transition
synthetic-aperture imaging technology from a dedicated single platform requiring
an operator to a large number of small platforms operating autonomously. Such a
swarm of sensors is expected to provide orders-of-magnitude performance gains
relative to a single, dedicated platform. They are also expected to operate in
complex environments involving dynamically changing scenes and multiple
scattering. Such multi-platform synthetic-aperture imaging systems pose a number
of challenges to image formation in addition to those involving wave propagation
in complex environments. First, the requirement for scalability implies that the
computational resources at each platform are limited and that moreover there may
not be perfect phase coherency between platforms. This means the reconstruction
algorithms have to be fast, decentralized and be able to handle phase errors.
Second, the autonomy of the platforms implies non-ideal conditions from the
perspective of image reconstruction: the sensors may be traversing arbitrary
trajectories, and transmitting varying waveforms, etc. These challenges rule out
the use of standard tomographic methods. This research involves developing
theoretical foundations and corresponding constructive algorithms to address the
challenges of multi-platform synthetic-aperture imaging. The fundamental
developments of this project are applicable to all scattered-field-based
synthetic-aperture imaging modalities, including RF and acoustics. Central to
the project is microlocal analysis. This theory leads to powerful Generalized
Filtered-BackProjection (GFBP) techniques that can accommodate non-ideal imaging
conditions and wave propagation models for complex environments. This project
investigates innovative extensions to microlocal techniques and integrates them
with inverse scattering theory and statistical estimation and detection theory.
Specifically, the investigators study GFBP algorithms for imaging in dynamically
changing and multiple-scattering environments; analytic autofocus methods and
fast GFBP algorithms.