* 0830109
* MOD - Transmission of Tacit Skills in East Asian Graduate Science Programs
* SBE,SBE
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2013
* John Kilburn, Texas A&M International University
* Standard Grant
* Joshua Rosenbloom
* 09/30/2013
* USD 385,356.00

This project addresses a crucial area in the globalization of science: the
transmission of skills to future scientists. It does this by examining doctoral
training practices critical to the transmission of skills acquired through close
interaction and hands-on experience, also known as 'tacit skills.' Although an
under researched area in scientific training, 'tacit skills' play a crucial role
in the creativity and innovation in experimental and mathematical sciences,
laser and nuclear technology development. While there is a standard set of
accepted scientific principles shared by most scientists, there are also
differences in terms of what is learned and how it is taught. This project
focuses on Japan, Singapore and Taiwan. Each of these countries has consistently
exhibited high rates of innovation and productivity in recent years. However,
while these countries have been successful in science education, each of them
approaches the task of training scientists in various methods. The core
hypothesis of the study is that student-mentor relationships significantly
configure levels of scientific creativity, pioneering discoveries, technical
innovation, and research productivity. The project?s main goal is to develop an
empirically tested and contemporary model of science that will inform science
and innovation policy about the role of 'tacit skills' in knowledge production,
and to enhance best practices in U.S. graduate science training. The project
analyzes the different methods using analytical, conceptual, and methodological
tools from the areas of knowledge sharing, social networks, and the extended
translation model of science. While a component of the project will uncover the
degree of codified knowledge that is taught by most standard text books and the
mastery of this knowledge, the project also seeks to understand advanced
knowledge acquisition and transmission through the study of graduate science
training by exploring students? relationships with mentors and peers.
Contemporary research has shown that the nature of informal educational
practices is not only conducive to the acquisition of 'tacit skills' but
enhances professional competencies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: This
project not only advances understanding of how 'tacit skills' are transmitted,
but also informs pedagogical programs, and generates 'best practices' in
advanced scientific training that recognize the changing nature and morphology
of knowledge production brought about by globalization. It enhances scientific
manpower and infrastructure by establishing networks of collaborations across
disciplinary boundaries among scientific institutions globally. This project
involves the active participation of students from underrepresented Hispanic
populations located along the U.S.-Mexico border. This participation exposes and
socializes these students to actual multicultural research work and to
professional scientific careers critical to socioeconomic development of the
U.S. southern border.