* 0830618
* Scalable Geometric and High Dimensional Data Structures and Algorithms: A Parallel and Distributed Approach
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2012
* Hanan Samet, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 03/31/2012
* USD 220,000.00

PROPOSAL: 0830618&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: Univ. of Maryland&lt;br/&gt;PI: Samet,
Hanan&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: Scalable Geometric and High Dimensional Data Structures
and Algorithms: A Parallel and Distributed
Approach&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;The steadily decreasing cost of
commodity computing as well as the democratization of the increasing thirst for
computing power, fueled largely by the massive volumes of data generated by
powerful search engines, has led to a reexamination of how the traditional
methods of solving problems that involve search. As more and more applications
become web services (i.e., ``cloud applications'' in technology parlance), there
is an increasing expectation that answers be obtained and provided in real time
and at a scale that is capable of servicing millions of users at the same time.
For many complex problems, this expectation forces a rethink of the solution
paradigm. In particular, there is an increasing realization that the speed and
scale requirements mean that the only way to provide the service is to decouple
the solution process into two steps: one that precomputes a solution space to
all possible problems, and possibly provides an encoding of it, and one that
navigates the solution space. This research explores the decoupling paradigm in
the context of answering shortest path and nearest neighbor queries in a spatial
network, where the effect is to decouple the process of computing shortest paths
along the network from the process of finding the nearest
neighbors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims at increasing the
accessibility to massive amounts of user generated data including maps,
documents, videos, images, and music by speeding up the similarity searching
task. This invariably involves taking advantage of ways to sort the data which
also includes developing methods to build appropriate multidimensional and
spatial indexes. By focusing on making use of GPUs and distributed processing,
as well as decoupling via pre-computation, it brings the benefits of this
increase in computing power to a wider range of users who often have this power
at their disposal. In addition, by demonstrating the power obtained by the use
of decoupling in computing nearest neighbors in a spatial network it stimulates
the development of scalable solutions to other search problems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;