* 0831664
* NeTS-ANET:   One Video Multicast to Serve Diverse Wireless Receivers
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Dina Katabi, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Darleen L. Fisher
* 09/30/2012
* USD 445,000.00

Wireless video multicast is increasingly popular, driven by users' desires to
watch live TV and sporting events on laptops and handheld devices. The problem
however is that wireless users have very different channel characteristics.
Transmitting the video separately to each user is unscalable, yet transmitting a
single video stream that serves all users despite their diverse channels is a
challenging problem.

This project introduces Digital Rain, a new paradigm for streaming video to
heterogeneous wireless receivers. Digital Rain builds on the theory of
compressed sensing to develop a novel approach to video multicast where the
source simply broadcasts coded packets belonging to a video stream. Receivers
exploit all received video packets, even those with bit errors. Receivers that
collect more packets, or experience fewer bit errors in each packet, see higher
video quality without any need to receiver feedback, retransmissions, or
changing the rate of the codec.

This research creates a bridge between the theory of compressed sensing and
practical wireless network design. Further, it significantly improves the
scalability of wireless video multicast, and hence has a direct and broad impact
on emerging wireless video applications (e.g., IPTV, or Television over Internet
Protocol), as well as the corresponding wireless industry. The research is
integrated and synergistic with an educational plan that, in addition to
standard graduate and undergraduate research and course development, directly
supports MIT's effort to provide a more nurturing environment for women and
underrepresented minorities. Finally, as in previous funded work, the project
will result in open source, downloadable code.