* 0831901
* Enhancing Science Education in Northeastern Kentucky
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Lesia Lennex, Morehead State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 08/31/2011
* USD 210,250.00

The Enhancing Science Education in Northeastern Kentucky is an MSP-Start
Partnership effort of the Rowan County School District and Morehead State
University (MSU), as the lead institution. As this Partnership evolves, it will
explore the potential of adding more school district and community and technical
colleges Partners: the county school districts of Bath, Boyd, Carter, Elliot,
Greenup, Lawrence, Lewis, Menifee, Montgomery, Morgan, Wolfe; and Kentucky
Community and Technical College System (KCTCS) campuses?Ashland, Big Sandy, and
Maysville. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This MSP-Start will develop a Partnership to
enhance the educational capabilities of potentially twelve county school
districts within an hours drive of MSU. The focus is on science education in
grades 5-8. In these counties, this represents approximately 250 teachers that
could interface with the project. The overall goal of this planning process is
to design a project specific to the regional culture and resource base that
results in a better teacher preparation program, enhanced competence in the
science content knowledge and pedagogical skill of veteran teachers, and
ultimately, middle grade students who are better prepared in science. In order
to attain this goal, this Start-Partnership will:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-
Establish a "Working Partnership" that has the capacity to develop and implement
an MSP project&lt;br/&gt;- Develop a needs assessment strategy that clearly
identifies program and professional development needs of all partners and
provides the necessary guidance for developing improvement
strategies&lt;br/&gt;- Formulate a management structure that represents all
partners and promotes the partnership and facilitates the development of an MSP
proposal in an efficient and timely fashion&lt;br/&gt;- Identify improvement
targets that are significant, realistic and accomplishable&lt;br/&gt;- Develop
activities for an MSP proposal that have the potential to produce significant
improvement in student learning outcomes in science&lt;br/&gt;- Devise a
research component for an MSP proposal that is likely to produce findings and
results that will enlighten the science education community&lt;br/&gt;- Develop
a competitive MSP proposal that employs a process which results in the
foundation for on-going higher education-school district
collaborations&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;At the beginning of the project, needs
assessment will be conducted via interviews with school district constituents,
as well as via a symposium on "Challenges in Rural Education." Baseline data to
be obtained, as well the type of assessments to be administered, will be
identified in Partnership collaboration with an external evaluator. A core
activity of the Start-Partnership will be the identification of appropriate
science modules, which integrate science and pedagogy, to be adapted or
developed. It is anticipated that the proper delivery of these modules will be
taught at summer teaching institutes, by hybrid online courses, and by teacher-
leaders developed in the school districts. During the term of this project, the
middle school teacher preparation curriculum at MSU will be evaluated with the
intention of designing new courses that combine science and pedagogy. To insure
uniformity in curricula that is generated for teacher education, liaisons will
be formed with the campuses of the Kentucky Community and Technical College
System, which supply the majority of education students that transfer to MSU. In
an effort to increase the number of teachers in the middle school pipeline,
strategies for recruitment of students into the middle school certification
program will be devised. Finally, a system of positive reinforcements for
teacher participation will be developed in collaboration with district
administrators.