* 0831502
* CT-ISG:  SPEAR:   Space Encryption based Query Processing for Privacy-Aware Location-based Services
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Xiao Qin, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 08/31/2012
* USD 215,999.00

As a result of recent wireless technology advances, mobile devices with
significant computational abilities, gigabytes of storage capacities, and
wireless communication capabilities have increasingly become popular. In
addition, positioning techniques like GPS are incorporated into an increasing
number of mobile devices. Emerging mobile applications allow users to issue
location-dependent queries in a ubiquitous manner. It is believed that location
privacy preservation represents important security and privacy problems in
mobile computing environments. For instance, when a mobile user launches a
series of queries to a location-based service (LBS) provider, that user?s
trajectory can be tracked through the service logs. Although it is true that not
all location-dependent queries are privacy-sensitive, it is of growing
importance to offer users the choice of protecting their location privacy when
it is necessary. The technical objectives of the project are to (1) develop
space encryption and space decryption mechanisms, (2) design privacy-protected
query processing algorithms to answer spatial queries based on encrypted search
space, and (3) develop a sophisticated SPEAR system architecture for supporting
real-world applications. This project also promotes education by exposing
students to mathematical and technological underpinnings in the fields of
security and data management. The success of this project will lead to another
wave of increased usage for LBS and benefit the economy of our country. Research
results will be disseminated through publications at conferences, journals, and
the website at http://www.eng.auburn.edu/~weishinn/SPEAR.html