* 0831973
* NEDG:   Locally-optimal Power, Rate Adaptation and Scheduling in Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Rohit Negi, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Min Song
* 08/31/2012
* USD 350,000.00

The growth of communication networks has profoundly increased &lt;br/&gt;the
availability of information and increased productivity. A &lt;br/&gt;key
requirement in continuing to reap the benefits of connectivity &lt;br/&gt;is the
growth of pervasive wireless networks. Wireless networks &lt;br/&gt;are resource
constrained, primarily due to their broadcast nature. &lt;br/&gt;Alleviation of
this constraint requires an efficient, distributed &lt;br/&gt;solution to the
Medium Access Control (MAC) problem. In this project, &lt;br/&gt;the
investigators study `locally-optimal scheduling and PHY &lt;br/&gt;adaptation',
by incorporating physical layer (PHY) models into &lt;br/&gt;maximal scheduling
for increased accuracy, and priority mechanisms &lt;br/&gt;for increased
efficiency. This will result in the design of &lt;br/&gt;efficient, distributed
MAC protocols, whose guarantees are accurate, &lt;br/&gt;from the PHY
perspective. The results from this research, which is &lt;br/&gt;training a
graduate Ph.D., are disseminated through appropriate &lt;br/&gt;publications and
seminars, to guide the development of future &lt;br/&gt;wireless network MAC
protocols and are incorporated into the &lt;br/&gt;university?s undergraduate
and graduate courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PHY adaptation and scheduling (MAC)
in general ad hoc wireless &lt;br/&gt;networks, is an NP-hard problem,
especially, if distributed &lt;br/&gt;solutions are desired. In this project,
the investigators study &lt;br/&gt;locally-optimal algorithms, a generalization
of maximal scheduling, &lt;br/&gt;using broad queuing results that prove
stability, and adapt them &lt;br/&gt;to wireless networks, with careful
attention paid to the PHY model. &lt;br/&gt;Theoretical characterization of the
performance of these algorithms &lt;br/&gt;is carried out using graph theoretic
and optimization theoretic &lt;br/&gt;analysis, along with intuition on the
design of optimal (though, &lt;br/&gt;centralized) MAC algorithms. The key ideas
of this research, which &lt;br/&gt;are at the intersection of communication
theory, queuing theory, &lt;br/&gt;graph theory and optimization, are
incorporated into university &lt;br/&gt;courses, using the concepts of Lyapunov
functions and fluid models. &lt;br/&gt;