* 0831646
* NeTS-NECO:    Collaborative Research:   Fixing the Reliability Problem in Network Software From its Root
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Jennifer Rexford, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2013
* USD 350,000.00

Most of the Internet's complexity resides in software running on Internet
routers. Bugs in this software are a highly critical problem, leading to a
number of recent high-profile attacks and outages, and are increasingly becoming
a bottleneck in building highly reliable networks. The PIs are designing and
evaluating techniques to make the Internet resilient to software bugs. Their
approach consists of two key components. First, they are building a highly
reliable single instance of a network router. This involves performing a
characteristic study of bugs in router software, by using static and dynamic
code analysis and by taxonomizing publicly disclosed vulnerabilities. They also
apply and extend techniques such as rollback, reordering inputs, microreboots,
and automated debugging to construct a software router resilient to
implementation bugs. Second, the PIs are developing and building an architecture
for highly-available bug-resistant networks. Their design leverages the
principle of "control and data diversity", which simultaneously runs multiple
functionally-equivalent instances of a piece of software or data. Each instance
is changed from the others in a way that makes it unlikely multiple copies will
simultaneously undergo the same bug, for example by randomizing the execution
environment, having each instance be responsible for a subset of routes, or by
having different programmers implement each instance. In addition to producing
designs and algorithms that enable these networks, the PIs will also make
available tools and implementations to enable their use. &lt;br/&gt;Successful
completion of this project will significantly improve the Internet's ability to
avoid and recover from failures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;