* 0831753
* Collaborative Research - ANET:   Mobius: A Multi-Tier \\Socially-Aware Network Infrastructure
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Quentin Jones, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Darleen L. Fisher
* 08/31/2012
* USD 409,978.00

ANET: Mobius: A Multi-Tier Socially-Aware Network Infrastructure

Abstract

This research explores the benefits of embedding social knowledge in network
protocols and services to support mobile social computing. Specifically, it
investigates 1) which mobile social computing problems can be solved with
socially aware networks; 2) what social information is amenable to being
captured and utilized by these networks (assuming privacy preserving
capabilities); 3) what mechanisms and system architectures are necessary to
enable dynamic network adaptation to geo-social context changes; 4) how to
leverage these mechanisms to design socially-aware protocols and services; 5)
how to define and enforce individual and global privacy policies, in general and
for accessing social context; and 6) which programming abstractions provide both
flexibility and simplicity for rapid mobile social computing application
development.

This research will lead to a self-organizing, self-adaptive, community-oriented,
two-tier network infrastructure for mobile social computing. The mobile human-
centric tier runs mobile applications and collects geo-social context
information. The peer-to-peer system tier runs services in support of mobile
applications and adapts to the geo-social context to enable energy-efficient,
scalable, secure, and reliable applications. For large-scale evaluation, this
project uses the NSF-sponsored SmartCampus testbed with hundreds smart phones
distributed to students.

This research will expand the understanding of mobile social computing, an area
of great practical relevance to the society at large. To spur the dissemination
of results, the source code is made publicly available. Noteworthy educationally
is that both institutions, University of South Florida and New Jersey Institute
of Technology, are among the national leaders in the percentages of graduates
from under-represented groups, and the researchers have specific plans to
attract students from these groups to research opportunities in the project.
Finally, the foundational results of the project are integrated in an inter-
disciplinary studio course that creatively explores design ideas in mobile
social computing.