* 0831466
* CT-M:   Collaborative Research:   A Resilient Real-Time System for a Secure and Reconfigurable Power Grid
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Xiaorui Wang, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Samuel M. Weber
* 08/31/2011
* USD 50,000.00

Energy infrastructure is a critical underpinning of modern society that any
compromise or sabotage of its secure and reliable operation will have a
prominent impact on people's daily lives and the national economy. Past failures
such as the massive northeastern power blackout in August 2003 and the recent
Florida blackout in February 2008 have revealed serious defects in both system-
level management and device-level designs. This project is aimed at a hardware-
in-the-loop reconfigurable system with embedded intelligence and resilient
coordination schemes to tackle the vulnerabilities of the power grid. The
research in this project will investigate a number of critical issues related to
this system, including the design of a hybrid system architecture, the
development of advanced power electronic devices with embedded intelligence for
reconfiguration of the power grid, the development of control- theoretic
algorithms to guarantee real-time adaptation to system changes caused by various
attacks, and the threats to existing state estimation algorithms and their
defenses.

The proposed research can help secure the grid and prevent potential outages
from happening. Instead of limiting the system to manage existing devices, the
developed system is adaptive to the future power grid in years to come. The
power grid is a typical example of complex networks of highly interacting
subsystems. Solving these fundamental problems to create a resilient power grid
has a direct and immediate impact on this and other critical infrastructures.