* 0831831
* NeTS-NECO:   Minimizing Communication Latency with Multiple Channels And Radios in Multihop Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Peng-Jun Wan, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Min Song
* 08/31/2012
* USD 390,457.00

Providing each node in a multihop wireless network with one or more multi-
channel radios offers a promising avenue for improving the networking
performance. Recently, the impact of multiple channels and radios on network
throughput has been extensively studied. But little is known about their impact
on communication latency, which is an important performance metric for a broad
class of time-critical applications such as emergency response and disaster
recovery. While it is of no doubt that multiple channels and radios hold
potentials of reducing the communication latency, what really matters is how
much benefit can be realized by specific algorithms. This research conducts
comprehensive algorithmic studies of minimizing the communication latency by
utilizing multiple channels and radios. The algorithms developed in this
research can be applied directly to support real-time applications in multihop
wireless networks. The theoretical analysis of the performance against the
number of channels and/or the number of radios can also provide guidance to
industries on cost-effective design of multihop wireless networks.

This research focuses on the communication schedules for four primitive
communication tasks which are involved in almost all applications: broadcasting,
aggregation, gathering, and beaconing. The problem of seeking a shortest
communication schedule for each of these four tasks is NP-hard. The
investigators develop constant-approximation algorithms for them and analyze the
impact of the number of channels and the number of radios on the latencies of
the constructed communication schedules. This research is of interest to a
number of research communities, and may serve as a basis for interesting future
projects on multi-channel multi-radio multihop wireless networks. Both student
training and curriculum development are integrated into this research.

