* 0831999
* NECO:   Provably Assurable Ad Hoc Networks under Arbitrary Malicious Behaviors
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Saurabh Bagchi, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Min Song
* 08/31/2013
* USD 215,991.00

Ad hoc wireless networks are becoming important in several application domains.
In these networks, nodes cooperate among themselves to achieve collective tasks,
without requiring any pre-existing infrastructure. However, the cooperative
nature and the possible hostile environments where the networks may be deployed
make them vulnerable to a wide range of security attacks. Some of these attacks
can be addressed through customized cryptographic primitives. However, the
adversary can physically compromise the network nodes, and thus defeat the
cryptographic measures. Further, the adversary may have much higher
computational and communication capabilities than the legitimate nodes, and the
malicious nodes can collude among themselves. This has created a difficult
imbalance in securing ad hoc networks---defense is hard and resource-consuming
while attack is often easy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the PIs at
Purdue University are developing a provably-assurable ad hoc network protocol
suite to invert this imbalance. The system developed can give guaranteed
security properties under a wide, and rigorously quantifiable, range of
adversarial behaviors, including Byzantine behaviors. The project employs two
main thrusts: (i) Security by diversification and randomization; and (ii)
Security through accountability and reputation. The solution is applied to
secure routing, secure data aggregation, and distributed leader
selection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The project will significantly
advance our understanding of the fundamental limits for security in wireless ad
hoc networks. It will provide methods to design provably-secure wireless
protocols for a large class of mission-critical applications. The results will
be disseminated through public release of detailed design documents, software,
and graduate course materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;