* 0831064
* Collaborative Research:   CT-M:  Unification Laboratory for Cryptographic Protocol Analysis
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Jose Meseguer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2010
* USD 50,000.00

Proposal Title: Collaborative Research: CT-M: Unification Laboratory for
Cryptographic Protocol Analysis Institution: SUNY at Albany Abstract Date:
08/13/08 The ability to reason about different equational theories is very
important to the analysis of cryptographic protocols. An understanding of how
equational properties of a function used by a protocol can be exploited by an
intruder can be invaluable in finding flaws that might otherwise be missed.
Numerous examples exist in the literature and even in fielded protocols. One
very powerful tool for cryptographic protocol analysis with equational theories
is equational unification. Equational Unification was the basis of the NRL
Protocol Analyzer (Maude-NPA). Its use of these theories allowed it to both
reproduce existing flaws and find new ones at a level of precision way beyond
that available to other tools at its time. This suggests that equational
unification if properly extended, can give support in a similar fashion to
analysis of cryptographic protocols that use functions that obey more expressive
equational theories. The aim of this project is to provide a laboratory for
equational unification that will develop the algorithms and techniques that can
be used to support the use of equational unification in cryptographic protocol
analysis. This effort will consist of two parts: the development of unification
algorithms for theories of interest to cryptographic protocol analysis, and the
development of new techniques for employing unification in cryptographic
protocol analysis. The project will help in the design and implementation of
next generation tools for protocol analysis. Tools developed in the project will
be made available to other researchers working on formal protocol analysis
methods as well as to protocol designers for experimentation. The educational
component of the project will involve undergraduate and graduate students at
both institutions.