* 0831707
* Collaborative Research:  NECO:  A Mathematical Framework for the Performance Evaluation of Large-Scale Sensor Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Jeffrey Kharoufeh, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 08/31/2012
* USD 311,994.00

Collaborative Research:&lt;br/&gt;A Mathematical Framework for the Performance
Evaluation of Large-Scale Sensor Networks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Jeffrey P.
Kharoufeh and Rusty O. Baldwin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This grant
provides funding for creating and analyzing mathematical models of large-scale
wireless sensor networks (WSNs). A WSN is a collection of sensing devices linked
via a wireless transmission medium for the purpose of sensing and conveying
information about objects, their surroundings, and their interactions, without
human intervention. When the information is time sensitive, the network?s
performance capabilities are critical to meeting quality-of-service guarantees.
However, assessing network performance is difficult because the location of the
data is generally not known a priori, or it may not exist in the network at all,
sensors have limited energy reserves and fail when these reserves are exhausted,
sensors may fail due a harsh operating environment, and communication channel
quality may vary with time, impacting the timely delivery of critical data.
These characteristics distinguish sensor networks from other communication
networks and significantly complicate the task of modeling and predicting their
performance over time. If successful, the results of this research will lead to
fundamental principles, effective algorithms and optimization schemes that will
enhance the design, analysis, control and realization of WSNs. Using a queueing
network-based model, specific performance parameters will be investigated
including the network energy expenditure, average time required to respond to
queries and the query success rate (the proportion of queries that are answered
on time). The sensitivity of the network?s performance to query deadline
distributions, sensor failures and the network?s environment will also be
assessed. Finally, optimization of the network?s parameters will be investigated
to ensure resilience in various operating environments.&lt;br/&gt;