* 0831774
* PRISM Phase II: Research on Key PRISM Strategies
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Charles Kutal, University System of Georgia
* Standard Grant
* James Hamos
* 09/30/2011
* USD 2,032,900.00

PRISM Phase II is conducting research on strategies that lead to changes in the
culture of science and mathematics education where dimensions of culture include
policies, practices, partnerships, and resources. Research studies in PRISM
Phase II are producing further evidence of how and to what extent distinctive
PRISM Phase I strategies - K-16 Professional Learning Communities, Culture of
Higher Education and a Public Awareness Campaign - give rise to these four key
elements of holistic cultural change.

The Phase II PRISM partnership is producing these outcomes through an integrated
set of research studies focused on the following questions:

1) In what ways and to what extent do K-16 professional learning communities
lead to partnerships which change professional practice of K-16 educators and
improve student learning in K-16 science and mathematics?

2) To what extent do policy change and incentive structures that reward higher
education faculty to collaborate with K-12 schools and to strengthen their own
teaching result in sustainable changes in departmental and institutional
culture, including changed policies, changed practices, new partnerships and
dedicated resources, in higher education?

3) To what extent do schools that participate in the Public Awareness Campaign
have greater student motivation, greater parental involvement and higher student
achievement in science and mathematics than non-participating schools?

PRISM Phase II expects to culminate in replicable models for implementing the
three strategies in ways which elicit changes in culture and ultimately
strengthen K-16 science and mathematics education. Based upon the successes of
PRISM Phase I, the University System of Georgia (USG) has launched a STEM
Initiative, in FY 2009, designed to replicate the successes of PRISM throughout
all 35 USG institutions. Through STEM Initiative funding, 12 institutions will
implement K-16 professional learning communities and faculty incentive programs
for participation in the scholarship of teaching and learning with faculty from
all USG institutions invited to participate in STEM-focused Faculty Institutes
on the Teaching and Learning of Science and Mathematics. The implementation of
STEM Initiative-supported learning communities provide a broad base of activity
to support experimental studies, as well as avenues by which the results of the
Phase II work also immediately inform the work of the STEM Initiative team. This
provides a direct avenue of dissemination of Phase II results to all public
institutions of higher education in Georgia. Phase II research findings are also
being disseminated through presentations at national and regional conferences
and through scholarly journals and proceedings.