* 0831505
* CT-ISG:   Enabling Location Privacy; Moving beyond k-anonymity, cloaking and anonymizers
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Cyrus Shahabi, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Samuel M. Weber
* 08/31/2012
* USD 402,666.00

Location-based services are becoming an important part of our everyday lives.
According to the Pew Internet &amp; American Life Project survey, 47% of current
cell-phone users prefer to have mapping features on their phones. Similar trends
can be shown for other portable devices such as car navigation systems, PDA's
and computer laptops. However, recent concerns over how such services can
jeopardize a user's private information resulted in the newly coined term
"location privacy." Several breaches of subscriber's privacy by stalking their
locations have been reported. This project is going beyond the conventional
approaches proposed for location privacy by devising novel frameworks to
eliminate the need for a trusted intermediary (acting as an anonymizer) in
location-based services and that satisfy significantly more stringent privacy
guarantees as compared to the anonymity-based approaches. The first approach is
inspired by the work in the area of encryption and the second approach builds
upon the framework of private information retrieval. Both of these research
fields have been around for a long time enabling privacy protection but not yet
fully exploited for location privacy. The broader impact of this study is to
enable many users with privacy concerns to utilize customized location services
in their mobile devices without compromising their location privacy. This in
turn would increase the customer base for many industries and government
agencies in the areas of geospatial information systems, online maps, car
navigation systems, Location Based Services, and military and intelligence
operations. Results will be disseminated through papers published in relevant
conferences and journals; open-source code will be disseminated through the web:
http://infolab.usc.edu/projects/LocationPrivacy/.