* 0831133
* CT-ER:   Ultra-wideband Radio for Low-Power Security
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Robert Jackson, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Vijayalakshmi Atluri
* 08/31/2011
* USD 200,000.00

Encryption is an important tool for security, particularly in wireless systems,
where the signal is not physically constrained. However, in extremely low-power
applications (e.g. RFID and sensor nets), the power required for nodes to run
standard cryptographic algorithms at a high level of security can be
prohibitive. In this exploratory project, the hypothesis that encryption at the
physical layer can supplant encryption done digitally at higher layers in
extremely low-power wireless applications is being evaluated. A novel low-power
ultra-wideband (UWB) radio framework is being developed and its cryptographic
security for different system parameters considered. Team expertise in digital
and RF circuits allows accurate calculation of both trends and fundamental lower
bounds on the power required under both standard digital cryptographic and the
physical layer cryptography scheme. The research team consists of UMass faculty
with expertise in ultra-wideband system design and characterization, low-power
digital hardware, and low-power RF hardware, and (external) contributions from
an expert in cryptography at RSA Labs. Expected results of the project include
(1) the development and cryptographic assessment of the proposed UWB framework
for encryption, and (2) the development of trends and lower bounds on the power
required for both standard (digital) approaches and the UWB framework. The
establishment of the hypothesis would have a substantial impact by providing a
completely new view of how to provide encryption in low-power wireless systems.
The project is also providing opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students to perform research crossing the boundaries of analog and digital
circuits, communication theory and cryptography.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;