* 0831369
* U.S.-Germany Dissertation Enhancement:  Serre Duality for Systems of Submodules
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2008,12/31/2008
* Markus Schmidmeier, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 12/31/2008
* USD 9,300.00

U.S-Germany Dissertation Enhancement: Serre Duality for Systems of
Submodules&lt;br/&gt;0831369&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this Doctoral
Dissertation Enhancement Project is to further the research in mathematics
conducted by Audrey Doughty, doctoral student at Florida Atlantic University, on
her thesis topic in the representation theory of finite dimensional algebras.
Ms. Doughty's dissertation advisor is Associate Professor Markus Schmidmeier.
The award will allow Ms. Doughty to visit the Collaborative Research Center 701
at Bielefeld University in Germany and work with Professor Claus M. Ringel on
the following topics: use of homological methods, in particular Serre duality,
for the classification of systems of submodule embeddings; applications to the
problem posed in 1934 by Garrett Birkhoff of the classification of the possible
subgroups of finite abelian groups, and to the Invariant Subspace Problem in
operator theory; and computation of the precise values of the Calabi-Yau
dimension of submodule embedding categories in important examples.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will expand on an existing collaboration
between researchers at Florida Atlantic University and at Bielefeld University.
Its success will improve opportunities for research and graduate studies in
mathematics in Southeastern Florida.