* 0831508
* CT-ISG:   High-Speed Network Defense with Massive and Diverse Vulnerability Signatures
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Yan Chen, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 08/31/2012
* USD 400,000.00

NSF Proposal 0831508: CT-ISG High-Speed Network Defense with Massive and Diverse
Vulnerability Signatures&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Yan Chen, Northwestern
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the ever-increasing sophisticated Internet
attacks, network-based Intrusion Detection/Prevention Systems (IDS/IPS) are of
critical importance. Such systems mainly have two important metrics: accuracy
and throuput. Accuracy is of particular importance, especially for IPSes which
are inline devices that throttle connections when they are identified as
malicious via signature-matching. The latest works assume that regular
expressions (RE) are the right choice for signature formatting. However, there
are polymorphic and metamorphic variations that can evade the RE-based
detection. The fundamental problem of RE signatures is that in many cases it
cannot capture the vulnerability conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
project, we design a next-generation semantic based network IDS/IPS system
(called NetShield) which contains thousands of vulnerability signatures with
rich diversity, including protocol, file and web semantic signatures. While
offering much better accuracy, NetShield provides high throughput comparable to
that of the state-of-the-art regular expression based IDS. We design algorithms
for 1) efficient protocol parsing and 2) massive protocol semantic signature
matching. Furthermore, we extend the parsing and matching solutions to Web and
file semantic signatures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has the potential
for significant broad impact. The research component will produce fundamental
knowledge that will advance the state-of-the-art in the network IDS/IPS systems.
Our wide collaboration with industry researchers will facilitate such technology
transfer. In addition, we plan to disseminate our work through timely releases
of software/hardware, traces, and benchmarks to the open source community for
broader usage. This research agenda is complemented by a strong and tightly
integrated educational and outreach component. &lt;br/&gt;