* 0831416
* CT-ER:   Exploring Physical Functions for Lightweight and Robust Cryptography
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* William Martin, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Xiaoyang Wang
* 08/31/2010
* USD 149,797.00

Low cost devices, e.g. RFIDs, smartcards, sensor nodes, etc., are becoming
crucial for building the next generation pervasive and ubiquitous heterogeneous
networks. Given the massive volume, the per-unit manufacturing cost will play a
key role in the adoption of these technologies. These devices are constrained in
their available computational power and footprint. Yet, their cryptographic
units, which tend to be among the most demanding components in the device
architecture, need to be hardened against physical tampering. The project is
exploiting hardware anomalies for cryptographic ends. Even as chip manufacturing
progresses and becomes more precise, one can always expect slight variations
along the production line which can be used to distinguish one physical device
from any other manufactured on the same production line. The team is developing
models, processes and hardware primitives which contribute to the goal of
exploiting these individual fingerprints so that they can be used to efficiently
identify devices and enable secure, tamper-resilient communication. This
initiative is providing low-cost, tamper-resilient cryptography from physical
functions, and thereby plays an enabling role in the adoption of a wide array of
products and applications to the benefit of the national economy and national
security. The results of this project include new physically unclonable function
(PUF) constructions with a particular emphasis on constructions which naturally
permit reduction to computationally difficult problems, PUF-enabled
cryptographic building blocks (such as secure and efficient storage, tamper-
resilient state machines, etc.) and PUF-enabled cryptographic primitives (e.g.
authentication schemes, block ciphers, pseudo-random
generators).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;