* 0831298
* CT-T:   Proactive Techniques for Preserving System Integrity:   A Basis for Robust Defense Against Malware
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2015
* Ramasubramanian Sekar, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 08/31/2015
* USD 1,000,000.00

Cyber threats have escalated rapidly over the past decade. "Zero-
day&lt;br/&gt;attacks" have become significant, delivered increasingly
through&lt;br/&gt;seemingly innocuous means such as web pages, images, and
documents.&lt;br/&gt;Malware is rampant, being installed surreptitiously on
millions of&lt;br/&gt;computers around the world using a combination of spam,
phishing,&lt;br/&gt;malicious shareware and freeware.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Today's defenses use techniques such as signature-based
scanning and&lt;br/&gt;file integrity monitoring to detect the presence of
malware, and then&lt;br/&gt;remove them. Unfortunately, clever adversaries can
quickly develop&lt;br/&gt;malware that conceals itself from these detection
mechanisms, and&lt;br/&gt;hence defeat such reactive defenses. In contrast, this
project will&lt;br/&gt;develop an approach that dramatically improves defenses
against&lt;br/&gt;malware, and put a computer owner back in control over
the&lt;br/&gt;attackers. This approach, based on synthesizing and
enforcing&lt;br/&gt;low-level information flow properties from generic high
level&lt;br/&gt;policies, will be used to identify components of a computer
system&lt;br/&gt;that are critical for its trustworthiness, and preserve
their&lt;br/&gt;integrity. In doing so, the approach will enable users to
continue to&lt;br/&gt;use popular operating systems, applications, and add-on
software, while still&lt;br/&gt;assuring system
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project will develop
techniques to protect (a) the OS&lt;br/&gt;and critical applications from
untrusted code or data, (b) critical&lt;br/&gt;applications from modules and
extensions (e.g., browser plug-ins and media&lt;br/&gt;player codecs) that run
within the same address space, and (c) the OS kernel&lt;br/&gt;from damage due
to untrusted kernel extensions such as device drivers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
terms of broader impact, this project will train several
graduate&lt;br/&gt;students, the research will be integrated into the teaching
activities of&lt;br/&gt;the PIs, and finally, the solutions developed will be
distributed as&lt;br/&gt;open-source software and/or tools.&lt;br/&gt;