* 0831647
* NECO:   Architectural Support For Fault Management
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Ramana Kompella, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 08/31/2012
* USD 237,000.00

The Internet today is a global infrastructure used by one and all. It is also
the life-line of many businesses. The Internet, however, still lacks the kind of
reliability and robustness we expect from critical infrastructure. While the
network has in-built fault-tolerance, it is typically restricted to hard
failures alone; the network is equipped to neither detect nor react to soft
failures such as high delays or losses that may be due to faulty implementations
or hardware failures or congestion related. To support delay- and loss-sensitive
applications, it is important to devise efficient mechanisms to quickly detect
such failures and recover from them in an automated fashion. Network devices
provide very little support for debugging performance problems?let alone
automatically respond to them. Operators today inject active probes between
pairs of provider edge routers to detect any forwarding problems such as high
delays and losses, in their network. Operators typically rely on applying
indirect inference algorithms, such as tomographic approaches, that can infer
root causes by joining active probes with network topology snapshots. Given the
problem is fundamentally under-constrained; inference is only approximate at
best and can be quite slow. Automated response mechanisms require fast and
accurate localization in order to be effective. The main research focus of this
research is to create novel in-network fault management mechanisms to
automatically detect, localize, report and respond to failures and other
performance degradations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research revolves around
three basic ideas: 1) Equipping routers with specialized high-speed low-
complexity measurement primitives to measure delay and loss; 2) Using this
feedback to allow routing protocols to automatically respond to congestion or
chronic failure conditions; and 3) Integrating these mechanisms into NetFlow to
provide per-flow delay and loss. Together, these mechanisms provide a rich set
of tools for network operators and administrators to monitor and manage their
networks efficiently and improve the overall fault-tolerance properties of these
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This research will contribute
to the established research area of network fault-tolerance by allowing the
network to automatically detect and respond to soft failures; it will carve new
areas of research on scalable router primitives for high-fidelity measurements;
and; it will significantly enhance the capabilities of routers by incorporating
new definitions of flows commensurate with latest innovations and advancements
in the Internet. This research directions combine three disparate areas of
research?scalable router primitives, fault-tolerant routing protocols, and
measurement?to significantly improve the robustness of critical infrastructure,
the Internet. The work has the potential to provide a powerful fault management
platform the Internet requires to sustain the next generation of delay-sensitive
and interactive applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad Impact: The project
will contribute to the education of the next generation of networking engineers
and designers. The researchers will disseminate the results through the
traditional academic channels, and will actively participate in industry forums
leveraging their collaborations with AT&amp;T and Cisco. They will also design
and revise courses in Networking and Router Architectures in the graduate and
undergraduate curriculum, and supervise Ph.D, Master, and undergraduate projects
through the Honors program.