* 0831520
* CT-ISG:   Data Tethers - Preventing Sensitive Data from Loss and Theft
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Peter Reiher, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 09/30/2011
* USD 400,000.00

The Data Tethers project is building an operating system that prevents loss of
sensitive data when portable computers or storage devices are lost or stolen.
Loss of such information is commonplace and often very &lt;br/&gt;damaging. Data
Tethers addresses this problem by ensuring that when a &lt;br/&gt;portable
device leaves a secure environment, sensitive data is not allowed to go with it.
Many organizations have policies saying that such data should not leave their
premises, but they have no enforcement mechanism. Data Tethers provides that
mechanism. Data Tethers must track data as it is copied from file to file, since
the goal is to prevent data loss, not just to protect particular files. The
system must deal with issues of data lingering on in deleted files, temporary
storage locations, and other obscure places in a modern computer, since
&lt;br/&gt;thieves will look for sensitive data in those places, as well. Data
&lt;br/&gt;Tethers is being added to Sun Microsystem's Open Solaris, an existing
operating system in common use, and will make use of Sun's standard mechanism
for adding functionality to Open Solaris. The expected results of the Data
Tethers project will be a working open source operating system that will allow
the owners and curators of sensitive data to avoid loss of that data through
loss of their devices. This system will be freely available to all through a
well-known web distribution mechanism, and will also serve as a template for how
other operating system providers can add similar services to their
systems.&lt;br/&gt;