* 0831229
* SGER-Exploratory Research with Constructal Theory:  Vascular Designs
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2008,12/31/2009
* Adrian Bejan, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Theodore L. Bergman
* 12/31/2009
* USD 99,998.00

Proposal Title: SGER-Exploratory Research with Constructal Theory: Vascular
Designs&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Bejan,
Adrian&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Duke University&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No:
CBET-0831229&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nature teaches
us that in animal design the arterial blood stream invades and bathes an entire
volume (organ, muscle, tissue) as a three-dimensional tree-shaped flow
architecture. The arterial and venous blood stream is reconstituted from the
same volume as a tree-shaped flow architecture. The arterial and venous blood
trees are matched canopy to canopy (the ?canopy? vascularizes the volume). This
project shows why and when trees matched canopy to canopy are the most efficient
way of bathing (servicing, keeping alive) a three-dimensional volume. The focus
is on fundamental design principles, or design as science. This project aims to
discover the strategy for assembling, optimizing and constructing complex flow
structures, in the time direction of increasing fineness and complexity. This
forms the basis for the design of vascularized materials with leaf-like
structure and volumetric functionality. The application on which the new method
is tried is the volumetric cooling or heating of a three-dimensional body, with
applications to the cooling of electronics and the packaging of fuel cells. The
winning architectures will be such that they create the best tapestry of peaks
and valleys of temperature, with the highest peaks (the hot spots shaved to the
lowest possible level). This integrative approach to determining the best
configurations for volumetric flow systems promises to unlock the design problem
of scaling up (using a small model to predict behavior at large scales), and to
shed light on natural phenomena of self-organization and animal organ design.
The intellectual merit of this project is that the entire panoply of
vascularized designs is based on physics principles that have universal
applicability, at all scales. The theoretical view is that all these design
phenomena involve global ?flow? architectures that are ?alive? with flows.
Sustainable designs are those in which imperfections (flow resistances, costs,
danger, choke points) are balanced and distributed optimally throughout the flow
territory. This integrative approach leads strategically to maximum global
performance, and to the discovery of the flow architecture. With regard to
broader impacts, the concept of vascularized flow systems and the principle-
based approach to the discovery of global design is applicable at all scales,
from nano and microscales (electronics, fuel cells), to human size (body suits,
bodies of vehicles). This fundamental approach is applicable across the board,
from engineering to biology and geophysics. While it is true that even without
such a theoretical paradigm humans react correctly to flow imperfections in the
field, typically they react by trial and error, on a piece-meal basis. They
react without understanding the larger system and how it is connected to the
local issue. This project teaches how to be proactive, with designs (mental
viewings) that come from principle, and which benefit from the strong backing
provided by all the flow designs of nature, animate and inanimate.&lt;br/&gt;