* 0831110
* Collaborative Research: Establishing an I/UCRC Center for Multicore Productivity Research (CMPR)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2008,10/31/2009
* David Bader, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 10/31/2009
* USD 10,000.00

0831875 University of Maryland, Baltimore County (lead institution) - Milton
Halem &lt;br/&gt;0831358 University of California, San Diego - Sheldon Brown
&lt;br/&gt;0831110 Georgia Institute of Technology - David Bader &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this planning grant proposal is to establish a
"Center of Multicore Productivity Research" (CMPR). The CMPR consists of sites
at the University of Maryland, Baltimore County, the Georgia Institute of
Technology, and the University of California, San Diego. The proposed center
will develop, test and optimize prototype formulations of computationally
intensive applications and systems relevant to industry and government
partnering sponsors on emerging multicore processors. The proposed work
addresses a real-world problem, and there is a number of processor-intensive
computer processes that can benefit immediately from this technology. The
unifying theme uniting these separate research institutions into a Center for
Multicore Productivity Research is their synergistic computational research
endeavors in multicore computing, available multicore processor resources and
the expertise of their staffs to support the computer science inherent in the
parallel processing algorithms that are required to optimize the performance and
scalability of intensive computations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact
of CMPR addresses the future needs of the computer industry as this new multi
core processor technology evolves. Breakthroughs in multi core productivity will
enable real-time use of more sophisticated artificial-intelligence based control
systems, providing additional productivity savings to multiple manufacturing and
process industries. All CMPR sites are incorporating multicore computing into
their core course curricula, and CMPR plans to significantly expand the number
of industry or government organizations sponsoring relevant student research.
CMPR also plans to capitalize on its relationships with local schools to provide
opportunities for high school educators and students to participate in projects
at the center. The collaboration with Maryland public schools and the charter
school at UCSD are highly innovative. The Meyerhoff program and the Georgia Tech
interaction with Atlanta area HCBUs should provide an excellent source for
research students. &lt;br/&gt;