* 0831058
* ONR/NSF-Sponsored Workshop: Reforming Electric Energy Systems Curriculum : 3 Workshops; 1st to be held in Wash, DC Feb 12-15 2009
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2011
* Ned Mohan, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* George Maracas
* 07/31/2011
* USD 30,000.00

Various governmental agencies such the Department of Energy, Edison Electric
Institute (an association of shareholder-owned companies) and various utilities
are concerned about the aging workforce and are predicting sever shortages of
qualified electrical engineers. At the same, there is a crisis in the
undergraduate education where the courses have not changed for decades while the
industrial and utility practices have changed, in some cases dramatically. Most
Electric Power Programs nationwide are stagnating, downsizing or disappearing.
This is a trend that must be reversed, given the aging workforce in most
utilities and many industries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
proposal is to obtain NSF collaboration and funding to continue the
dissemination of the educational material and approaches developed at the
University of Minnesota. The development of these educational materials was
previously supported by NSF and is currently supported by ONR. NSF support is
request for partial participant travel funding to attend three annual workshops
organized for carrying out the above dissemination effort. ONR will be
cosponsoring the workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: The attempt
of this curricular reform is to excite our students so more of them, compared to
the present rate, pursue graduate education and PhD research. By creating a
Community of Teaching Scholars, all instructors will have an opportunity to
bring the enthusiasm of research in their classroom and possibly carry out
research themselves, for example, by approaching their local utilities. All
schools, regardless of their size and research-versus-teaching orientation, will
be approached, thereby creating a much larger pool for creativity and
innovation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The objective of the
curriculum reform being promoted through the workshops is to provide first-rate
education to undergraduates in the Electrical Energy Systems nationwide. This
curriculum has been developed to be effective, regardless of the severity of the
workforce shortages that cannot be predicted accurately, to train undergraduates
broadly so they can be flexible in their employment choices. This broad impact
on well-educated pool of graduates nationwide is made possible by this
curriculum by using the faculty and teaching assistant resources very
effectively. Therefore, this curriculum can be adopted by the entire spectrum of
schools spanning from four-year colleges that primarily focus on teaching to
large research universities. A special attempt will be made to encourage
minority-serving institutions to participate in the workshops organized under
this project.