* 0831580
* Collaborative Research:   NEDG:   Network Scheduling and Routing under Partial Information Structure
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Constantine Caramanis, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Min Song
* 08/31/2011
* USD 98,166.00

Despite the clear success stories of wireless networks in the public,
commercial, and governmental realms, recent work has shown that poor
routing/scheduling can significantly impair their performance. We note that the
unacceptable performance loss observed is not a consequence of a lack or
deficiency of scheduling/routing algorithms in the literature; rather the cause
is the information structure (channel state, queue state, topology, etc) that
these algorithms assume. This proposal steers down a different path, initiating
a conceptual shift toward the primary importance of information structure. We
consider practical scenarios where only a small fraction of the network state
can be explored. The goals of this proposal are two-fold: (a) characterizing the
fundamental impact of partial/delayed network state information (NSI) on network
throughput and other performance metrics such as delay and reliability, and (b)
developing high-performance and distributed algorithms that can operate
optimally subject to partial information. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: We believe
this work can contribute towards furthering basic network science required to
design high-performance scheduling and routing with limited NSI. We also plan to
bring some of the questions both as interesting undergraduate projects, as well
as develop a new graduate-level course on the mathematics of the design of
communication networks.&lt;br/&gt;