* 0831914
* NEDG:   Cross-Layer Designs for Video Streaming in Multihop Wireless Mesh Networks
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Prasant Mohapatra, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Min Song
* 08/31/2012
* USD 200,000.00

Cross-Layer Designs for Streaming Video in Multihop Wireless Mesh Networks

As unprecedented advances on wireless mesh networks continue, there is an
increasing expectation on such networks to support content-rich multimedia
communications (e.g., video and voice) in addition to simple data
communications. Given the resource constraints and the uncertainties or variable
nature of resource availability, quality of service (QoS) provisioning in
wireless meshes is a challenging task. These constraints coupled with the
requirements for supporting video traffic, layer-specific and isolated solutions
are not adequate; hence, arises the need for cross-layer and integrated design
approaches.

In this project, the researcher will pursue cross-layer approaches to support
video streaming over wireless mesh networks. The work will be primarily based on
experimental studies, backed by theoretical analysis, and evaluated on an
existing wide-area mesh test-bed. Intellectual components of the project are:
(a) Experimental characterization of video streaming in wireless mesh networks;
(b) Exploring cross-layer schemes for admission control and scheduling of video
flows; (c) Exploiting packet retransmissions for quality enhancement of video
streaming; (d) Experimental validation of the proposed schemes using the
existing test-bed.

The outcome of the project will have a broader impact on the society as well as
the education and training of the students. Video streaming over wireless mesh
would enhance and facilitate remote monitoring facilities and enable new
applications. Several parts of the project will be integrated with the
educational missions at UC Davis, both at graduate and undergraduate level.
Dissemination of the results and inferences will also incite further research in
the broader community.

