* 0831545
* CT-ISG:   A Game Theoretic Framework for Privacy Preservation in Community-Based Mobile Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Bhaskar Krishnamachari, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Samuel M. Weber
* 09/30/2012
* USD 265,999.00

The explosive growth of mobile devices coupled with near universal connectivity
creates new opportunities for community based mobile social networking
applications. &lt;br/&gt;In this class of applications each user in a community
contributes their knowledge about their surrounding environments and the
collective knowledge is used by the group members for a personal or social
benefit. The foundational underpinning of all mobile social networks is a
participant's desire to take advantage of the collective knowledge gained from
other users in the community. However, as security concerns grow there is a
desire to protect one's own privacy. Thus all mobile social networks have a
fundamental tension between privacy and information utility. This tension can be
well formulated as a game theory problem where a self-interested agent's
behavior alters dynamically based on the behavior of other agents in the system.
This research will investigate the existence and efficiency of Nash equilibria
and also design mechanisms that can maximize application performance while
satisfying the privacy concerns of users. In particular, this research is
conducted in the context of two specific case studies: one pertaining to a
mobile device-based real time vehicular traffic information application and
another pertaining to a community based mobile application for enhancing
personal safety. This research will provide an important proof-of-concept that a
rigorous game-theoretic analysis and design&lt;br/&gt;methodology can lead to
practical systems to provide appropriate tradeoffs between privacy and user
service. The lessons learned in this project will be broadly useful to the
development of next-generation social participation-based applications for
mobile devices. &lt;br/&gt;