* 0831530
* CT-ISG:   I-BLOCK:  Understanding and Filtering of Malicious IP Traffic
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Michalis Faloutsos, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 08/31/2012
* USD 399,847.00

0831530- CT-ISG: I-BLOCK: Understanding and Filtering Malicious IP
Traffic&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Athina Markopoulou and Michalis
Faloutsos&lt;br/&gt;UC Irvine and UC Riverside&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How can
network infrastructure be protected from malicious traffic, such as scanning,
malicious code propagation, spam, and distributed denial-of-service attacks?
This project investigates mechanisms at the network layer for blocking malicious
traffic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One such mechanism is IP filtering: access
control lists (ACLs) can selectively block traffic based on fields of the IP
header. This mechanism is already available in routers today but, in order to be
effective, two issues must be addressed. First, one must identify which IP
addresses to block, which requires understanding and detection of malicious
activity. A key insight to exploit is that malicious traffic exhibits clustering
in both time and address space. Second, filters (ACLs) are a scarce resource,
because they are stored in the expensive ternary content addressable memory
(TCAM). To decrease the number of filters and therefore the cost, aggregation is
used: a single filter blocks an entire range of IP addresses; however, this also
blocks legitimate traffic originating from that range. Filter selection becomes
an optimization problem that tries to block as many malicious and as few
legitimate sources as possible, given a limited number of
filters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outcomes of this project will include: (a) methods
for modeling malicious traffic at the IP level (b) cost-efficient filtering
algorithms and (c) a prototype to be tested in real networks. The problem is
challenging and requires synergy between machine learning, data-mining,
optimization and algorithmic techniques. The project can impact networking
practice, by providing a comprehensive set of tools that can be deployed on
today's Internet architecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;