* 0831835
* Nebraska Math
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2015
* Ira Papick, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* John Haddock
* 12/31/2015
* USD 9,235,407.00

NEBRASKA MATH is to improve achievement for all students and narrow achievement
gaps among at-risk populations by focusing on three key transition points along
the mathematics continuum: the mathematics education of children in transition
from kindergarten through early primary to grade 3; the algebra transition from
middle to high school and the transition of new secondary math teachers from
certification to the classroom. &lt;br/&gt;The project is focused on four
strategies; (i) Developing an active and mature partnership (sustained through
state dollars after the end of NSF funding) by linking mathematics teachers and
school administrators from across Nebraska with university mathematicians and
mathematics educators and early childhood educators to improve mathematics
education statewide; (ii) Strengthening the mathematical and pedagogical
knowledge for teaching of participating teachers and their professional
interactions with other teachers in their schools, while improving their
attitudes to the teaching and learning of mathematics; (iii) Improving students'
competence, beliefs and attitudes about mathematics, their appreciation of the
importance of sustained effort, and their knowledge of mathematics; and (iv))
Contributing to the research in mathematics education through a mixed methods
research design studying K-3 teacher's knowledge, attitudes, and leadership in
relation to student disposition and achievement.&lt;br/&gt;A goal of the project
is to create a model partnership, both on the University of Nebraska-Lincoln
(UNL) campus and nationally, where faculty in an academic discipline (in this
case mathematics) and faculty in education work with teachers and administrators
from the K-12 education community, sharing expertise and resources in pursuit of
a world class mathematics education system. NEBRASKA MATH partners the
University of Nebraska-Lincoln with four school districts and 15 Educational
Service Units (ESUs), in rural Nebraska, which provide support to 63 additional
school districts. The intent is to form a permanent K-16 mathematics partnership
that is sustained primarily by local dollars. Over the five years the project is
to impact 900 teachers (750 at the elementary level and 150 at the secondary
level) and approximately 60,000 students.