* 0831820
* Entrepreneurial Leadership in STEM Teaching & learning (EnLiST)
* EHR,DRL
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2015
* Mats Selen, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 12/31/2015
* USD 5,000,000.00

The Entrepreneurial Leadership in STEM Teaching & learning (EnLiST) Partnership
is comprised of Thornton High School District #205, South Holland, IL, Champaign
Unit 4 School District, Champaign, IL, and the University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign, which serves as the lead among these core partners. In addition, the
following are supporting partners: The Illinois Mathematics and Science Academy
(IMSA), IMSA-affiliated school districts, and Thornton elementary and middle
school feeder districts. EnLiST intends to develop and build the infrastructural
elements necessary to sustain a state-wide Illinois community of highly
qualified science Teacher Leaders, who will effectively contribute to the
transformation of science teaching and learning throughout the K-12 educational
continuum in their districts. EnLiST will achieve these goals through a
combination of intensive summer institutes and year-round professional
development and collaborative activities. The synergy and continuity of these
efforts will be ensured through establishment of an on-line community
capitalizing on robust technological tools and infrastructure. EnLiST will
commence with the development of core cadres of high school chemistry and
physics Teacher Leaders organized into district teams. Next, the partnership
will support and scaffold the activities of these core cadres as they engage in
developing a cadre of middle school and elementary specialist science Teacher
Leaders in their school districts. The activities of this latter participant
group will focus on an interdisciplinary approach to science teaching and
learning in elementary and middle school. Data collection and use will be a
central theme in the development of Teacher Leaders and project operation as a
whole.

The innovation of EnLiST is its intent to reconceptualize the very notion of a
"Teacher Leader" by drawing on scholarship in the field of social and
entrepreneurial leadership and theories of distributed leadership. EnLiST aims
to create a new generation of Teacher Leaders who, armed with cutting edge
content knowledge, a strong pedagogical repertoire, and entrepreneurial spirit,
can support their colleagues and transform their schools into responsive and
data driven institutions of teaching and learning. EnLiST will provide
participant science Teacher Leaders with understandings, skills, attitudes, and
habits of mind enabling them to perceive themselves, and to act, as agents of
change. The entrepreneurial leadership skills that will be developed will arm
these Teacher Leaders to meet the many challenges faced by teachers in the
current US K-12 educational milieu, including dealing with resource constraints,
uncertainty, and multiple goals often related to internally desired and
externally imposed demands for change and innovation. They will be equipped to
meet the challenges and tensions that have often impeded the adoption of
innovative curricula and pedagogies and transformation of K-12 science
instructional practices in service of addressing increasingly diverse student
population needs.

The major research questions of the project will center on understanding and
assessing the development of the target Teacher Leaders and the success of those
leaders in transforming their own teaching. The ultimate aim is to develop a
scalable national model for the preparation of social and entrepreneurial
science Teacher Leaders who act as strong champions and effective initiators and
implementors of change in pre-college science teaching and learning. The EnLiST
research questions are: (a) What is the impact, if any, of the project's
activities on participant Teacher Leaders' conceptions, attitudes, skills, and
behaviors related to social and entrepreneurial leadership? (b) What is the
nature of the perceived organizational culture in partner school districts in
relation to barriers to, and encouragement of, innovation and change? What are
the associated roles of Teacher Leaders and school administrators? (c) What is
the differential impact, if any, of enhanced social and entrepreneurial
leadership among Teacher Leaders on effecting innovation and change in science
teaching and learning in partner school districts?