* 0831428
* CT-ISG:   Usable Cyber Trust Indicators
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Julie Downs, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Vijayalakshmi Atluri
* 08/31/2012
* USD 386,665.00

When systems rely on a "human in the loop" to carry out a security-critical
function, cyber trust indicators are often employed to communicate when and how
to perform that function. Indicators typically serve as warnings or status
indicators that communicate information, remind users of information previously
communicated, and influence behavior. They include a variety of security- and
privacy-related symbols in the operating system status bar or browser chrome,
pop-up alerts, security control panels, or symbols embedded in web content.
However, a growing body of literature has found the effectiveness of many of
these indicators to be rather disappointing. This research is systematically
studying the effectiveness of cyber trust indicators and developing approaches
to making these indicators most effective and usable. The researchers are using
cognitive psychology's "mental models" approach to study how both expert and
non-expert personal computer users understand common cyber trust indicators.
They are also using the "Communication-Human Information Processing" (C-HIP)
model from warnings science to structure their evaluation and provide insights
into the human information processing steps at which a warning is mostly likely
to fail. Using an iterative design process, they are developing improved
indicators for several common applications and evaluating the effectiveness of
these indicators. The expected results include a set of specific recommendations
for improving a set of common cyber trust indicators, a set of design patterns
for designing effective cyber trust indicators, and a curriculum module for
teaching students how to design effective and usable cyber trust
indicators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;