* 0831359
* Synoptic-Scale Influences on Outbreaks of Severe Convection
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Lance Leslie, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 12/31/2012
* USD 479,336.00

Severe thunderstorms and the damaging weather they produce (including large
hail, strong straight-line winds and tornadoes) are by nature small scale
phenomena occupying narrow segments of space and time. As such, local extreme
events such as tornadoes are not resolved even by advanced mesoscale numerical
models. Recent evidence nonetheless suggests that clusters of such severe
weather events (termed "outbreaks") may be anticipated on a regional basis with
lead times of 2-3 days or more, although the ability of models to discriminate
tornadic outbreaks from primarily non-tornadic ones is apparently diminished
during the spring season when damaging storms are most frequent. This study will
investigate the limits of predictability (viz. maximum lead times) over which
contrasting outbreak types may be reliably forecast by the MM5 and WRF (Weather
Research &amp; Forecasting) community models when initialized using only
spatially coarse synoptic-scale information on atmospheric structure. Derived
meteorological covariates (summary parameters used to evaluate the potential for
contrasting outbreak types) will be analyzed through a combination of subjective
and objective statistical techniques. This analysis will cover the period
1970-2003. Initial results suggest that dynamical measures including shear-
related quantities such as storm-relative helicity are favored over
thermodynamically-based measures such as Convective Available Potential Energy
(CAPE) in these long-range forecasts. This invites further exploration of why
certain pathways may be preferred for communicating large-scale atmospheric
influences down to more the scale of individual thunderstorms. Evidence of
seasonal modulation of ability to discern tornadic vs. non-tornadic outbreaks
will be further explored, as will forecast skill based both upon single model
runs and more computationally demanding ensemble runs. The utility of model-
resolved storm properties such as updraft strength in discriminating outbreak
type will also be evaluated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
work rests on improved ability to run and interpret mesoscale forecast models to
reliably anticipate major outbreaks of severe weather, to discern the nature of
these outbreaks with lead times of several days, and to gain improved
understanding of atmospheric processes connecting large and small scales.
Broader impacts of this work will include benefits from increased lead time for
the public to prepare for hazardous weather events, through immediate
communication of these advances through cooperation and collaboration with
operational forecasters at NOAA's Storm Prediction Center and Australian Bureau
of Meteorology, as well as more traditional links and graduate student
education.