* 0831615
* Milwaukee Mathematics Partnership Phase II: Sharing in Leadership for Student Success
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2013
* Kimberly Farley, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 12/31/2013
* USD 2,099,988.00

The Milwaukee Mathematics Partnership (MMP) began in 2003 with the aim of
improving mathematics achievement for the students in the Milwaukee Public
Schools and increasing students' success in transitioning to college
mathematics. The University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, the Milwaukee Public
Schools, and the Milwaukee Area Technical College have solidified their
continued commitment as core partners to this unique collaboration among a large
urban district, a four-year urban university, and a two-year technical college.
Student achievement has increased in most grade levels with an accompanying
decrease in the gap between state and district proficiency. Evaluations indicate
that building school capacity through a math framework and distributed
leadership via school learning teams and math teacher leaders is associated with
improved student achievement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phase II will investigate
three specific research topics. The first topic involves continued study of the
impact of distributed leadership through varied mathematics teacher leader
models on school professional communities and on student achievement. The MMP
initiated a no-release time model of teacher leaders and is transitioning to a
partial-release time model with funds from the Office of the Wisconsin Governor.
A second area of research is the transition of students to post-secondary
mathematics. The MMP will study the impact of a new district post-secondary
mathematics readiness exam on high school course enrollments and post-secondary
placements into remedial and non-remedial courses. The third area is focuses on
the development of mathematical knowledge for teaching in preservice teachers,
teacher leaders, and classroom teachers and will examine the relationship of
this knowledge to teacher leader practice, instructional practice, and student
learning.