* 0831612
* GOALI-FIND:   Optical Flow Switched Core Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2008,02/29/2012
* Vincent Chan, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 02/29/2012
* USD 118,000.00

Optical flow switching has recently emerged as a promising new approach to
address the exponentially growing traffic demands in optical networks. In order
to realize this new paradigm for optical networks, the core network must be
capable of wavelength reconfiguration and service provisioning on time scales
approaching one second or faster. The present methods used in wavelength
division multiplexed (WDM) optical transmission are designed for static
wavelength channels, which can increase in number over time and may be
configurable to form different paths at the time of provisioning. Provisioning
new wavelengths is a methodical, one at a time, step-wise process of ?turning
up? the optical signal along the path, which requires minutes to hours in order
to achieve the final stable state, appropriate for GMPLS networks. Furthermore,
the extensive literature on optical transmission assumes this quasi-static
network environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
project will be to determine both the practical and fundamental limitations on
optical flow switched networks imposed by physical layer constraints, including
optical transmission in a dynamic, wavelength switching environment. This goal
is particularly challenging because of the multi-layer nature of the problem.
The network topology and signaling protocols will dictate physical layer
transmission requirements, such as how fast the optical signal must achieve an
error free condition and over what transmission distance. Likewise the physical
limitations both in terms of performance and cost will motivate design choices
for the architectures and protocols. In order to address the multi-layer nature
of optical flow switched networks, this GOALI project is proposed as a mechanism
to utilize the novel optically transparent mesh network testbed facility within
Bell Laboratories to extend the network architecture activities within the NSF
funded NeTS-FIND Future Optical Network Architectures program at MIT. In
particular, targeted experiments will be conducted in the testbed in conjunction
with the optical flow switched network optimization studies at MIT. This new
testbed has recently been used to study both the power dynamics and the
transmission performance of signals in reconfigurable optical networks. These
two elements are essential for understanding the physical layer in a transparent
switched network and this facility is unique in that it combines these in a
broadband, long haul transmission configuration, typical of core networks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This university-industry collaboration will have broader
impact at many levels. The problem of scaling optical networks to serve the
dramatic rise in internet traffic has broad social ramifications. The project
will enable cooperation between two synergistic research efforts to address this
important problem: at MIT and at Bell Labs. The academic participants will have
the opportunity to work in a premier industrial research laboratory and benefit
from the knowledge and skills specific to that environment. In the process, the
program will provide a unique opportunity to merge the traditions within both
organizations of promoting individual driven&lt;br/&gt;