* 0831338
* CT-ISG:   Collaborative Research:  Incentives, Insurance and Audited Reputation:   An Economic Approach to Controlling Spam
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Andrew Whinston, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Samuel M. Weber
* 06/30/2011
* USD 351,562.00

ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Internet is plagued by security problems
including spam, threatening its legitimate role as the engine of growth in the
new millennium. While technology makes admirable progress against cyber-security
problems, the problem is not one of technology alone. Cyber security is part of
a framework that encompasses technological, economic and social issues. The
availability of technological solutions needs to be supplemented by service
providers accepting responsibility for deploying technologies efficiently.
Deployment of solutions and assignment of responsibility today tend to focus on
a network provider's accountability to its own customers. In the decentralized
Internet, allocation of accountability for potential impact on a remote network
is important. This research seeks to direct investments to minimize impact on
destination networks by efficient allocation of incentives. Security threats
render the Internet a risky environment, and insurance mechanisms can seek to
enhance productive and secure use of the Internet by risk management. This
project uses game theoretic models to study allocation of incentives among mail
service providers to reduce global incidence of spam. This project will develop
incentive and insurance mechanisms with the provision for certifying providers
who voluntarily accept responsibility for damage to rest of the network, conduct
empirical studies of the patterns of spam observed on Internet today for
refining the analytical model, and experimentally test and validate the
mechanisms and model. This research seeks to start an evolution of the Internet
into an accountable and well-organized environment