* 0831068
* CT-ISG:   Collaborative Research:   Router Models and Downscaling Tools
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* George Kesidis, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2012
* USD 124,923.00

National Science Foundation&lt;br/&gt;NSF Cyber Trust
Program&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 0831068&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: George Kesidis&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Pennsylvania State
University&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: CT-ISG: Collaborative Research: Router
Models and Downscaling Tools for Scalable Security
Experiments&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Summary&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;It is critical to protect the Internet from attacks such as denial of
service, and attacks on inter-domain routing. Although several defenses have
been proposed, actual deployments have been limited. A primary reason for this
lack of deployment is that most defenses have not been validated under realistic
conditions, or at sufficiently large scales. Many attacks also have second-order
effects that are not well understood. This is because it is difficult to
incorporate all the protocols involved at any reasonable scale in analytical,
simulation, or emulation models or testbeds. This project includes two
complementary efforts to address both the fidelity and scale challenges in
security experiments by designing the following: (1) Router models: High-
fidelity yet scalable models for routers and other devices will be designed that
are based on simple device measurements under a few well-crafted scenarios. Both
the queueing behavior in the data plane and resource consumption in the control
plane will be considered. (2) Downscaling tools: Techniques will be developed to
simplify experimental scenarios before studying them using simulation,
emulation, or testbed experiments. Algorithms that can downscale an experimental
scenario while still preserving the important queueing or routing
characteristics of this scenario will be devised. Broader Impact: Development
and public dissemination of general- purpose experimental tools, large-scale
testing techniques, methodologies for the use of testing frameworks, and related
graduate- level courseware will be undertaken. Significant outreach is planned
to simulation and testbed teams, e.g., ns-3, C-BGP, and DETER (based on Emulab),
and to industry, specifically Cisco, Intel, and AT&amp;T. Students from under-
represented minority groups in computer science and electrical engineering will
be actively involved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;