* 0831714
* NETS-NECO:   The WAM Continuum:   Unified Design and Operation for Wireless and Mobile Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Mostafa Ammar, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Min Song
* 07/31/2012
* USD 450,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Early efforts in wireless and mobile network research focused on
&lt;br/&gt;Mobile Ad Hoc Networks (MANETs), while some recent research has
focused on a paradigm named Disruption-Tolerant Networks (DTNs). In DTNs, in
contrast to&lt;br/&gt;MANETs, links on an end-to-end path may not exist
contemporaneously and intermediate nodes may need to store data waiting for
opportunities to transfer data towards its destination.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The question of whether the network is a MANET or a DTN is
critical to answer as it will profoundly influence its operation. Such a
question is hard to formulate and even harder to answer as many networks will
not fit neatly within a simple classification scheme. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
main premise of our work is that it is best to consider the space of Wireless
and Mobile Networks (WAMs) as a continuum. A network is characterized by its
position in this continuum which is a function of its features and which may
change over time. Certain network classes can be defined over this WAM continuum
and such network classification can be used to guide WAM design and operation.
Our work will include development of: fundamentals for WAM continuum
specification and classification, network classification approaches, and
techniques for WAM operation that exploit network classification
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We are also committed to activities that will
promote broader impact of our work including: development of modules based on
our research for graduate and undergraduate classes and continued emphasis on
inclusion of under-represented groups within our research efforts.&lt;br/&gt;