* 0831950
* Promoting Institutional Change to Strengthen Science Teacher Preparation
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Lizanne DeStefano, Association of Public and Land-Grant Universities
* Continuing Grant
* James Hamos
* 08/31/2012
* USD 1,798,783.00

This project is a three-year partnership between the National Association of
State Universities and Land Grant Colleges (NASULGC) and two discipline-based
organizations, the Physics Teacher Education Coalition (PhysTEC/PTEC, an effort
of the American Physical Society and the American Association of Physics
Teachers) and the American Chemical Society. The project vision is the creation
of a large and enduring national network of colleges and universities that have
successfully negotiated difficult institutional constraints to establish strong,
effective, and well-sustained high school teacher preparation programs in
science and mathematics - programs that respond successfully to the need for
accomplished science and mathematics teachers in their states and throughout the
country. Core objectives of the work are to: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; a. Create
and support a national leadership network from up to 50 institutions of
presidents, chancellors, provosts and their designees who are active at their
institutions in improving mathematics and science education - and especially
teacher education;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; b. Increase the number of disciplinary
faculty who are contributing toward teacher preparation and who, through inter-
departmental, inter-college and school-university partnerships, assume increased
responsibility for the mentoring and induction of beginning teachers and the
professional development of career teachers;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; c. Address
and make demonstrable progress toward overcoming the challenges that impede the
ability of universities to strengthen their science teacher preparation
programs; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; d. Widely disseminate the results and lessons
learned from this and other related projects, especially the lessons learned
about: (1) changes in institutional policies and practices that enhance science
teacher preparation programs and increase the participation of disciplinary
faculty; (2) the programmatic features of exemplary science teacher preparation
programs, (3) the features of successful Noyce Scholarship Programs; (4)
securing the ongoing and active commitment of top institutional leadership to
making teacher preparation - particularly in science and mathematics - a central
university enterprise; (5) the role of the disciplinary societies in
strengthening science teacher preparation and in the support of practicing
teachers; and (6) state policy efforts that can facilitate improvement of
science teacher preparation and that remove the disincentive for pursuing a
career in teaching; and&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; e. Provide support to the national
networks of MSP and Noyce Scholarship programs, facilitating communication
across these and other networks of science and mathematics education programs.