* 0831951
* Planning Grant:  International Collaboration on New Ferromagnetic Smart Materials
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Pnina Ari-Gur, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 08/31/2010
* USD 9,000.00

OISE 0831951&lt;br/&gt;Ari-Gur&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Prina Ari-Gur of
Western Michigan University?s Department of Mechanical and Aeronautical
Engineering will travel to Finland and Russia to plan an international
cooperative research project to improve our knowledge of new Heusler
ferromagnetic shape memory alloys. In Finland, she will visit Professor Simo-
Pekka Hannula at Helsinki University of Technology whose group is known for
growing ferromagnetic shape memory alloys and for its fundamental understanding
of the structure of such alloys. In Moscow, Prof. Ari-Gur will go on to visit
the Russian Academy of Sciences? Institute of Radioengineering and Electronics,
where she will meet with Professors Sergey Nikitov and Victor Koledov to pursue
mutual interests in growth of single crystals and preparation of ferromagnetic
alloy powders that demonstrate giant magneto-caloric effects. The overall goal
of the two-part visit is to develop a plan for follow-on collaboration that will
build upon the Western Michigan team?s strengths in ex-ray and neutron
diffraction to develop ferromagnetic alloys with extremely high sensitivity of
the phase transformation to applied magnetic fields. If successful in the long-
run, resulting new smart materials should demonstrate phase transition and
shape-memory effect in metals for low-cost permanent magnets.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project development in materials research fulfills
the program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling experts in
the United States and Europe to combine complementary talents and share research
resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence. Broader impacts
include stronger links for the U.S. research community with Finnish and Russian
experts in a field where results of their cooperation may be applicable to
micromechanics and problems associated with alternative energy.