* 0831491
* CCollaborative Research:   CT-M:  Beyond Testbeds-Catalyzing Transformative Research and Education through Cybersecurity Collaboratories (BTCT)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2008,03/31/2011
* John Wroclawski, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Samuel M. Weber
* 03/31/2011
* USD 178,000.00

Experimental cybersecurity research is inherently risky. An experiment may
involve releasing live malware code, operating a botnet, or creating highly
disruptive network conditions. Realism is required in replicating attacks so
that proposed defenses can be thoroughly tested and future attacks anticipated.
This proposal, in addressing intellectual merit, seeks to develop a unique model
for risky experiment management; enabling researchers to carry out experiments
that interact with their larger environment while retaining both control and
safety. The model forwarded here is based on a very simple line of reasoning: If
the behavior of an experiment is completely unconstrained, the behavior of the
host environment must be completely constraining, because it can assume nothing
about the experiment; but, if the behavior of the experiment is constrained in
some particular and well-chosen way or ways, the behavior of the host testbed
can be less constraining, because the combination of experiment and environment
constraints together can provide the required overall assurance of good
behavior. The key benefit of this model is that both experimenter and testbed
operator can proceed with assurance in carrying out a wide and interesting range
of previously unsupportable experiments. The ultimate goal is to develop both
implementation and formalization of this model, including logical tools to
reason about experiment and testbed constraint composition (broader impact).
Initial work will develop mechanisms to support the model in the DETER facility
and similar Emulab-based testbeds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal was
reviewed by panelists and received one Very Good, one Very Good/Good and one
Good. Panelists viewed all three elements of the proposal (risky experimentation
support, dynamic health monitoring, and federation of testbeds) to represent
contributions to the field, with the most valuable area of the three being risky
experimentation support. The panel overall wanted to see a stronger case made
for improving existing security testbeds in general, and particularly a tie in
with current uses and needs of the DETER testbed by researchers. Panelists
recognized the team as being well qualified for the work. If successful, the
activities were viewed as advancing the state-of-the-art in experimental
facilities for cybersecurity.