* 0831673
* Collaborative Research:   NEDG:   Exploring Data Access in Internet-based Wireless Mobile Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,03/31/2010
* Sunho Lim, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Sajal Das
* 03/31/2010
* USD 54,360.00

Wireless networks are increasingly popular as the last-mile solution for a
ubiquitous communication infrastructure. This trend in combination with the
users? growing interest and falling cost in accessing vast amount of resources
in Internet wirelessly has driven the developments of hybrid wireless network
architecture such as Internet-based mobile ad hoc networks (IMANETs) and
Internet-based vehicular ad hoc networks (IVANETs). However, it brings critical
challenges in terms of limited storage space, frequent disconnections due to
mobility, as well as unreliability of communication links. Caching a frequently
accessed data in a local storage is shown to be an effective technique not only
to relieve the network but also to improve data accessibility and availability
in the presence of such challenges. The specific goal of this project is to
develop algorithms and communication protocols that allow efficient and correct
data caching in Internet-based wireless mobile networks. This project
investigates cache management and invalidation strategies for IMANETs, and cache
invalidation and consistency strategies for IVANETs. The project will make
significant advances in understanding and designing an efficient data caching
schemes for Internet-based wireless mobile networks. The success of this project
will have a much broader impact on Internet-based wireless mobile network
education and the corresponding industry, and provide versatile research
opportunities to both undergraduate and graduate students. The algorithms and
techniques developed in this research will be integrated with the education
curricula