* 0831163
* Collaborative Research:   NeTS-ANET:   A Network Architecture for  Federated Virtual/Physical Worlds
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Vladlen Koltun, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2012
* USD 950,000.00

This research asks how one might design a network architecture to support three-
dimensional virtual worlds as a dominant application platform. The architecture
is based on three key design principles. First, rather than being centralized or
peer-to-peer, the architecture is based on federation: cooperative but not
necessarily collaborative interaction between multiple parties. This enables
providers to enforce local administrative and security policies, yet requiring
new support for discovery, messaging, and migration between and within domains.
Second, application communication is grounded in three-dimensional coordinate
spaces: objects can only communicate after being introduced through proximity.
This geometric addressing decouples applications from their physical locations
on hosts, and introduces interesting security protections from unwanted
communication. Third, by using this communication model, the architecture can
directly interface with and connect the physical world, leading to new
possibilities for virtual interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much as the
Internet was designed with a layered communication model, this research designs
a new layered approach for virtual worlds: from a high-level object layer
providing a rich programming environment for immersive virtual worlds, to the
narrow waist of geometry-based communication, and down to the underlying service
layer that implements computation, storage, and communication mechanisms. With
backgrounds across networking, systems, and graphics, the investigators have
been previously developing a highly expansible and personalizable virtual world
system, Meru. This new project will develop the network architecture necessary
to enable the seamless interaction and interoperation between many different
Meru-based virtual worlds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integrating virtual worlds is
already a pressing issue and concern among providers. Research towards a
unifying networked system architecture would improve these efforts and could lay
the groundwork for a next-generation programming platform for the Internet. It
would integrate the current divide between the logical, host-centric networks
and the emerging sensor networks of tomorrow. By incorporating existing efforts
towards building an open, scalable virtual world system, the research will have
impact in all of the areas virtual worlds are already bringing change.
Fundamentally, virtual worlds, even more so than the Internet, are a platform
for inter-personal communication, affecting education, public services and
planning, commerce, and social networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;