* 0831041
* CT-M:   Hardware Containers for Software Components - Detection and Recovery at the Hardware/Software Interface
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2013
* Joseph Zambreno, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 12/31/2013
* USD 216,000.00

This project focuses on hardware features &lt;br/&gt;to improve the security of
software systems.&lt;br/&gt;By refining the coarse-grained protections available
in&lt;br/&gt;today's architectures, the project will aim to
protect&lt;br/&gt;the integrity of individual software objects or
components.&lt;br/&gt;The hardware mechanisms force tight controls on
&lt;br/&gt;the execution of software components, which&lt;br/&gt;programmers can
define to be as large as entire&lt;br/&gt;applications or as small as individual
objects. &lt;br/&gt;The goal is to rapidly detect and also recover from attacks
that&lt;br/&gt;improperly access memory or take over the CPU.&lt;br/&gt;The
approach also includes hardware-supervised&lt;br/&gt;recovery, to enable systems
to return to normal &lt;br/&gt;operation after an attack and to protect the
recovery &lt;br/&gt;process itself from attacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
benefits of this project include the ability to &lt;br/&gt;thwart a large class
of attacks and the potential of&lt;br/&gt;developing more robust software
systems in the future.&lt;br/&gt;Recovery, which has received somewhat less
attention than&lt;br/&gt;attack prevention or detection, is especially important
for &lt;br/&gt;embedded systems that do not have the luxury of intervention
&lt;br/&gt;by human operators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be used to
train graduate students and to &lt;br/&gt;feed material into graduate courses
taught at the three &lt;br/&gt;participating universities. Modules will also be
developed for &lt;br/&gt;use in K-12 education with the aim of drawing students
into &lt;br/&gt;considering careers in computer science and engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;