* 0831138
* Collaborative Research:   CT-M:  Understanding and Exploiting Economic Incentives in Internet-based Scams
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Stefan Savage, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Mohamed G. Gouda
* 09/30/2011
* USD 500,000.00

Computer security is a field in which defenses are pitted against adversaries.
Thus, it is critical to understand the capabilities and motivations of the
adversary if one is to plan effective defenses. However, modern Internet-based
attacks are largely driven by economic factors that are only understood in the
abstract. While we know that it is sufficiently cheap to compromise Internet
hosts that large-scale botnets have become a compelling platform for launching
attacks, we simply do not understand the scale of the revenue that that such
activities bring in. While we understand that billions of spam e-mails are sent
per day, the conversion rate of this spam ? the probability that a sent message
will result in a ?sale? ? is largely unknown. Absent such information it is
difficult to reason about the structural nature of the conflict between
attackers and defenders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditionally, obtaining
information about the critical economic factors in Internet attacks is difficult
because such information is only visible to the attacker themselves. Our
research is focused on sidestepping this issue by infiltrating the technical
infrastructure ? the botnets themselves ? used by Internet miscreants. Our
technique, called ?distribution infiltration? provides a means to directly
quantify key aspects of spam and phishing campaigns as well as to measure the
impact of defenses on an economic footing (i.e., their impact on the
profitability of e-crime). Our research will both refine these methodologies and
produce concrete data for developing economic-based threat models of computer
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;