* 0831420
* The West Texas Middle School Math Partnership
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2014
* Gary Harris, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* John Haddock
* 12/31/2014
* USD 6,178,422.00

The West Texas Middle School Math Partnership's primary goal is to improve the
mathematics performance and mathematics appreciation of middle grades students
in West Texas by developing teacher leaders who have a deep understanding of the
elementary mathematics taught in the middle grades, of special pedagogy
knowledge required to teach mathematics to diverse student populations, and of
the ability to employ proven strategies for enhancing the mathematics self-
efficacy of diverse student populations. The partnership team uses four
components to support these principles: (1) Summer courses are taught with
graduate credit awarded to in-service teachers. (2) A virtual community of
middle school mathematics teachers and mentors is used to maintain a supportive
environment for the participants throughout the academic year. (3) Regional
conferences are held at each university campus for participants and their
administrators. (4) Case portfolios and training modules are created and used
for professional development of both in-service and pre-service teachers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theoretical framework for the project is based on
extensive research in self-efficacy theory and case-based learning. The research
associated with this project has far reaching ramifications as a result of
studying the relationship between student achievement and self-efficacy and
teacher cultural sensitivity, competence and self-efficacy as well as factors
affecting Hispanic student learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This partnership is
led by Texas Tech University and has core university partners of Angelo State
University, Sul Ross State University, and University of Texas at Permian Basin,
as well as core school partners of Lubbock Independent School District, and
Texas Education Service Center Regions 15, 17, and 18. They directly impact 150
middle level mathematics teachers and hundreds of pre-service mathematics
teachers. Nearly 50,000 students, the majority being Hispanic, in middle grades
could eventually be impacted annually in the three service center regions.
Institutional transformation and sustainability are enabled by the creation of
specialized clinical faculty positions in the higher education partners,
systemic changes in the preparation of new math teachers at the four partner
universities, and the continuing professional development of practicing math
teachers.