* 0831974
* RITES:Rhode Island Technology Enhanced Science Program
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2008,03/31/2019
* Robert Tinker, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 03/31/2019
* USD 11,287,781.00

The University of Rhode Island (URI), Rhode Island College (RIC), Johnston
Public Schools and the Rhode Island Department of Education (RIDE) are Core
Partners in a comprehensive, statewide effort to improve the quality of science
teaching and learning at all secondary schools. The Education Alliance at Brown
University, which will evaluate the project, is a supporting partner together
with the Community College of Rhode Island, the Rhode Island Economic
Development Corporation and the Concord Consortium. &lt;br/&gt;Rhode Island
Technology Enhanced Science (RITES) is based upon structural reform initiated
with the support of the Governor. An action plan developed by a PK-16 council
resulted in an investment of $15 million to establish a permanent STEM Center
that features two new tenure track positions and will provide support to all
schools. The comprehensive statewide STEM education reform also has support from
all levels of government and academia and RITES represents a valuable experiment
in organization and structure within that effort. &lt;br/&gt;The RITES project
will, in five years of NSF funding, transform the quality of science teaching
and learning at all secondary schools, with the goal of increasing the number
and diversity of students who are proficient in science and pursue careers in
Science, Engineering, Technology, and Mathematics (STEM). The heart of the
project is the seamless integration of all segments of the Rhode Island
educational community (i.e., teachers and school systems, higher education
science departments and schools of education, the various state offices that
monitor and support STEM education and the private sector). &lt;br/&gt;RITES
will impact all 686 middle school and high school teachers and all of their
83,339 students with excellent, challenging, computer-based, standards-aligned,
science materials. Pairs of high schools and feeder middle schools will join the
Partnership together by developing a unified, comprehensive, middle and high
school science action plan that will integrate RITES resources, for professional
development of teachers and materials for students, with school needs and
ongoing school reform. Schools that participate in the project will be expected
to have the active engagement of the school leadership and at least 75% of the
science teachers. Teachers will attend short courses not only to deepen their
content knowledge and pedagogy but also to learn how to customize the newly
designed curricular materials for their own classrooms. &lt;br/&gt;The
comprehensive evaluation plan will include annual reviews of the New England
Common Assessments Program (NECAP) science assessment,which will be administered
for the first time in Spring 2008. Results will be disaggregated by race, gender
and disabilities and income. Specific benchmarks for student achievement,
teacher professional development and workforce diversity will be used to track
progress.