* 0831940
* XPLR:   Network Virtualization Using Dynamic FPGA Reconfiguration
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Lixin Gao, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 08/31/2012
* USD 357,750.00

Network Virtualization Using Dynamic FPGA
Reconfiguration&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the Internet grows and evolves,
increasingly diverse network applications will be deployed to accommodate
business and social needs. These increasingly diverse network applications
undoubtedly will exacerbate the demand for a spectrum of network services.
Often, network applications call for strikingly divergent performance
requirements in terms of security, predictability, and throughput. Although
physically separate networks could be constructed to meet these varied
performance constraints, in many cases, a common physical substrate is needed to
minimize equipment investment, operating cost, and power consumption. Several
virtual network implementations which share network nodes and links have
recently been introduced. To allow for the rapid allocation of system resources
and a flexible programming environment, these systems are deployed in general-
purpose processors and the physical resources required by each virtual network
are dynamically allocated by an operating system. Although this approach has
been shown to be feasible, the serial nature of general-purpose processors
limits virtual network performance. In this project, a new hardware-based
approach to virtual network construction that provides scalability and
programmability will be developed. The planned computing platform uses a
reconfigurable field-programmable gate array (FPGA) to implement one or more
individual unique routers that have been customized to specific virtual network
needs. As the number of virtual networks and their characteristics change, the
hardware in the FPGA can be reconfigured to support the updated requirements.
The management of the deployed virtual routers is performed by a resource
manager which is executed on an accompanying microprocessor. To evaluate the
approach, a series of software tools and hardware modules will be
created.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: This project represents an
aggressive effort to develop an integrated environment for the creation and
deployment of reconfigurable virtual networks. This coordinated effort takes
advantage of advances in FPGA systems, FPGA resource management, and network
router development to allow for the creation of scalable, high performance
virtual networks. A virtual network architectural layer will be developed to
address dynamically changing network requirements. Architectural resources will
be managed by a new resource allocation algorithm that will allow for the
effective use of the available FPGA area under virtual network performance
constraints. This algorithm will run periodically to allow for dynamic
rebalancing of FPGA resources. All hardware and software components of the
system will be designed to allow for effective system use by users that are
unfamiliar with FPGA design. The real-time performance of the system will be
evaluated in the PIs? networking laboratory at the University of Massachusetts,
Amherst under realistic workloads.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: The
potential for broader impact from this work is substantial due to the ubiquity
of networking and the scalability of the solution. The researchers plan to
develop two specific programs to broaden the impact of the work including: 1) a
new undergraduate curriculum in virtual networking, focused on scalable real-
world systems, and 2) application of the new technologies in the NSF-sponsored
Engineering Research Center for Collaborative and Adaptive Sensing of the
Atmosphere (CASA) which already has an elaborate infrastructure in place to
impact meteorologists, emergency managers, and under-represented groups at the
University of Puerto Rico.&lt;br/&gt;