* 0831366
* Collaborative Research:   CT- ISG    Key Generation from Physical Layer Characteristics in Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Bulent Yener, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Samuel M. Weber
* 08/31/2011
* USD 209,250.00

Proposal Title: CT-ISG: Collaborative Research: Key Generation from Physical
Layer Characteristics in Wireless Networks Institution: University of
Connecticut Abstract Date: 08/05/08 This project focuses on the development of a
new class of secret key generation and renewal algorithms for securing wireless
networks by taking advantage of physical layer characteristics. The basis of the
approach is the identification of measurable quantities of the wireless channel
between a pair of nodes that are highly correlated exclusively between them
(albeit not identical). Capitalizing on this correlation, the project develops
algorithms for obtaining a shared key under various adversarial models. This
addresses a critical problem area as the broadcast nature of a wireless link
provides a natural eavesdropping and intervention capability to an adversary and
thus it follows that securing a wireless link is essential to the security of
any wireless network. This project undertakes the design, implementation,
analysis and testing of several protocols and clarifies the relationship between
the channel characteristics and the cryptographic protocols that use them. It
also investigates the trade-offs between computational and communication costs,
and quantifies the level of security achieved by the key generation and renewal
protocols assuming various adversarial models. The broader impact of the project
is in the potential of making wireless communications more secure while avoiding
costs (both computational and organizational) of cryptography. Given the
increased wireless internetworking and the multitude of wireless enabled devices
presently carried by an average user, the security of the wireless link becomes
one of the most critical aspects of securing computer systems. The reduction in
the computation also will translate to a reduction in energy use, important to
battery or alternative powered systems. Educationally, the project will present
an attractive combination of aspects of signal processing, computer security,
algorithms and cryptography and will offer a wealth of problems for student
engagement