* 0831990
* From the Bottom Up: Improving Science and Math Education in the USVI
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Paul Abney, University of The Virgin Islands
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 09/30/2012
* USD 300,000.00

Lead institution: University of the Virgin Islands (UVI)&lt;br/&gt;Other
partners: US Virgin Islands Department of Education (VIDE), Virgin Islands
Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (VI-EPSCoR), St. Thomas
and St. John School Districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this MSP-Start grant, a
strong and sustainable partnership will be built between the Virgin Islands
Department of Education, the University of the Virgin Islands (UVI) and other
community stakeholders to strengthen K-12 STEM education. Teachers and school
administrators from the St. Thomas/St. John District and the St. Croix District
and UVI teacher training faculty and scientists will work together to conduct a
systematic assessment of the territory's educational system, in order to
identify key interventions to strengthen the quality of K-12 STEM teachers and
to ensure that K-12 students can engage in challenging STEM courses and
curricula to effectively prepare them for the workforce or for higher education.
Learning from the experiences of other programs, pedagogical research, and the
project needs analysis, the project team will develop plans for follow-on action
to strengthen K-12 STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The US Virgin Islands is
a relatively homogeneous predominately minority population, with strong family
and cultural connections to other parts of the eastern Caribbean. Virgin Islands
educators have begun developing more culturally/locally relevant materials to
strengthen STEM curricula, typically with themes relevant to students' everyday
lives and emphasizing hands-on scientific investigation. This project will
contribute to the knowledge base on how to adapt and create synergies between
the local context, curriculum content, instructional design and pedagogies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additionally a partnership model will be developed based
on prior research from other MSP projects and adapted to the local context,
contributing to the knowledge base on establishing partnerships in different and
cross-cultural contexts. Information on strategies for building strong
partnerships will be disseminated through the MSPnet electronic learning
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The strong foundation built by the MSP-Start
grant will increase the likelihood of success of future interventions to
strengthen K-12 STEM education, so that Virgin Islands students leave school
better prepared for employment and higher education. Eighty nine percent of the
Virgin Islands population and 98% of children in the public schools are of
African descent and Hispanic heritage, and consequently the proposed activities
will significantly contribute to increasing and broadening participation in
higher education and careers in STEM disciplines.