* 0831017
* Funding for U.S. students to Attend the 2008 International Semantic Web Conference
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Joel Sachs, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Frank Olken
* 06/30/2009
* USD 20,000.00

Travel Support for Students from U.S. Universities to &lt;br/&gt;Attend ISWC
2008&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ISWC 2008 Travel Fellowships provide funding for
students at U.S. &lt;br/&gt;Universities to attend the 2008 International
Semantic Web Conference &lt;br/&gt;(ISWC) which will be held October 26-30, 2008
in Karlsruhe, Germany. Our &lt;br/&gt;goal is to encourage students who want to
become part of the Semantic Web &lt;br/&gt;research community, and we expect
that participation in ISWC 2008 will be &lt;br/&gt;a significant event in the
graduate careers of the selected students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The doctoral
consortium, in particular, creates an opportunity for &lt;br/&gt;doctoral
students to test their research ideas, present their current &lt;br/&gt;progress
and future plans, and to receive constructive criticism and &lt;br/&gt;insights
related to their future work and career perspectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
selecting applications for travel support, preference is given to
&lt;br/&gt;students selected to participate in the doctoral consortium, followed
by &lt;br/&gt;students who are first author on a paper accepted at the
conference, &lt;br/&gt;followed by students who have other authorship on a
conference or related &lt;br/&gt;workshop paper.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Details,
including application instructions, can be found
at&lt;br/&gt;http://ebiquity.umbc.edu/ISWC08Travel
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;