* 0831470
* CT-ER:   Detecting Click Fraud in Pay-Per-Click Streams of Online Advertising Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Yong Guan, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Vijayalakshmi Atluri
* 08/31/2012
* USD 162,000.00

With the rapid growth of the Internet, online advertisement plays a more and
more important role in the advertising market and has become a billion-dollar
business ($19.5 billon in 2007). One of the current and widely used revenue
models for online advertising is Pay-per-click (PPC), which involves charging
for each click based on the popularity of keywords and the number of competing
advertisers. However, the pay-per-click model leaves room for individuals or
rival companies to generate false clicks (i.e., click fraud) due to the lack of
verifiable engagement in PPC requests. It has been reported that in online ad
market, 14.6% are paid to Click Fraud, which has damaged the development and
healthiness of online advertising. This project is (1) developing a
fundamentally new framework for verifiable clicks and a new way of defining the
quality of clicks; and (2) developing filtering-based tools for validating and
weeding out suspicious clicks, each of which provides quantifiable guarantees on
false positive and negative rates while involving a reasonable processing
overhead and space requirements. The new framework promotes transparency and
trust between advertisers and online ad businesses and eliminates the need for
keeping ?click filters? as trade secrets. A set of portable course materials is
also being developed to facilitate the teaching of developed techniques in
undergraduate and graduate courses. Some of these results are planned to be
licensed for use by online ad businesses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;