* 0831305
* Collaborative Research:   CT-M:  Unification Laboratory for Cryptographic Protocol Analysis
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Christopher Lynch, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* carl landwehr
* 08/31/2010
* USD 125,000.00

The ability to reason about different equational theories is
very&lt;br/&gt;important to the analysis of cryptographic protocols. An
understanding of&lt;br/&gt;how equational properties of a function used by a
protocol can be&lt;br/&gt;exploited by an intruder can be invaluable in finding
flaws that might&lt;br/&gt;otherwise be missed. Numerous examples exist in the
literature and even&lt;br/&gt;in fielded protocols. One very powerful tool for
cryptographic protocol&lt;br/&gt;analysis with equational theories is equational
unification. Equational&lt;br/&gt;Unification was the basis of the NRL Protocol
Analyzer (Maude-NPA). Its&lt;br/&gt;use of these theories allowed it to both
reproduce existing flaws and find&lt;br/&gt;new ones at a level of precision way
beyond that available to other tools&lt;br/&gt;at its time. This suggests that
equational unification if properly&lt;br/&gt;extended, can give support in a
similar fashion to analysis of&lt;br/&gt;cryptographic protocols that use
functions that obey more expressive&lt;br/&gt;equational theories. The aim of
this project is to provide a&lt;br/&gt;laboratory for equational unification
that will develop the algorithms&lt;br/&gt;and techniques that can be used to
support the use of equational&lt;br/&gt;unification in cryptographic protocol
analysis. This effort will&lt;br/&gt;consist of two parts: the development of
unification algorithms for&lt;br/&gt;theories of interest to cryptographic
protocol analysis, and the development&lt;br/&gt;of new techniques for employing
unification in cryptographic protocol&lt;br/&gt;analysis. The project will help
in the design and implementation of next&lt;br/&gt;generation tools for protocol
analysis. Tools developed in the project&lt;br/&gt;will be made available to
other researchers working on formal protocol&lt;br/&gt;analysis methods as well
as to protocol designers for experimentation. The&lt;br/&gt;educational
component of the project will involve undergraduate and&lt;br/&gt;graduate
students at both institutions.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;