* 0831934
* Collaborative Research:   NECO:   Designing Intermittency-Aware Networked Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Lakshminarayan Subramanian, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2011
* USD 285,000.00

Brewer 0832153&lt;br/&gt;B: Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Research:
NECO:&lt;br/&gt;Designing Intermittency-Aware Networked
Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both the Internet and phone system exhibit deep
assumptions about continuous connectivity that are simply not true in much of
the world, including rural areas and developing regions in particular.
Intermittent network connectivity is a fact of life in most developing countries
due to a variety of factors including high usage costs, frequent power outages,
network failures and the use of delay tolerant networks. Traditional networked
applications are not designed to work in intermittent environments. Although
work on delay-tolerant networking (DTN) has created viable low-level networking
protocols that support intermittency, it remains difficult to write applications
that tolerate disconnections well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes
Intermittent Aware Network Architecture (IANA), a new network platform that can
enable a spectrum of intermittent-aware applications. This work will develop
several novel applications that show the power of intermittent networking in
developing regions and that test and validate the IANA platform. The proposed
applications include intermittent versions of web search, collaborative wiki
software, automatic teller machine (ATM) support, and voice-messaging cellular
phones. These are challenging applications that cover a range of scalability,
data sharing, and security issues. Pilot versions of all the four applications
will be deployed in India or Africa to understand how well the platform enables
real applications in challenging environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An
overarching goal in the design of IANA is to determine the underlying principles
in building a generic network architecture that can be both adopted across
different types of intermittent networks and be used as a common platform across
several intermittent applications. An important related challenge is to
determine an appropriate and generic Application Programming Interface (API) for
intermittent applications. In pursuit of this larger goal, this work will 1)
classify the kinds of intermittent networks, which facilitates appropriate
responses to disconnection; 2) develop an intermittent-aware overlay network
above DTN that enables application-specific in network optimizations, which in
turn enables both better performance and better data distribution and sharing;
and 3) develop a range of new APIs that move beyond low-level connection APIs
(sockets) to support intermittent sessions, data collection and distribution,
data replication and consistency, and
mobility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This work will result in a
substantial increase in the ability to create applications that work well in
intermittent environments. The key contributions include an overlay network to
help manage replication, mobility, aggregation and sharing, new higher-level
APIs validated by real applications, and an evaluation of the effectiveness of
the new platform via large-scale deployments in developing
regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The target applications have
direct value in bridging the digital divide. The collaboration software empowers
rural content creation and sharing and facilitates content distribution for
education, health care, and emergency response. ATM software can help address
the economic inefficiencies due to limited cash flow and limited access to
banking services. The voice-messaging phone can extend the impact of the
cellular revolution to rural areas and to low-literacy users. The PIs have a
history of impactful applications in developing regions and expect similar
impact from the proposed deployments and from the free, open-source release of
the apps. Field work and new curriculum will also promote development-aware
graduate students with strong international exposure. The applications and
deployments facilitate inspiring internships, which will encourage diversity and
multi-disciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;