* 0831957
* Collaborative Research:   NeTS-FIND:   SWITCHNET:   A Switched Internetworking Architecture with Contracted Services
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Murat Yuksel, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2011
* USD 25,001.00

The Internet faces many challenges, including security, management and control.
The research project explores a future Internet/networking architecture based on
a well-proven hierarchical architecture that is untested at global levels. The
architecture includes a flexible addressing scheme and a compact four layer
protocol stack. The radical change to the Internet architecture would be
potentially transformative from a socioeconomic and business perspective. The
scientific problems to be addressed are hence multidisciplinary. The technical
and socioeconomic feasibility for the new network architecture, as well as the
likely patterns of adoption for such a radical change are
investigated.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: This research asks how a
fully hierarchical architecture, with adequate redundancy at different levels in
this design, results in a robust structure that is also scalable. The solution
distributes the "switching decisions," the management of how traffic moves from
one point to another, to all levels of a hierarchy of communications providers:
it allows the traffic to be managed independently wherever the traffic is
flowing. The replaces present highly interdependent routing and network
management architecture. The research will show how this architecture is robust
and stable with a potential for future growth. A key contribution of the
architecture is a scalable and flexible hierarchical addressing scheme, where
key network functions are relegated to different levels in the hierarchy, and
this also provides better management and control. The research includes proof-
of-concept by interfacing diverse wireless networks in the
architecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: A new network architecture
resulting from the SWITCHNET research could create radical changes in the
economics of communications networks and ultimately have a very large impact on
the economy and society. The conceptual architecture is almost ideally scalable.
It is very much simpler to manage than the present architecture. As an example
of the broad impact of SWITCHNET manageability, by enabling fundamentally better
provider control, the architecture would open the door to new methods of
identifying and pushing back denial of service, an economically and nationally
much needed capability. Furthermore, this research could provide the
breakthrough architecture for attaining the all-optical goal and thus address
that national challenge to create a more energy-efficient network. Approaches to
achieving such a purely optical communications infrastructure have long been
sought. &lt;br/&gt;