* 0831490
* CT-ISG:   Opportunistic Secret Key Exchange Using Wireless Link Characteristics and Device Mobility
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Sneha Kasera, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2012
* USD 349,995.00

The objective of this research is to build new measurement-based methods for
secure secret key establishment between two wireless devices, without ever
communicating the secret key, using diverse physical characteristics of the
wireless medium, notably an innovative measurement called temporal link
signatures, and using device mobility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merits of this research include (i) collection of extensive measurements and
characterization of spatial and temporal behavior of wireless link signatures in
a variety of indoor and outdoor settings, (ii) determination of the shared
secret space in different settings through the use of analytical methods and the
measurement data, (iii) novel methods for enhancing the length of the shared
secrets to make them robust against brute force attacks, (iv) novel methods for
dealing with asymmetric measurements of link signatures, and (v) a complete,
implementable methodology, with specific configuration recommendations, for
secure secret key establishment in real scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will have a significant broad impacts. It generates a large amount of
measurement data useful for various future wireless communications and security
research; this data is and will continue to be available to the research
community through the NSF-funded CRAWDAD repository. The results of this
research potentially make mobile applications safer to use in ways that require
far less complex management and far less computation than the existing
cryptographic methods; these results benefit both security and goals of using
mobility in green applications. Finally in broader impacts, this research will
be used in conjunction with the PI's existing NSF STEP project for creating
learning modules for high school students to demonstrate the problems and
limitations of public key cryptosystems and the need for new ideas for secret
key establishment.