* 0831970
* Minority Student Pipeline MSP
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2008,03/31/2019
* Andrew Elby, University System of Maryland
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 03/31/2019
* USD 12,889,749.00

The Minority Student Pipeline Math Science Partnership (MSP)2 is led by Bowie
State University (BSU) with the additional core partners of the Prince George's
County Public Schools (PGCPS), the Prince George's Community College (PGCC), the
University of Maryland College Park (UMCP), the University of Maryland
Biotechnology Institute (UMBI), and the University System of Maryland (USM).
(MSP)2 proposes to establish a strong, multifaceted partnership among the
essential P-16 players in one of the largest minority-majority counties in the
country, Prince George's County, Maryland, in order to expand the minority
student pipeline in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
fields in higher education. (MSP)2 will employ four strategies engaging STEM
faculty, teachers, undergraduates, and high school students:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Working with approximately 750 teachers in grades 4-8
over five years, &lt;br/&gt; science faculty will develop two different types of
professional &lt;br/&gt; development programs designed around principles of
teaching and learning &lt;br/&gt; through inquiry science. &lt;br/&gt;2. A total
of 110 high school science teachers will engage in summer research&lt;br/&gt;
experiences over five years with college and university STEM faculty.
&lt;br/&gt;3. At least 375 high school students over five years will be offered
&lt;br/&gt; opportunities to take challenging science courses through an
innovative &lt;br/&gt; early college/dual enrollment programs. &lt;br/&gt;4. 100
undergraduate underrepresented minority college undergraduate
students&lt;br/&gt; will be offered opportunities for teaching experiences (with
100 PGCPS &lt;br/&gt; science teachers to mentor them) and 50 undergraduate will
be offered &lt;br/&gt; research experiences over 5 years.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(MSP)2 will explore four research strands through four
implementation strategies: (1) In what ways do different inquiry-based
professional development experiences and training for elementary and middle
school teachers influence students'interest in science? Are different models
more effective at achieving different outcomes? How do these possible effects
compare for underrepresented minority students and teachers versus non-minority?
(2) What characteristics of summer research opportunities for secondary science
teachers, paired with intentional learning communities focused on the nature of
scientific inquiry, lead to enhanced curriculum and greater success for students
in science, particularly underrepresented minorities? (3) In what ways do
opportunities for secondary students to take early-college and dual-enrollment
courses affect the likelihood that students, particularly underrepresented
minorities, will attend college and choose science majors? And (4) How do
opportunities for undergraduate science majors to teach science lessons in
elementary and secondary schools affect the likelihood that science majors will
consider a career in teaching? How do early research experiences affect the
likelihood that STEM majors will complete science degrees?