* 0831912
* Collaborative Research:   FIND:   NetSerV - Architecture of a Service-Virtualized Internet
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Henning Schulzrinne, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2014
* USD 872,507.00

PROJECT SUMMARY Despite or because of the Internet?s great success, it has shown
itself to be very resistant again attempts to add new functionality to the
network core. This dilemma lead to the recent trend in networking to implement
services using overlay networking; overlay networking provides an opportunity
for end systems to collaborate with others to achieve enhanced functions without
having to modify routers. However, since overlay networks operate at the
application layer, they cannot effectively use the resources that are available
to network services. To address the limitations of services in the current
Internet, this work presents a clean slate Internet architecture, called
NetServ, based on the concepts of service virtualization. NetServ strives to
break up the functions provided by Internet services and to make these
functionalities available as modular building blocks for network services. A
building block effectively encapsulates a network resource or function realized
by a network node, such as link monitoring data or routing tables, and provides
tunable parameters for easy configurability. These building blocks form a
foundation for the implementation of full-fledged network services, which can
then be used by applications. Furthermore, the new framework handles aspects of
service discovery, distribution and management, thereby making new services more
readily deployable. This project addresses five major research challenges in the
new service architecture: i) the definition of requirements for a service-
virtualized Internet architecture, ii) the design of an architectural framework
for modular, virtualized services, iii) the identification of an initial set of
key building blocks, which together can provide a foundation for common network
services, iv) the development of mechanisms and protocols for service discovery
and service distribution, and v) the design and implementation of a content
distribution service based on the NetServ architecture. The feasibility of the
NetServ approach will be demonstrated by building the prototype of a content
distribution service. This service will interwork with two other services that
are crucial for a variety of applications: a generalized naming service and a
network monitoring service. The naming service is capable of naming a variety of
network entities (like content, users, services, and devices), while obeying
policy constraints. The network monitoring service provides makes network
performance data available to applications. Overall, the objective of this work
is to develop an architecture that provides an efficient and extensible
architecture for core network services, to implement a prototype of the new
architecture, design and implement a prototype of a content distribution service
to demonstrate the feasibility of NetServ, and to evaluate the new architecture
in a simulation environment as well as on a GENI-like test bed. Intellectual
Merit: NetServ fully decouples service execution from packet forwarding on a
network node. A service only assumes that a node provides packet transport and
possibly offers building blocks that can be used to access resources. The new
architecture for next-generation Internet services, therefore, provides an
efficient and flexible foundation for network services, makes the future
Internet highly evolvable, and decouples services from a specific technology.
Broader Impact: This work will make the Internet service-centric and enable
services to directly utilize network resources as building blocks. NetServ can
serve as an excellent container for integrating other ongoing FIND work at other
institutions. This project will also contribute to both the graduate and
undergraduate experimental and theoretical networking curriculum, and involve
under-represented groups within its research efforts.