* 0831511
* 1st International Conference from Nanoparticles and Nanomaterials to Nanodevices and Nanosystems
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2009
* Efstathios Meletis, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Jorn Larsen-Basse
* 04/30/2009
* USD 12,000.00

The goal of this effort is to organize the 1st International Conference from
Nanoparticles and Nanomaterials to Nanodevices and Nanosystems in Halkidiki,
Greece, in June 2008. The preliminary list of invitees/participants includes a
Nobel Laureate and several world leaders and distinguished researchers from the
US and around the world who are at the scientific forefront in the area of
nanoscience and nanotechnology. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The proposed
conference has several clear foreseeable intellectual merits. The meeting has
been designed to include Symposia and Special Sessions addressing and linking
current state-of-the-art in the field of nanoparticles and nanomaterials to
building future nanodevices and nanosystems to address global issues relating to
energy, human health and the environment. The presentations outlining present
knowledge and interactions between researchers in the field will deepen the
scientific understanding of (i) the underlying mechanisms in the formation and
evolution of nanostructures and nanomaterials and (ii) utilizing these new
nanostructures into building nanodevices and nanosystems. Knowledge gained from
these interactions can enable profound progress in these research fields.
Finally, the conference can stimulate new research ideas leading to novel
concepts and applications. Such stimulation is possible due the
interdisciplinary nature of the proposed conference. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
The proposed conference provides an excellent venue and environment for the
exchange of ideas and open discussions that allow for the presentation of the
researchers? latest work, augmenting efforts to advance the research frontiers
in this field. A publications committee has been establish by the organizers to
archive the presentations in a form that can be easily disseminated to the
community at large. In additions, participants can submit manuscripts based on
their presentations for consideration for publication to a number of referred
journals. The conference will provide a significant opportunity for human
resource development and graduate education, training and exposure to an
interdisciplinary international environment. Attraction of underrepresented
minorities will be pursuit through our relation with the Society for Hispanic
Professional Engineers (housed on UTA campus). The theme of the proposed
conference also impacts fields of critical technological importance to the U.S.
including microelectronics, nanotechnology, and bioengineering. &lt;br/&gt;