* 0831060
* CT-ISG:   Collaborative Research:   Router Models and Downscaling Tools for Scalable Security Experiments
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Ness Shroff, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2012
* USD 125,000.00

National Science Foundation NSF Cyber Trust Program

Proposal Number: 0831060 Principal Investigator: Ness Shroff Institution: Ohio
State University Proposal Title: CT-ISG: Collaborative Research: Router Models
and Downscaling Tools for Scalable Security Experiments

Project Summary It is critical to protect the Internet from attacks such as
denial of service, and attacks on inter-domain routing. Although several
defenses have been proposed, actual deployments have been limited. A primary
reason for this lack of deployment is that most defenses have not been validated
under realistic conditions, or at sufficiently large scales. Many attacks also
have second-order effects that are not well understood. This is because it is
difficult to incorporate all the protocols involved at any reasonable scale in
analytical, simulation, or emulation models or testbeds. This project includes
two complementary efforts to address both the fidelity and scale challenges in
security experiments by designing the following: (1) Router models: High-
fidelity yet scalable models for routers and other devices will be designed that
are based on simple device measurements under a few well-crafted scenarios. Both
the queueing behavior in the data plane and resource consumption in the control
plane will be considered. (2) Downscaling tools: Techniques will be developed to
simplify experimental scenarios before studying them using simulation,
emulation, or testbed experiments. Algorithms that can downscale an experimental
scenario while still preserving the important queueing or routing
characteristics of this scenario will be devised. Broader Impact: Development
and public dissemination of general- purpose experimental tools, large-scale
testing techniques, methodologies for the use of testing frameworks, and related
graduate- level courseware will be undertaken. Significant outreach is planned
to simulation and testbed teams, e.g., ns-3, C-BGP, and DETER (based on Emulab),
and to industry, specifically Cisco, Intel, and AT&T. Students from under-
represented minority groups in computer science and electrical engineering will
be actively involved.

