* 0831948
* Michigan Teacher Excellence Program (MITEP): A Model for Improving Earth Science Education Nationwide
* EHR,DRL
* 01/01/2009,06/30/2016
* William Rose, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 06/30/2016
* USD 3,986,101.00

Lead Partner: Michigan Technological University&lt;br/&gt;Core Partner: Grand
Rapids Public Schools (GRPS)&lt;br/&gt;Supporting Partners: Grand Rapids Area
Pre-College Engineering Program (GRAPCEP), Midwest National Parks, Cass
Technical High School, American Geological Institute, Grand Valley State
University Geology Department, Kalamazoo Area Mathematics and Science
Center&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Michigan Teaching Excellence Program
(MITEP) is a multi-year program of teacher leadership development that empowers
middle-grade science teachers to lead their schools and districts through the
process of systematically improving science teaching and learning. The project
uses Earth Systems Science(ESS)content and inquiry-based instructional practices
to emphasize themes that unite all sciences and mathematics. MITEP includes both
summer and academic-year components, and uses a variety of on-site, residential,
field, distance, and in-service delivery methods. Components promote leadership
skills, collaboration, urban place-based inquiry, access to cutting-edge data
and materials, technology, engagement of diverse learners, study of key
scientific concepts that cross disciplinary boundaries, pedagogical innovation.
The project will also implement and test lessons and units that challenge
students and prepare them for further science study. Teachers receive stipends
and credit as incentive for participating in the project and testing its
approach to reform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The project is based on the premise
that successful reform depends on the full involvement of teachers who have the
skills to lead their colleagues through the process of developing and
implementing new instructional approaches. MITEP teacher-leaders and research
university faculty are full partners in the process. Teacher-leaders are at the
forefront of their schools' and district's efforts to evaluate, design,
implement, and test new inquiry-based instructional programs. MITEP teacher-
leaders help develop common pacing schedules and course assessments. They assist
with planning professional development activities and providing ongoing
assistance to colleagues. MITEP teacher-leaders are encouraged to disseminate
information about the project through presentations at state and national
conferences, to submit papers for publication. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Teacher-
led reform is strongly supported by the administration of the core school
district partner as an innovative way to generate enthusiasm for curricular and
instructional change. To encourage development of leadership skills, school
administrators give teacher-leaders progressively increased responsibility for
strengthening curriculum, improving instructional strategies, and designing
assessments. District administrators are providing the resources required for
teachers' success in implementing and coordinating the project by assisting with
the selection of teachers with exceptional leadership qualities for
participation in MITEP;assisting in the design of professional development
activities that meet the needs of teachers and their students; providing
flexibility in teachers' schedules; utilizing middle-grade teachers' expertise
in the dissemination of information to primary and high-school teachers;
recognizing, rewarding, and encouraging teachers who serve as leaders; fostering
growth of a teacher network; and creating a district-wide atmosphere that
nurtures teacher-led reform efforts.