* 0831636
* SGER: Collaborative Research: Mapping the Structure and Evolution of Sustainability Science Research
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2008,01/31/2011
* Katy Borner, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 01/31/2011
* USD 104,197.00

CBET-0831636&lt;br/&gt;K. Borner, Indiana University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new
field of Sustainability Science and Engineering is emerging that seeks to
understand the fundamental character of interactions between nature and human
society and to help steer the impact of humanity's needs on the planet's natural
resources towards sustainable trajectories. Sustainability Science and
Engineering is unified in clear terms by its ultimate goals but occupies an
interdisciplinary position among traditional research fields, spanning both
science and engineering and spreading across disciplines as diverse as
agriculture, ecology, oceanography, climate studies, economics, a diverse set of
social sciences, energy and materials and several additional aspects of
engineering, physics, biology, and chemistry. Although Sustainability Science
and engineering is by now widely discussed in the scientific and engineering
community, and is beginning to be connected to the political agenda for economic
and social development, it remains unclear to what extent its many facets are
being integrated into a global perspective and whether researchers are utilizing
it as a nexus to collaborate across traditional scientific and engineering
fields. This project will address such issues by delineating, analyzing, and
mapping both basic research on sustainability. Specifically, a comprehensive
dataset of scholarly publications, patents, research grants, policy documents
and popular science pieces that together define the integrated knowledge of the
field will be compiled. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Analysis results will be presented
as tables, graphs, and in form of geospatial and science maps. Sustainability
experts will be invited to interpret these results. Findings will be presented,
discussed, and disseminated via scholarly publications, online, and at a
workshop on the topic of sustainability. Encouraging timely scientific and
engineering progress across a large set of traditional disciplines requires
generating a global perspective (a view 'from above') to determine the most
effective actions and incentives to be created by governments, funding agencies,
non-governmental organizations, the scientific community, and the public at
large. This work will map the current state of sustainability science and
engineering worldwide and provide actionable insights into its future
development. The resulting maps will be useful for communicating the state of
the art as well as to point out challenges and opportunities. They might be
extended and adopted as a visual interface into research and practice of
Sustainability Science and Engineering. Several graduate students will be
involved and trained in this project.