* 0831963
* NeTS-NECO:  Collaborative Research:   New Approaches for Secure and Dependable Distributed Data Storage and Access Control in Mission-critical Wireless Sensor Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Kui Ren, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 08/31/2012
* USD 289,680.00

Distributed data storage and access in wireless sensor networks (WSNs) recently
has found increased popularity driven by many mission-critical applications.
While WSN security has been extensively studied in recent years with focus on
network communication security, little attention has been paid on the security
and dependability of distributed data storage and access control. However, it is
of paramount importance to ensure data security and dependability in the
mission-critical applications, where data genuineness and availability can be
about life or death. This project is aimed at solving this important challenge.
On the one hand, the problem of how to store the sensor network data in a
distributed manner while satisfying the requirements of both fault-tolerance and
compromise-resilience is studied. The problem of dynamic data security and
dependability after the initial data storage is tackled as along the time
sensors may be compromised and/or behave Byzantine failures. On the other hand,
researches on distributed and fine-grained data access control are carried out
to ensure sensor network data can only be accessed by authorized network users.
The worst-case scenario is considered in which not only sensors may be
compromised, but also network users may not be fully trusted. Novel symmetric
key cryptography (SKC) and public key cryptography (PCK) based approaches are
proposed, built on top of the in-depth security analysis of the state-of-the-art
SKC solutions and efficiency enhancements over the most recent PKC primitives
such as Ciphertext Policy- and Key Policy- Attribute Based Encryption, i.e., CP-
ABE and KP-ABE.