* 0831300
* Collaborative Research:   CT-L:   CLEANSE:   Cross-Layer Large-Scale Efficient Analysis of Network Activities to Secure the Internet
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2015
* Wenke Lee, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 09/30/2015
* USD 1,033,297.00

Layer-8 attacks (e.g., spam and phishing) are launched from a malicious service
platform, e.g., botnet, which consists of a large number of infected machines
(or bots). Such an attack platform relies on lower-layer network services to
achieve efficiency, robustness, and stealth in communication and attack
activities. These services include look-up (e.g., DNS), hosting (e.g., Web
servers), and transport (e.g., BGP).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main research
goals and approaches of the CLEANSE project are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; 1.
Control-plane monitoring. Much of the infrastructure for mounting layer-8
attacks involves abuse of the control plane in core network services (e.g., DNS
and BGP).&lt;br/&gt;The CLEANSE project develops control-plane anomaly detection
sensors that are distributed, online, and real-time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; 2.
Data-plane monitoring. The project develops new and general network anomaly
detection algorithms based on traffic sampling and clustering for monitoring
high-speed traffic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; 3. Improved security auditing
capabilities. The CLEANSE project develops packet "tagging/tainting" techniques
to enable tracking and clustering of network traffic flows (e.g., that are
generated by the same bot program). The project also develops improved traffic
sampling capabilities that are attack-aware and distributed network-
wide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By focusing on monitoring of core network services,
the CLEANSE framework can detect future layer-8 attacks and new forms of large-
scale malware infections. The project also creates educational contents,
including new textbooks and on-line course materials, which directly benefit
from the research activities. The CLEANSE project team also work with industry
partners (including the ISPs) to organize focused workshops that bring together
researchers from academia and practitioners from the industry/ISP, government,
and law enforcement agencies to foster the exchange of ideas, data, and
technologies.