* 0831540
* CT-M:    A Real-Time Botnet Monitoring Infrastructure
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Steven Gribble, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Angelos Keromytis
* 08/31/2013
* USD 932,000.00

Large-scale botnets have become a blight on the Internet. Botnets engage in a
variety of harmful activities, including initiating DDoS attacks, committing
click fraud, propagating adware, and sending enormous volumes of spam. Though
there is an increasing awareness of botnets, there are gaping holes in our
understanding of botnets, both in terms of macroscopic properties as well as the
ability to track and thwart specific attacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of
this project, we develop a response to the botnet threat by building a
monitoring system that gathers and distributes objective data on the problem.
Our work offers three novel contributions. First, we solve many of the
challenges involved in building a real-time botnet monitoring platform. For
example, our system executes live botnet nodes, and as such, it must prevent
these nodes from causing harm to other hosts on the Internet. Second, we
implement several prototype defensive tools that take advantage of the real-time
information provided by the platform. Third, our work exposes the rich texture
of the botnet ecosystem by analyzing botnets from multiple perspectives and by
correlating the attack vectors with observations of real bots executed in
laboratory settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our botnet monitoring platform thus
advances our understanding of botnets and enables promising anti-botnet defense
tactics. It thus serves as a crucial step in the development of a trustworthy
network that can support a much wider diversity of uses than can be found on
today's Internet.&lt;br/&gt;