* 0831004
* CT-ISG: New Directions in Elliptic Curve, Pairing-Based, and Torus-Based Cryptography
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2009,02/28/2015
* Alice Silverberg, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 02/28/2015
* USD 300,000.00

The goal of this research is to solve some important problems in nnnntorus-
based, pairing-based, multilinear, and elliptic curve and abelian variety
cryptography. Elliptic curve cryptography helps to secure the Internet and is
used by the U.S. and other governments and institutions to provide secure
communication. Abelian variety cryptography includes elliptic and hyperelliptic
curve cryptography, scales well to high security levels, and is especially
advantageous in constrained environments. Pairing-based cryptography is a recent
cutting-edge use of elliptic curves, with numerous useful security applications.
Torus-based cryptography and compression-based abelian variety cryptography
improve the efficiency of discrete log and pairing-based cryptography.
Multilinear cryptography, which generalizes pairing-based cryptography, is an
open question; an efficient and secure solution would give efficient and secure
multi- party communication. The security of these systems and the difficulty of
the number theoretic problems on which they are based are crucial for the health
of the economy and for national and international
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on the security of the
elliptic curve discrete log problem and other number theoretic problems on which
cryptographic security is based, and on the construction of efficient, secure,
and scalable public key cryptosystems. The techniques will involve some deep and
interesting mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will educate and
train a diverse workforce in cybersecurity by supporting graduate students,
promoting the participation of underrepresented groups, furthering the
development of new courses in cutting-edge cybersecurity, and promoting outreach
that educates the public.&lt;br/&gt;