* 0831427
* CT-M:   Meta-Environments for Experiments on Diverse Topics in Network Security
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Paul Barford, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2013
* USD 849,999.00

Proposal Number: 0831427 PI: Paul Barford Institution: University of Wisconsin -
Madison Title: CT-M: Meta-Environments for Experiments on Diverse Topics in
Network Security

Abstract In order to address the continued escalation in the diversity,
sophistication and quantity of malicious activity in the Internet, new methods
for systematic testing and evaluation of next generation security systems and
techniques are required. The objective of this research is to investigate and
develop meta-environments for Emulab-based testbeds. A meta-environment is a set
of testbed configurations, tools and processes developed for a specific security
domain that enables experiments to be conducted in a simplified, realistic and
consistent fashion. The first component of this research program is focused on
investigating tools such as traffic generators that can be used across all
metaenvironments. Next, five specific meta-environments will be investigated and
developed for the following areas: 1) network intrusion detection, 2) firewalls,
3) honeynets, 4) denial of service defense, and 5) security perimeter design.
Finally, mechanisms for federation between the Wisconsin Advanced Internet Lab,
DETER and other Emulabbased testbeds that will enable large-scale experiments
and transparent access to resources will be investigated. The broader impacts of
this project are that it will simplify and accelerate the use of testbeds for
security research, and enable consistent comparisons between new security
systems and tools. The expected results of this work include tools,
configurations, and documentation for the five meta-environments and testbed
federation capability. The project also includes education and outreach
activities that will develop network security lab exercise materials. These web-
based materials will be openly available to the community, and will emphasize a
hands-on approach intended to provide students with practical, relevant
experiences.