* 0831293
* CT-ISG:   Crypto Algorithms for an Integrated Approach to Conditional, Revocable and Traceable Anonymity
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,12/31/2012
* Anna Lysyanskaya, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 12/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

As records of individuals' activities become increasingly computerized and
linked, privacy becomes an ever more challenging problem. It is especially
challenging when legitimate security needs require the ability to link different
transactions and even obtain details about the individuals involved. The focus
of this project is on cryptographic technologies that achieve a compromise:
transaction records should be anonymous until special circumstances (such as
wrong-doing on the part of a particular individual, or an emergency that
requires special measures) arise. One wants to specify these circumstances
before a transaction takes place, so an individual can choose not to participate
in a transaction that does not provide him or her with sufficient privacy
guarantees.

The project considers several trade-offs between anonymity and accountability.
Conditional anonymity/conditional disclosure means that an individual user is
anonymous until her activities violate a certain condition, at which point some
piece of information about her becomes known. Revocable anonymity means that a
user is anonymous to all but a special anonymity-revoking trustee that only
becomes involved in case of emergency. Traceable anonymity means that, under
special circumstances, it is possible to quickly trace all of a particular
user's transactions; this can be a form of conditional anonymity where the
circumstances are due to the user's misbehavior or revocable anonymity where a
trustee decides when to run the trace algorithm. This project investigates
techniques that allow one to develop and enforce anonymity contracts between
individuals and organizations that spell out what can become known about the
individual user and under what circumstances.