* 0831301
* CT-ISG: Collaborative Research: Fault Tolerance in Crypto Hardware via Dynamic Assertion Checking
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Kaijie Wu, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Shands
* 08/31/2013
* USD 231,734.00

ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Secure applications require trustworthy hardware
for successful deployment. A trustworthy hardware device (e.g., a smart card)
should maintain its security properties even against efforts at probing and
reverse engineering; moreover, sensitive data stored on a trustworthy hardware
device should be protected at all times. Side-channels attacks are used to learn
the secrets stored by a device through monitoring the side effects of its
computation. The well known power side-channel attack uses the effect that a
cryptographic key has on the power waveform as the cipher runs. Another side-
channel attack, the focus of this project, is the Differential Fault Attack
(DFA). DFAs alter the computations performed by a trustworthy device and use the
faulty results to uncover secrets. An approach to defeating DFAs is to
continuously check dynamic assertions, made part of its cryptographic algorithms
(including, e.g., symmetric block and stream ciphers, asymmetric ciphers, and
message authentication), against DFA. The project advances secure hardware
design methods and methodologies, develops course material on side-channel
attacks and countermeasures, and promotes technology transfer through
partnerships with industry. The project has a strong education component with
opportunities for international research experience.&lt;br/&gt;