* 0831823
* NEDG:   Featherlight Information Network with Delay-Endurable RFID Support (FINDERS)
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Hongyi Wu, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 08/31/2013
* USD 366,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;This project centers on the Featherlight Information Network with
Delay-Endurable RFID Support (FINDERS), composed of passive RFID tags which are
ultra light, durable, and flexible, without power supply for long-lasting
applications under strict weight constraints and harsh environments. It expands
the use of RFID gear for wireless network construction, aiming to find events of
interest and gather aggregate information. FINDERS faces unprecedented
challenges in communication and networking, due to its sporadic wireless links,
unique asymmetric communication paradigm, intermittent computation capability,
and extremely small memory of tags. The objectives of this project include the
establishment of fundamentals and principles, system design and optimization,
mathematical analysis and modeling, and prototyping and experimental evaluation
of the FINDERS system. The success of this project will not only advance the
scientific study of wireless sensor networks and RFID systems but also serve as
a new paradigm for pervasive data acquisition under strict weight constraints
and harsh environments. The technologies and the prototype of FINDERS to be
developed in this project will immediately benefit wildlife and biological
research projects. In the long term, it will foster multi-disciplinary research
opportunities for future relevant projects, effectively strengthening the
research competitive edge of UL Lafayette. The research results will be
disseminated through conference presentations, journal publications, a dedicated
website, and frequent lectures at our graduate seminars. The research problems
and findings and the testbed developed in this project will enrich course
materials, provide students with hands-on experience, and attract more graduate
students into this emerging area. &lt;br/&gt;