* 0831825
* NEDG:   Efficient Design and Control of Heterogeneous Mobile Networks: Beyond Poisson Regime
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Do Young Eun, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Min Song
* 08/31/2013
* USD 299,872.00

Mobility is central to various applications, from the classical problems of
searching for a moving target and rescue mission in military and disaster
settings, to deploying mobile ad-hoc/sensor networks for surveillance and data
communication over hostile terrain and underwater. While the random mobility
pattern of nodes in these networks has been considered as the main source of
uncertainty and disruption of communication links, it can also facilitate
reliable and predictable performance, if properly controlled and actively
exploited. Most existing approaches have taken advantage of nodes' mobility only
as passive vehicles for data forwarding upon contact by chance, with an over-
simplifying assumption that every pair of nodes is making contacts with each
other according to a Poisson process, which is recently contradicted by
empirically observed non-Poisson nature with high degree of heterogeneity in
various mobile networks.

The long-term goal of this research is to develop a unified methodology for
efficient protocol design and control of nodes in heterogeneous mobile ad-hoc
networks and delay/disruption-tolerant networks under non-Poisson contacts. The
goal further extends to the use of mobile nodes with controllable mobility that
can autonomously exploit the changing diversity. The broader impact of this
research lies in its interdisciplinary nature in addressing the analysis and
design of algorithms running on mobility with heterogeneous non-Poisson
contacts, which is also central to other scientific areas such as epidemiology,
foraging ecology and biology, all driven by contacts among living organisms.
This tight relationship between mobile ad-hoc networks and various phenomena in
nature will serve as a vivid example for undergraduate students at a freshmen
level or even to general public.