* 0831536
* CT-ISG:    Real Time Cryptography
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Daniele Micciancio, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 09/30/2011
* USD 300,000.00

Security is of primary importance in many modern computer applications, like
electronic payments, personalized news broadcasts, location aware electronic
services, automatic sharing and exchange of personal information for social
networking, etc. Cryptography provides many technical tools that can be used to
achieve security and privacy goals, but at a substantial computational cost.
Traditionally, this cost has been measured in terms of the number and size of
messages exchanged during the cryptographic protocol execution. However, such
traditional efficiency measures are not representative of performance as
perceived by the final user: the main efficiency measure of interest to the end
user is real time, i.e., the amount of clock time elapsed since the user issues
a request, till the moment the request is served. This is especially true for
applications that run over an heterogeneous network like the Internet, where
latency and bandwidth can substantially vary both across the network and over
time. This project investigates the design and analysis of cryptographic
protocols in a real time model, with two main objectives: (1) designing
cryptographic protocols that are efficient with respect to realistic time
complexity measures, as perceived by the end user, and (2) exploiting time
itself as a tool to achieve security goals. For example, local timing
constraints (e.g., delays and time-outs) can be used to enforce restrictions on
the order in which events take place in a global execution environment. Time can
also be used to introduce asymmetries between the capabilities of different
parties similar to what is typically achieved using expensive public key
cryptographic operations. Finally, the value associated to information usually
varies with time: what is valuable confidential information today, may be
publicly available tomorrow. This project will investigates all these different
aspects of real time cryptographic protocol design, first focusing on zero-
knowledge proof systems (a representative and very useful class of cryptographic
protocols), and then, after appropriate models for timed cryptographic protocol
execution have been developed, expanding our study to larger classes of
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader significance: Security is essential
in many modern computer applications, and to ensure public confidence in the
cyber infrastructure. Cryptography has developed many tools that can be used to
secure electronic transactions, but still many cryptographic protocols are
seldom used in practice because they are too complex or computationally
expensive. This project investigates cryptographic protocols that make use of
timed operations to achieve security goals at a reduced computational cost, and
according to a metric directly related to efficiency as experienced by the end
user. As such, the project will help making cryptography more usable and more
used in practice.&lt;br/&gt;