* 0831791
* Collaborative Research:   NECO:  A Market-Driven Approach to Dynamic Spectrum Sharing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Samir Das, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Min Song
* 08/31/2013
* USD 422,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;To counter the inefficiencies of the current spectrum usage,
regulatory bodies, all over the world, are exploring ways to deregulate the
spectrum market by&lt;br/&gt;allowing flexible dynamic spectrum access (DSA) in
a broad range of spatio-temporal scale. Recent advances in radio technology have
given an impetus to this trend. For DSA to fulfill its promise of economic and
societal impact, wireless services based on DSA must be commercially successful,
and a tangible spectrum market must evolve that can be supported by technology.
This research project will build a realistic DSA architecture for cellular
networks supported by appropriate market mechanisms in an integrated fashion
that is both technically and economically viable and efficient. This is a truly
trans-disciplinary approach spanning the fields of wireless networking and
systems, algorithmics, economics, simulation and modeling, which leads to a
deeper understanding of the dynamics of the spectrum market by (i) realistic
modeling of various market entities (i.e., buyers, sellers, and the market
mechanisms), (ii) dynamic spectrum demands and bids based on innovative and
realistic population dynamics models, and (iii) new and robust market clearing
mechanisms with provable performance guarantees. The results will be validated
using large-scale simulations, and experiments on a prototype test bed with
reconfigurable radio hardware. In addition to fostering new topics in trans-
disciplinary education, this project will offer insights into market driven
spectrum sharing, provide useful tools for policymakers, and ultimately guide
spectrum policy decisions in DSA technology. This will, in turn, open up new
business opportunities in the use of wireless spectrum. &lt;br/&gt;