* 0831535
* CT-L:   Collaborative Research:   Comprehensive Application Analysis and Control
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2014
* Vern Paxson, International Computer Science Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Shands
* 09/30/2014
* USD 1,650,000.00

A deep, pervasive problem when attempting to secure modern computer networks
arises from the bewildering range of applications that these networks
carry.&lt;br/&gt;Unless a specific application is understood, its presence
cannot be soundly monitored and controlled. Yet we have seen in the past decade
the rise and use of many hundreds of applications, a growth far outpacing the
ability of security practitioners to apprehend their individual operation and
implications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research effort aims to facilitate
pervasive understanding and control of the wealth of application protocols
running on today's networks. Developing in-depth visibility into these protocols
will perforce lead to new capabilities for exposing the inner-workings of modern
applications that have yet to be well understood within the community. Such
understanding will provide pragmatic, high-impact functionality, since operators
will be able to directly incorporate this information in their monitoring
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key goal of the undertaking is to facilitate the
means by which the broader network research community can work together to
jointly construct application analysis resources that are shared across the
field. The project envisions a "lingua franca" for expressing application
protocol structure and semantics that moves beyond the status quo by providing a
common platform and language for expressing a wide range of semantics and
analyses. While the focus within our project is on application analysis for
purposes of monitoring and securing networks, the tools we develop will often
lend themselves to repurposing in support of other networking concerns such as
network management, trouble-shooting, and performance optimization.&lt;br/&gt;