* 0831081
* CT-ISG:   The Origin of the Code:   Automated Identification of Common Characteristics in Malware
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,01/31/2012
* Douglas Reeves, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 01/31/2012
* USD 268,510.00

Software is a common target of attacks on the current computing / communications
infrastructure. Software continues to be vulnerable to attacks that exploit
obscure or misunderstood language and program features. Detection of these
software exploits (also called "malware") will therefore be needed for the
forseeable future as one part of an effective defense. Virus checkers detect
many known exploits, and are now widely used, but attackers have adapted by
obfuscating and mutating their code to evade virus checkers.

Such techniques make precise identification of malware extremely difficult. This
project will use key characteristics of attack code for identification purposes.
Important features of this approach include: advanced disassembly techniques;
translation of code into an intermediate form more amenable to analysis, and
more resistant to obfuscation; static reconstruction of program control flow and
data flow; and, extraction of properties of interest, followed by analysis of
these properties. The properties of interest include the characteristic
behaviors of encryption and compression, and the system calls executed by the
code. Rather than relying on exact matching of these properties for malware
identification, approximate matching will be used. Static analysis will be the
focus, to avoid the performance penalties of dynamic execution monitoring. The
application of data mining to identify important malware features, and construct
high-level patterns or signatures in a completely automated way, will also be
investigated. The method will additionally help identify malware relationships,
with applications to forensics, recovery of attack strategies, and
identification of new classes of attacks (including zero-day attacks).

The method will resist the introduction of noise, or targeted evasion by malware
writers, and will provide much better protection against polymorphic and
metamorphic exploit code, and new attack variations. A database of patterns /
characteristics for known software exploits will be maintained and made public.
Educational materials about malware detection will be developed and
disseminated, and training of female researchers will continue to be a priority.