* 0831440
* CT-M:   Realizing Verifiable Security Properties on Untrusted Computing Platforms
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2013
* Virgil Gligor, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,014,400.00

This project is motivated by the fundamental question of whether it is possible
to achieve verifiable end-to-end security properties by adding suitable security
mechanisms on top of commercially available applications executing on an
untrusted computing platform. A concrete example of such a scenario is provided
by a user interacting with a bank's web server using a web browser running SSL.
An important end-to-end security property in this context is protecting the
confidentiality and integrity of the exchanged information and the user's
password from malware and insider attacks on the local machine or the bank's
server, as well as an active adversary trying to compromise the network
communication. The untrusted computing platform here is the user's machine,
which is running a commodity OS such as Windows or Linux and applications such
as Internet Explorer or Firefox.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;We believe that this goal
can be achieved if one takes the approach of (1) minimizing the liability of
security-property proof based on differentiated application services, and well-
defined, useful properties of security-sensitive code, and (2) supporting the
identified and proved properties by a security architecture that is compatible
with commercially available platforms. Our system architecture includes novel
components (e.g. trusted paths to local and remote security sensitive code) and
integrates existing &lt;br/&gt;technologies (e.g., hypervisors, isolated
execution environments) in a way that minimizes the size of both system and
security-sensitive application code, thus enabling formal
verification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide extensive
educational opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students; research
results will be integrated into courses at CMU and disseminated via technical
publications, student internships, the CyLab Industrial Partners program, and
the CMU Women@SCS roadshow program.