* 0831299
* CT-ISG:    On Imperfect Randomness and Exposure-Resilient Cryptography
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Yevgeniy Dodis, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

Randomization has proved to be a vital part in building essentially any kind of
secure cryptographic system: secret keys should be randomly generated and most
cryptographic primitives, such as encryption, must be probabilistic. As a common
abstraction, it is typically assumed that ideal randomness is available to all
the participants of the system. In many situations, this assumption is highly
unrealistic, and cryptographic systems have to be built based on *imperfect*
sources of randomness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits of the Project:
The research will address the question as to what extent cryptographic protocols
can be adapted to work with imperfect sources of randomness. In particular, it
will concentrate on the feasibility of cryptography imperfect sources of
randomness and exposure-resilient cryptography. For the first topic, the PI will
address the question if nearly ideal randomness is *necessary* for building
various cryptographic primitives, such as encryption and authentication, or,
perhaps, one can base such applications on more realistic imperfect sources. For
the second topic, in many settings the adversary can gain partial knowledge of
some secret information (e.g., a cryptographic key). The exact nature of this
knowledge is often unknown, except that it is ``bounded''. Therefore, even if
the secret was originally random, it looks like an imperfect random source to
the adversary, given his partial knowledge about the secret. The PI will design
novel protocols which are resilient to such leakage of partial information in
the recently proposed Bounded Retrieval Model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts of the Project: The availability of ideal randomness is a common
assumption used not only in cryptography, but in many other areas of computer
science, and engineering in general. Questioning the validity of this assumption
and designing techniques to base a given system on weaker, more *realistic*
assumptions will surely be useful in many other disciplines. Additionally, given
the increasing spread of viruses, Internet worms and Trojan horses, the use of
exposure-resilient protocols will result in more stable and secure application
environments. Furthermore, because the research in this project will use tools
from information theory and pseudorandomness to solve cryptographic questions,
it will help find new connections among these fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PI also regularly teaches courses on cryptography and network security, and will
be able to incorporate the new results into such courses. In addition, the
project has a significant graduate student training component.&lt;br/&gt;