* 0831903
* NECO:   Robust, Delay-Tolerant Sketches for  Aggregating Sensor Data Streams
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* Srikanta Tirthapura, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 08/31/2014
* USD 228,264.00

NeTS-NECO: Robust, Delay-Tolerant Sketches for Aggregating&lt;br/&gt;Sensor Data
Streams&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emerging data-intensive mobile sensor networking
applications promise&lt;br/&gt;a close observation of the world around us at a
relatively low data&lt;br/&gt;acquisition cost. In these applications, it is a
challenge to&lt;br/&gt;aggregate observation streams from distributed sources,
due to the&lt;br/&gt;bandwidth and delay constraints of the network, and the
energy costs&lt;br/&gt;of data transmission. This project develops techniques
for processing&lt;br/&gt;voluminous sensor data streams within the resource
constraints imposed&lt;br/&gt;by a distributed infrastructure-less
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Techniques are designed to summarize the
observation streams into&lt;br/&gt;small space "sketches". By disseminating
sketches rather than the raw&lt;br/&gt;data, it is possible to trade-off reduced
communication cost for&lt;br/&gt;approximate answers to user queries. The
project investigates the&lt;br/&gt;technical challenge of making the sketches
robust and suitable for&lt;br/&gt;transmission over unreliable links. The
sketches are delay-tolerant,&lt;br/&gt;i.e. they can tolerate long and variable
network latencies. Various&lt;br/&gt;classes of queries are supported including:
basic aggregates of&lt;br/&gt;numerical and categorical data, multi-dimensional
temporal and&lt;br/&gt;geographic aggregates, and time-decayed aggregates. The
design of&lt;br/&gt;sketches is informed and inspired by the recent rapid
progress made in&lt;br/&gt;the area of massive data stream processing. The
project will result in&lt;br/&gt;new algorithms and data structures for
sketching sensor data with&lt;br/&gt;provable guarantees on the quality of
answers. The research is&lt;br/&gt;expected to benefit data-intensive sensor
networking applications that&lt;br/&gt;are critical to our society, such as
earthquake, pollution, and&lt;br/&gt;traffic monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;