* 0831848
* NECO:   Towards a theory of network evolution
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Constantinos Dovrolis, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 08/31/2012
* USD 370,000.00

As the evolution of living species is determined by few basic mechanisms, such
as genetic heritage, genetic variation, and natural selection, it may be that
the evolution of large-scale internetworks is similarly determined by simple,
but still unknown, principles. The investigators aim to discover the fundamental
character of network evolution, the laws that describe it, and ways in which
networking researchers or innovators can effectively influence this process.
This research can cause a paradigm shift in the way we understand the Internet
and on how we attempt to introduce new features and correct its problems. The
project also has a significant education component, including a new course that
is cross-listed in the computer science and biology graduate programs of Georgia
Tech.

The first thread of this research focuses on the evolution of the Internet
Autonomous System (AS) ecosystem. The goal is to better understand this complex
and dynamic ecosystem, the behavior of entities that constitute it, and the
nature of interactions between those entities. ASes attempt to optimize their
utility or financial gains by dynamically changing the ASes they interact with,
and thus by changing the organization of their ecosystem. In the second research
thread, the focus is on the evolution of network design and architecture and on
the laws and principles that determine the evolution of large-scale
internetworks. The investigators will explore questions about the price of
evolution in network design, the trade-offs between evolutionary and clean-slate
architectures and the evolutionary implications of layered network organization.
The objective is not only to understand the evolution of the Internet, but also
to provide concrete guidelines for the design of evolvable architectures for the
Future Internet.

