* 0831331
* Development and Testing of a Unified Parameterization of Diabatic Heating - Proof of Concept
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2008,05/31/2012
* Roger Pielke, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 05/31/2012
* USD 386,096.00

Intellectual Merits: The Principal Investigator (PI) will develop a new
methodology for physical parameterizations in numerical models. The typical
parameterization is a one dimensional model that estimates the physical entity
being estimated (e.g. turbulent fluxes) using as input data from the larger
scale model. The PI will bypass the one dimensional model approach by developing
a unified parameterization that would be derived from a look up table (LUT) and
based on input variables from the numerical model. For this research, the
Principal Investigator will concentrate on subgrid scale diabatic heating. If
this approach can be made sufficiently accurate, there would be a significant
gain in computational speed for the model. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will run
the Regional Atmospheric Modeling System (RAMS) for selected months in 2006 over
North America using the standard one-dimensional parameterizations for diabatic
heating. The integrated diabatic heating rates will be stored and used along
with the input variables and parameters to create a unified LUT that includes
the sum of the effects from each original standard parameterization for the
diabatic heating. RAMS, using the derived LUT to simulate the diabatic heating,
will be integrated for the same time periods to determine if the resultant
meteorological fields are reproduced with the same accuracy as in the original
model run, but at a fraction of the computational cost. If the technique proves
to be accurate, the PI will examine the variations in the simulated
meteorological fields that result when perturbations are artificially imposed in
the LUT in order to assess the sensitivity of the results to these variations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among the results of the research will be the size of the
LUT that is needed to accurately capture the dimensionality of the output space,
as determined by the ability of the regional model run with the unified LUT to
recreate the original results when the traditional approach of using separate
parameterizations for the different diabatic heating terms is used.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The research has broad impacts to the
scientific community and to society. The replacement of existing
parameterizations in weather and climate models with LUTs at a fraction of the
cost of the original parameterization will provide a revolutionary improvement
in model run speed. This research will directly contribute towards the education
of one graduate student at the University of Colorado, Boulder.