* 0831780
* NeTS:   Find:    Collaborative Research: Relationship-Oriented Networking
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2013
* Mark Allman, International Computer Science Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 12/31/2013
* USD 450,734.00

Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;NeTS: FIND: Collaborative Research: Relationship-
Oriented Networking&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the key aspects upon which
societies are and have always been built is the notion of relationships?both
personal and institutional. In fact, relationships are so ingrained into
people?s lives that their role as a fundamental societal fabric is often taken
for granted and not explicitly considered. While powerful in one?s everyday
life, establishing relationships within the electronic realm of communication
networks leaves one without many of the traditional tools for building,
sustaining and recognizing relationships. One cannot use visual or auditory cues
to verify that they are talking to a friend. Rather, a message that is just
words on the screen could just as easily come from someone they know or an
imposter. One key reason for this is because often networks have based the
notion of identity on the name of a resource rather than some stronger notion
such as cryptography provides. The over-arching goal of this project is to
consider how to design future network architecture to first pervasively
incorporate cryptographic-based identities and then use those strong identities
to establish relationships as first-class citizens within networks. This
promises to provide better overall usability, security and trust in the system.
Ultimately, this work will develop an architectural framework and components
that allow users and institutions to build trusted relationships within digital
communications that can be viewed and utilized much like relationships outside
of the digital communications realm. This project will consider leveraging
relationships for a variety of tasks, such as access control, service
validation, and naming. It thus moves past a simple transaction-oriented network
to a system that is able to provide general linking of activity across time and
exposing legitimate assistive services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
Computer networks were designed to serve people, but there has been little
research in leveraging how people naturally behave and work in the real world.
One way people generally operate is by establishing relationships and developing
trust in those relationships. This project will design a new network
architecture that weave this intuitive mode of operation into communications to
give users more confidence in the system by allowing users to build
relationships that work much like they do in the real world. This work will
respect the tussle-spaces that will naturally occur within the architectural
designs. A particular tussle-space that will be considered is that of the
benefits of exposing relationships compared with the cost in terms of privacy of
doing so. The designed architecture will not mandate how a tussle is resolved,
but allow users and institutions to reason about these issues and set policy as
they see fit. By enabling a network with a solid understanding of both identity
and relationships, this project will empower an immense number of services,
protocols and applications to use this information as part of their standard
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Over and above its goal of
building a trustworthy future Internet, this project will have a number of
broader impacts. In terms of networking economics it will make two
contributions: (i) added confidence in the security of the overall system will
encourage even more widespread use and a broader set of applications as users
will feel safe online and (ii) its envisioned new naming system will allow users
to choose service providers based on merit rather than on artificial naming
constructs. In addition, by putting cryptographic identity as a foundation for
the network design, this project will enable cryptographic identity to be widely
used within the network architecture. This will have far-reaching benefits to
users? privacy by enabling easy encryption of network traffic. Finally, this
research will have educational impact in the form of enhanced opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students, as well as mentoring of middle- and high-
school students through an established foundation with which we are
affiliated.&lt;br/&gt;