* 0831811
* UTeachEngineering: Training Secondary Teachers to Deliver Design-Based Engineering Instruction
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2016
* David Allen, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* David Haury
* 08/31/2016
* USD 12,478,158.00

The University of Texas at Austin's Cockrell School of Engineering is partnering
with the successful UTeach Natural Sciences program and the Austin Independent
School District to develop and deliver UTeachEngineering, an innovative, design-
and challenge-based curriculum for preparing secondary teachers of engineering.
To meet the growing need for engineering teachers in Texas, and to serve as a
model in engineering education across the nation, UTeachEngineering has the
following four professional development pathways to teacher preparedness, two
for in-service teachers and two for pre-service teachers: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
1. UTeach Master of Arts in Science and Engineering Education (MASEE);
&lt;br/&gt; 2. Engineering Summer Institutes for Teachers (ESIT); &lt;br/&gt; 3.
Engineering Certification Track for Physics Majors; and &lt;br/&gt; 4. Teacher
Preparation Track for Engineering Majors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key elements of
the four UTeachEngineering pathways are four new engineering courses focusing on
engineering content and pedagogy: Fundamentals in Engineering and Design,
Knowing and Learning in Engineering, Engineering Energy Systems, and Design of
Machines and Systems. Leveraging these four courses in combination with existing
UTeach pedagogical courses, UTeachEngineering anticipates reaching 650 teachers
(80 pre-service and 570 in-service) over the first five years. In the future, it
is expected that UTeachEngineering will be sustained as a vital program at the
University of Texas at Austin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UTeachEngineering is firmly
rooted in current research in the field of engineering education and affords a
much-needed opportunity to study the teaching and learning of engineering.
During the development phase, UTeachEngineering is examining impacts on three
specific groups: (1) Engineers involved in the creation of curricular materials
and course design, (2) participants (current and future teachers) enrolled in
the engineering courses, and (3) the students of these teachers. While the
focused goal of UTeachEngineering is to train a cadre of secondary teachers, the
project's vision is that all students are "engineering enabled," acquiring the
design and interaction skills that would enable them to be successful in an
engineering career should they choose one, while enhancing their lives and
participation as global citizens even if they do not become engineers.