* 0831865
* NeTs-NECO:    Study of the Fundamenal Compatibility Space of Wireless Routing Metrics
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2013
* Thomas Hou, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Min Song
* 07/31/2013
* USD 349,984.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The current rich collection of wireless routing designs
brings significant compatibility issues between different design choices. A
combination of arbitrary designs of routing components with a routing metric may
result in catastrophe on a network's normal operation, such as routing loops,
inconsistent routing decisions, suboptimal paths and routing instability.
Previous works for modeling routing metric designs focused on several IP routing
protocols deployed for the Internet. There remains a serious lack of
understanding of the compatibility issue for wireless networks. The objective of
this project is to address this challenging issue by systematically studying the
fundamental compatibility space of routing metrics for different wireless
routing designs. The proposed project will move the traditional simple linear
wireless routing metric design into the new era of non-linear design and provide
in-depth analysis of potential incompatibility issues. The routing theory
developed in this proposed project is a major step in the understanding of
interoperability and compatibility between wireless routing protocols. In
addition, the theory of compatible routing designs also brings insights for
developing flexible wireless routing architecture so that designs that
potentially may put too many restrictions on the development of routing metrics
can be avoided. The proposed research will foster the integration of research
and education by expanding the existing curriculum with the new results from
this project. The outreach component of the project includes disseminate
research results and pedagogical materials via education and industry outreach
programs.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;