* 0831315
* CT-ISG Collaborative Research:   Trusted Cooperative Transmission:  Turning a Security Weakness into a Security Enhancement
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Yan Sun, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Angelos Keromytis
* 09/30/2012
* USD 107,999.00

Cooperative transmission is an emerging wireless communication paradigm that
improves wireless channel capacity by creating multi-user cooperation in the
physical layer. In cooperative transmission, when the source node transmits a
message to the destination node, the nearby nodes that overheard this
transmission will "help" the source and destination by relaying the replicas of
the message, and the destination will combine the multiple received waveforms so
as to improve the link quality. This technology departs from the traditional
point-to-point link abstraction of wireless connections, and is expected to have
a profound impact on network performance and design. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
current algorithm design, protocol development and performance evaluation for
cooperative transmission assume that all wireless nodes are trustworthy.
Investigation of the security issues is lagging behind. This research addresses
the major security issues related to cooperative transmission. In particular,
does cooperative transmission provide new opportunities for attackers to
undermine network performance? Conversely, are there new ways to defend wireless
networks through physical layer cooperation? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Any project
in an open area in security benefits the larger society which now has urgent
need of true innovations in security. In addition, this project will have
broader impacts through its education plan, which focuses on an outreach program
integrating campus summer camps for high school-age women/minority students and
an online mentoring group, in addition to graduate and undergraduate student
participation. In summary, the PIs are equally dedicated to improving wireless
network performance through security-assured cooperative transmission and to
enhancing female and minority participation in engineering.