* 0831581
* RETA: Development of Longitudinal Models Linking Student Mathematics Achievement to Instruction Content
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2014
* William Schmidt, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,499,652.00

The project is to develop and evaluate longitudinal models that examine what and
how students learn in the school setting. With a focus on mathematics, it draws
on a unique data set gathered by the existing Promoting Rigorous Outcomes in
Mathematics/Science Education (PROM/SE) project. This Comprehensive NSF/Math and
Science Partnership (MSP) effort involving over 300,000 students in grades 3
through 12 and approximately 4,000 teachers in over 50 districts from the states
of Michigan and Ohio collected data over the past 4 years, 2004-2008. It
consists of multi-grade curriculum measurements at different time points of (a)
student knowledge in multiple content topics and of (b) student's opportunity to
learn those topics. The sample of students mirrors that of the nation both in
demographics and socio-economic factors. &lt;br/&gt;The longitudinal models will
involve three important issues: the exposure to important mathematics content
students experience over time, (ii) the change in student mathematics knowledge
in specific curricular sensitive content areas over time, and iii) how the
relationship between these two changes. This enables researchers to develop
statistical models and evaluate them for three different longitudinal designs:
i) one for synthetic cohorts involving multi-grade measurements at a single time
point; ii) a second for true grade cohorts with repeated measurements at
multiple time points; and iii) an individual longitudinal model involving
repeated measurements at multiple time points. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
longitudinal models incorporate three important educational issues : i) students
opportunity to learn (OTL) curriculum content, i.e., the exposure students
experience over time, ii) the change in student achievement in specific content
areas over time, and iii) the relationship between OTL and achievement. The fit
with the statistical models developed for each is to be explored, and compared
and contrasted for results and conclusions that lead to policy implications. The
results promise to inform a national model for the improvement of student
achievement.