* 0832845
* Dummy Endogenous Variables in Threshold Crossing Models, with Applications to Health Economics
* SBE,SES
* 02/28/2008,02/28/2011
* Edward Vytlacil, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 02/28/2011
* USD 53,813.00

Threshold crossing models are a standard framework for analyzing binary data in
microeconomics, medicine, and elsewhere. For example, analysts often model
mortality by imagining latent health status falling below a threshold. A common
problem arises when one of the regressors is a dummy endogenous variable, such
as a medical procedure that is performed on individuals with the worst
unobserved health. Standard methodologies for recovering the average effect of
the endogenous variable either depend on the validity of parametric
distributional assumptions or require strong properties on an instrument.
Instrumental variables analysis recovers the 'Local Average Treatment Effect'
but not the average effect.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs propose developing a
new non-parametric methodology for evaluating the average effect of a dummy
endogenous variable in a threshold crossing model where there is an instrument.
Using an early version of this methodology, the PI's have constructed sharp
bounds. When all regressors are discrete, the PI's have developed confidence
sets that asymptotically contain each point in the bounds with a given specified
probability. The PI's will extend their procedures for inference, including to
allow for continuous regressors and to consider confidence sets that
asymptotically contain the entire identified set with the desired probability.
The PI's will develop bounds for other classes of threshold crossing models and
limited dependent variable models beyond binary choice models, for example,
ordered choice models. The PI's will extend their analysis to consider dummy
endogenous regressors in discrete-time, dynamic outcome
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The analysis is applied to an important medical
problem. The placement of Swan-Ganz catheters is an extremely common procedure
with over 2 million patients in North America catheterized each year. Doctors
debate whether the greater observed mortality of patients receiving Swan-Ganz
catheterization can be attributed to catheterization itself, or are due to the
unobserved worse health of catheterized patients. In preliminary analysis, the
PI's have considered the effect of Swan-Ganz catheterization on later mortality.
The proposed theoretical work will allow the PI's to apply statistical inference
procedures to account for the dynamic nature of the outcome variable to this
situation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is of broad intellectual
significance because it advances the theoretical literature on endogenous
variables in nonparametric, nonseparable models. Previous approaches require a
continuous endogenous regressor, a continuous outcome variable, or particularly
strong statistical identification requirements. The research introduces a new
approach without the need for any of these objects, which are often not
available in empirical settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program will
also have broader impacts outside of theoretical econometrics. The empirical
project proposed is important in its own right, and the results will provide
doctors with guidance on thorny patient care decisions. The analysis of the
effect of binary endogenous variables on limited dependent variables is a common
problem in empirical economics, sociology, political science, and medicine;
hence, the theoretical work will have wide applicablity.