* 0832969
* Greater Philadelphia Region LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate (Cohort VI) Project
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2008,12/31/2011
* Stephen Cox, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 12/31/2011
* USD 987,000.00

The Greater Philadelphia Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation Bridge
to the Doctorate (BD) Program, under the leadership of Drexel University, is a
collaborative effort between the National Science Foundation and institutions of
higher education in Delaware, New Jersey and Pennsylvania. The goal of the
alliance is to increase the quality and quantity of underrepresented minorities
matriculating to completion of the doctoral degree in science, technology,
engineering and mathematics fields (STEM) fields. The program at Delaware State
University prepares students to meet the challenges of completing doctoral
programs of study and for academic careers in higher education. In addition, the
program develops leadership skills necessary for success in the STEM workforce
nationally and internationally.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Integrating research and
education, the BD fellows will be nurtured over two years as a cohorted
community that will benefit from a program of academic and personal development
activities as well as social support to sustain their commitment and success to
the terminal Ph.D. STEM degree. Program activities include linkages to the
Delaware Experimental Program To Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), Dual
Degree Graduate Program in Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience, Minority Access
to Research Careers (NIH) as well as other NSF-funded research and education
projects, including programs that provide mentoring opportunities for
undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A total of 12 students from
underrepresented minority populations in STEM fields will participate in the
program at Delaware State University during the 2009-2010 academic years.
Results from this support will broaden the participation of African-Americans,
Hispanics, Native Americans, and Pacific-Islanders in the STEM pipeline, U. S.
workforce and abroad. Results from rigorous evaluation of the project will add
to the body of literature in the recruitment and retention of underrepresented
minority students in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;