* 0832084
* NeTS-NEDG:   Toward Service Predictability under Uncertain Resource Availability in 802.11 Like Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Rong Zheng, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Min Song
* 12/31/2012
* USD 208,000.00

Explosion of wireless products and innovative use of the ISM bands lead to a
very crowded spectrum space. When densely deployed, significant performance
degradation may be experienced ranging from higher latency and lower data rate
to starvation and service disruption. To tackle the co-existence problems, two
key challenges need to be addressed. First, there exists innate uncertainty in
channel quality, user location and population as well as coexisting devices and
networks. Second, many emerging applications using radio technologies in the ISM
bands require high availability and predictable services instead of large access
bandwidth. The focus of this project is thus to develop theoretical models and
algorithms for robust resource management that target at minimizing the outage
and/or disruption of desired service level under varying resource availability
in 802.11 like networks. This work will result in i) new methods and measurement
procedures for inferring internal and external conditions of broadband wireless
networks; ii) novel concept of effective margin as a quantifiable metrics for
the robustness of resource management decisions; and iii) design of an
optimization framework for robust resource management with both discrete and
continuous constraints. The proposed activities serve as fundamental building
blocks to address wireless co-existence issues in industry, commercial and
medical domains, where severe interferences can possibly cause tremendous
economic loss and claim human lives. The interdisciplinary nature of this
research lends naturally to a combine engineering and science curriculum
development at both undergraduate and graduate levels with a significant
experimental component.