* 0832965
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Ritual Practices and the Emergence of Urbanism: Wari Social Strategies, AD 600-1000, Ayacucho, Peru
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Amy Groleau, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2009
* USD 15,000.00

Amy Groleau, with the supervision of her advisor Dr. William H. Isbell, will
undertake a study of ritual activity in the earliest cities of the Wari Empire
that flourished in the central Andes of Peru from AD 600-1000. Pre-dating the
Inca by 500 years, Wari was the first expansive group in this area of the world
that had far-reaching colonies governed by administrative centers. Standardized
architecture and distinctive ceramic styles bearing images of deities and
mythical creatures are the hallmark of Wari centers, which have been found as
far south as Bolivia and north to Ecuador--spanning the length of present-day
Peru. Without the benefit of a written language and traversing landscape
extremes from the desert coast to the rugged highlands, the rise of the Wari
state has been a subject of debate among Andean scholars. It has most recently
been theorized that Wari expansion was facilitated by a combination of military
might, religious conversion, and relocation of people from the capital to govern
the colonies. Ms. Groleau's study will examine religious ritual offerings during
this time period at three sites in the Wari heartland near present-day Ayacucho,
Peru: the capital site of Wari; Conchopata, a secondary city; and Ã‘awinpukyo, a
settlement dating to the period directly preceding Wari dominance. This study
will track changes in ritual offering practice during the rise of urbanism and
the emergence of Wari state power to provide a better understanding of the role
of religion in these larger social and political changes. The combination of
sites provides the perspective of a large geographical area and offers the
possibility of seeing change through time during the transition to urban living;
contributing data from an important and early South American empire to the
larger debates of the rise of complex societies and urbanization.

Current archaeological scholarship emphasizes the importance of cities to the
formation of greater political complexity such as states. Ms. Groleau's research
examines how people were using ritual and religion to negotiate their place
within an emerging state and city. For example, were city residents adopting new
rituals supportive of state ideologies; attempting to better their lives by
opting into an increasingly stratified state power? Or do ritual offerings found
in residences represent a challenge both to emerging state power and to
increasing inequalities of the urban environment? While governmental and
religious institutions were aligning, people may have sought to mitigate the
monopoly on divine authority through widespread household ritual practice.
Ritual is an important locus for examining ongoing tensions that needed to be
addressed by Wari governing bodies and underscores the extent to which power was
constantly negotiated. Ms. Groleau's results will provide robust empirical data
for the capital region which can then be used by scholars working on Wari
provincial sites.

Beyond the contribution to social science, this project provides experience in
running a large laboratory analysis for the graduate student, Groleau, and
substantial training opportunities for undergraduate assistants from the local
university in Ayacucho, Peru; one of the more impoverished regions of the
country.