* 0832833
* Signal Processing for Wireless Communications over Triply Selective Fading Channels
* CSE,CCF
* 10/31/2007,11/30/2009
* Chengshan Xiao, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 11/30/2009
* USD 79,803.00

Multiuser multiple input multiple output (MIMO) communication is likely to
become instrumental for future wireless communication networks due to limited
frequency spectrum and increasing demand for high data rate and high quality
services. Research on MIMO wireless communication has been going on for about a
decade. Various MIMO signal processing methods and information theoretical
results have been developed using simplified or idealized fading channel models.
Relatively less work has been done for the transceiver design of MIMO
communications over realistic fading channels, which usually undergo space-
selective, time-selective, and frequency-selective fading. This realistic fading
is referred to as triply selective fading. The triply selective fading contains
doubly selective as a special case but it is not a trivial extension, especially
in terms of capacity-based transceiver design.

The project investigates several key problems in multiuser MIMO communications
over triply selective fading channels. First, it analyzes the effects of triply
selective fading and its correlation matrices on the ergodic capacity, outage
capacity, network throughput, and error performance of multiuser MIMO multiple
access channels (MAC) to assist in the design of capacity-based transmission
policies. Secondly, it designs a cooperative multiuser MIMO MAC transceiver that
requires only the correlation matrices be provided to optimize transmission
policies, and investigate the design methodology for aximizing capacity gains
and system performances with low system complexity. Thirdly, it develops signal
processing algorithms for the information capacity-based transceivers including
single carrier and multi-carrier modulations, multiuser MIMO channel estimation,
and multiuser MIMO channel equalization and detection. The research in these
topics will provide viable solutions for the ergodic capacity and outage
capacity of multiuser MIMO triply selective fading channels that have, to date,
not been successfully addressed.