* 0832545
* Establishment of a Site on SMA-Research Technologies (SMA-RT) as part of OSU-SVC
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2008,12/31/2013
* Dimitris Lagoudas, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence A. Hornak
* 12/31/2013
* USD 331,000.00

Texas A &amp; M University (TAMU) is planning to establish a site for the NSF
I/UCRC program on shape memory alloys (SMA) and actuation technologies as a new
thrust area of the recently established I/UCRC Smart Vehicles Concepts Center
(SVC) at Ohio State University. The proposed research site will focus on
development, processing, characterization, design and analysis of SMAs and SMA
actuators with high actuation work outputs and operating temperatures spanning
from subzero temperatures to 500C. In particular, the proposed research will
establish the relationship amongst processing, microstructure and properties of
SMAs. Emphasis will also be placed on studying the complicated thermo-mechanical
response of SMAs and SMA actuator designs and analysis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new SMA materials, actuators, design and analysis
tools developed at TAMU will benefit a wide range of industries and especially
the design of new vehicles and mechanisms. The proposed site will contribute to
and support the smart technology activities that are currently under development
at OSU. TAMU will help disseminate the SMA knowledge to the interested US
industries and help maintain or improve their global competitiveness. The
researchers at the proposed site intend to recruit women and minority
undergraduate and graduate students to participate in the SVC-TAMU research
work.