* 0832912
* Ethically Contentious Research and Innovation: An Interdisciplinary and Interinstitutional Experiment in Ethics Education and Assessment
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Edward Queen, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Linda Layne
* 12/31/2012
* USD 298,626.00

This project, supported by the cross-NSF program in Ethics Education in Science
and Engineering, conducts an experiment in ethics education for graduate
engineering and science students and an experiment in assessment of this
educational effort. These experiments draw on a theoretical foundation
integrating contextualized approaches to ethics and policy, problem-based
learning, and the cognitive science supporting problem-based learning. If these
experiments yield promising results, this would invite further research on a
larger scale to examine whether effective ethics education can be delivered and
assessed in the ways tested by this project.

Advances in research and innovation sometimes stimulate 'fractious' policy
problems that generate contentious and unproductive policy debate, threatening
to undermine public trust in science and engineering. These fractious problems
share five characteristics; they are (1) novel, (2) complex, (3) ethically
fraught, (4) divisive, and (5) unavoidably of public concern. Examples of
fractious problems include policy problems surrounding the development and use
of neuroimaging technologies; human-nonhuman chimeras; human enhancement
technologies; and genetic technologies to predict the onset of disease, predict
behavior, or identify individuals. Future scientists and engineers can
contribute to the social capacity to understand and address these fractious
problems, and it is the responsibility of the science and engineering
professions and of educators to equip future professionals to do so.

Investigators will design and deliver experimental ethics courses aimed at
cultivating skills needed to understand and address the five characteristics of
'fractious' problems by incorporation of the following course elements: small
groups of diverse, multi-disciplinary learners; problem-based, student-directed
learning; facilitation by similarly diverse and multi-disciplinary faculty
mentors; preparation of findings and policy recommendations regarding two or
more fractious problems of current policy concern; and presentation of these
findings and recommendations to the public and to policymakers and/or their
staffs. Learners will be drawn from four Atlanta-area institutions, including
private and public and historically black and primarily white institutions:
Georgia Tech (graduate students in bioengineering and in public policy), Emory
(graduate students in bioscience and in ethics), Morehouse School of Medicine
(graduate students in bioscience), and Georgia State (law students).
Investigators will also design and test a new assessment instrument aimed at
measuring progress in developing these skills, named SkillSET (Skills for
Science/Engineering Ethics Test).