* 0832204
* International Research in El Salvador:   Dissertation Enhancement:   Climate, ecophysiology, and evolution in a tropical butterfly (Chlosyne lacinia)
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2010
* Paul Ehrlich, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 07/31/2010
* USD 12,680.00

This dissertation enhancement award will provide support for doctoral student
Mr. Timothy Bonebrake, to conduct research on microclimate effects on
ecophysiology and evolution within a checkerspot butterfly population in a broad
geographic range in El Salvador, under the guidance of Drs. Carol Boggs and Paul
Ehrlich, of Stanford University. Data will be gathered through biophysical
modeling, thermocouple experimentation and genetic analysis. Field work will be
based near the El Imposible National Park in El Salvador, with a strong
international collaboration between the U.S. investigators and El Salvadoran
ecologists Dr. Oliver Komar (Salvanatura) and Dr. Francisco Serrano
(Bioproductores). Results will be compared to past and present research in Costa
Rica and North America, and will be disseminated through a Stanford University
bilingual website. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will enhance current
biodiversity inventory efforts and monitoring capacity in an area where there is
a dearth of empirical data. A strong international collaboration will be
fostered between U.S. researchers and those in El Salvador. Research on
anthropogenic effects on biodiversity will benefit both the U.S. and El
Salvador. &lt;br/&gt;