* 0832894
* U.S.-Singapore Planning  Visit:  Collaborations in Forward Osmosis Research
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2010
* Isabel Escobar, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Sung
* 07/31/2010
* USD 15,500.00

0832894&lt;br/&gt;Escobar&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a planning
visit to enable Professor Isabel Escobar at the University of Toledo in Ohio, to
meet with Professor (Neal) T.S. Chung at the National University of Singapore.
The proposed research is novel in the sense that it combines a nanofiltration
membrane with tailored surface functionalization for forward osmosis (FO)
application. The researchers propose to develop the FO operation by increasing
the value of the negative charge of the membrane surface at neutral pH values.
This more negative nanofiltration membrane will have a higher monovalent
electrolyte rejection along with lower concentration polarization. Development
of a desalination process technology using the forward osmosis route has the
potential to achieve up to a 75 percent decrease in costs and energy consumption
in desalination, in comparison to conventional thermal or reverse osmosis
processes. With continued development of more efficient nanofiltration
membranes, operating at lower pressures, the forward osmosis process can be
beneficial for both seawater desalination and identifying a new resource for
fresh water availability. This would result in satisfying both economical and
environmental concerns. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers have complementary
scientific expertise in the field. The project will combine the University of
Toledo?s expertise on membrane material synthesis, surface modification and
fouling resistance with the University of Singapore?s expertise in forward
osmosis and membrane formation. It is feasible that this project will develop
patentable and marketable FO hollow fiber membrane technologies that could have
significant long-term impact on the water supply and the membrane industry. It
is anticipated that this project will provide unique training and educational
opportunities for two U.S. graduate students to obtain a global research
experience. These early collaborations between the scientists and students from
each country will likely lead to long-term collaborations that will benefit both
institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;