* 0832031
* San Antonio Mathematics and Science Education Partnership
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* J. Aaron Cassill, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Michael Jacobson
* 09/30/2012
* USD 300,000.00

Project Description

The University of Texas at San Antonio (UTSA) in conjunction with three
independent school districts (ISD), San Antonio, North East, Northside, and the
Alamo Community College District will partner with South Texas Oncology and
Hematology, Lockheed Martin, CPS Energy and the Mayor of San Antonio. The San
Antonio Mathematics and Science Education Partnership (SAMSEP) will bring
together all stakeholders from the various demographic groups to establish a
strong and comprehensive partnership with a shared vision of addressing local
and regional gaps in student achievement in STEM education. The long-term goal
of the project is to prepare students to succeed in higher education and
contribute to workforce needs by creating a regional Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) Center at UTSA that will serve as a hub for
the coordination of efforts between the city?s fifteen school districts, the
five campus community college districts and the other four institutions of
higher learning. The objectives are to increase student achievement in the
sciences, engineering, and mathematics K-16, increase the rigor of STEM courses
offered, align curriculum, particularly between high school and first year
college, and develop a broad base of support within the civic and business
community. Partners in civic leadership and the business community are a
critical addition to the academic group as they can assist in practical training
and identifying local job related needs in the expanding manufacturing and high
tech industry in San Antonio. The results of this START project will be
incorporated into a needs assessment that will provide a framework for STEM
faculty involvement, address the five MSP key features, implement and assess
pilot projects and support the development of a follow up Targeted Partnership.
The intended project has the potential to positively impact a large number of
underserved students in the San Antonio. The proposed activity will serve as a
pathway to broadly integrate STEM learning across diverse partner organizations
and to provide additional opportunities for collaborative engagement to
vertically aligned and/or horizontally aligned K-20 institutions of learning. A
product will be a digital social networking tool that after initially supporting
partner interactions will become a resource for others.