* 0832993
* 2008 Texas A&amp;M University System Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation Bridge to the Doctorate V Program: Continuring the Pathways
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2008,05/31/2011
* Karan Watson, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 05/31/2011
* USD 987,000.00

Texas A&amp;M University System?s (TAMUS) Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation (LSAMP) Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) Program is a collaborative
effort between the National Science Foundation the TAMU College of Science and
the College of Engineering. The program prepares students to meet the challenges
of completing doctoral programs of study and for academic careers in higher
education and develops leadership skills necessary to succeed as young students
from underrepresented populations in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) workforce nationally and internationally.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integrating research and education, the BD fellows will be
nurtured over two years as a cohorted community that will benefit from a program
of academic and personal development activities as well as social support to
sustain their commitment and success to the terminal Ph.D. STEM degree. Program
activities include linkages to the NSF-funded Integrative Graduate Education in
Research Training (IGERT) in the area of Next Generation Computations and
Analytical Tools for Material Science and student mentoring opportunities under
several undergraduate research and education projects. Leadership training,
proposal writing and training in ethics are modules within the two-year
fellowship program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A total of 12 students from
underrepresented minority populations in STEM fields will participate in the
program at Texas A&amp;M University during the 2009-2010 academic years. Results
from this support will broaden the participation of African-Americans,
Hispanics, Native Americans, and Pacific-Islanders in the STEM pipeline, U. S.
workforce and abroad. Results from rigorous evaluation of the project will add
to the body of literature in the recruitment and retention of underrepresented
minority students in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;