* 0832025
* NEDG:   Cooperative Wireless Networks: From Theory to Urban-Scale Trials
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Behnaam Aazhang, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Min Song
* 08/31/2011
* USD 300,001.00

This project studies a paradigm in which nodes cooperate by pooling power and
bandwidth resources and where flows interact opportunistically to avoid
interference and increase network utilization. The PIs will leverage their
existing expertise in cooperative and opportunistic communications to analyze
the implications for broader networks of communication nodes. In particular,
they will instantiate their design philosophy in three ways:

Node Information Management: While previous network analyses considered only
isolated aspects of a node (e.g., channel gain), the project studies a
comprehensive network state information, which captures not only physical-layer
conditions but also higher-layer information such as queue state, processing
power, and availability of forwarding routes.

Novel Network Representations: Instead of regarding the network as a simple
connectivity graph, the PIs will introduce and develop a network representation
which incorporates both temporal and spatial relationships between nodes. The
PIs refer to this as the trellis representation of the network, and it will
enable us to describe cooperative and opportunistic communication in a wide area
network. The trellis will provide a structure in which to identify opportunities
for physical layer cooperation, determine the impact of cooperation on
neighboring nodes and flows, and opportunistically schedule and route competing
flows at fine grained time scales.

Distributed Cooperative Discovery: Traditional discovery protocols for
determining network connectivity are unable to identify cooperative links. New
techniques will be developed that leverage existing discovery protocols to
efficiently locate potential cooperative topologies, which are a key to
opportunistic communication. These discovery protocols will recover network
state information and enable the use of the trellis representation to identify
the optimal cooperative route through the network.

With these tools, the PIs will develop and analyze protocols for coordinating
cooperative and opportunistic communications in heterogeneous networks. The new
protocols will expand access in underserved areas while increasing throughput in
existing networks.

This research will have a broad impact on education by engaging undergraduate
and graduate students in the Rice Center for Multimedia Communication (CMC)
laboratory. Cooperative communication will be integrated into several courses at
Rice in the wireless communication and networking areas. Software and firmware
modules as well as publications will be distributed through the WARP open-access
repository (\href{http://warp.rice.edu/trac}{http://warp.rice.edu/trac}).