* 0832250
* Support for Young Researchers at the 2008 Intelligent Tutoring Systems Conference
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2008,05/31/2009
* Beverly Woolf, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 05/31/2009
* USD 25,000.00

This is funding to support travel by 25 students currently enrolled in PhD
programs in the United States to participate in the ITS (Intelligent Tutoring
Systems) Doctoral Student Consortium, at the upcoming International ITS
Conference, to be held June 23rd-27th 2008, in Montreal, Quebec. The ITS
International Conference is the premier biennial event for promoting promotes
rigorous research and development of interactive and adaptive learning
environments for learners of all ages; ITS will be the 9th event in the series.
The interdisciplinary areas that ITS represents, comprising cognitive science,
computer science, and educational technology, are critical research domains that
enhance the effectiveness and usability of software learning systems. Active
participation of young researchers in this conference is very important, both
for the health of the field and for the researchers themselves. The ITS 2008
Young Researcher's Track (YRT) provides a unique opportunity for PhD students
partway through their dissertation research to receive valuable feedback and
individual mentoring from top researchers in the field. The YRT officially takes
place on June 25-27, 2008 during the three days of the conference that follow
the pre-conference workshops and tutorials. The program format dedicated to the
students will include three 1.5 hour structured poster sessions open to all
conference participants. Students will be paired-up with a senior member of the
ITS community who serve as a mentor during the conference. The PI holds an
active leadership roles within ITS 2008, and personally holds over $1.5 million
of NSF grants in the areas of advanced learning technologies and intelligent
tutoring systems.

Bringing young and creative researchers to ITS 2008 will help advance an
important and socially valuable interdisciplinary research field. For many
graduate students, the cost of attending the conference exceeds their travel
budget. Thus, NSF funding will significantly impact the careers of the next
generation of ITS researchers, by enabling a number of them to take part in an
important event they would otherwise have to miss; in particular, those who lack
funding from other sources (e.g., advisor's grants). The students will have an
opportunity to gain wider exposure in the community for their innovative work,
and to obtain feedback and guidance from senior members of the research
community. Participation will also help foster a sense of community among these
young researchers, by allowing them to create a social network both among
themselves and with senior researchers at a critical stage in their professional
development. The PI and co-PI have indicated that they will act to assure
participation by members of traditionally under-represented institutions, and
will pay close attention to inclusion of minorities and women.