* 0832043
* ANET:   Interest-Aware Delivery for Future Mobile Social Networks:  A TRACE-driven Approach
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2013
* Ahmed Helmy, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2013
* USD 352,000.00

This project introduces a novel communication paradigm, called profile-cast, to
support new classes of interest-aware services in mobile networks. Unlike
unicast, multicast or directory-based paradigms, profile-cast infers user
interest using implicit behavioral profiling via a self-monitoring and mining
technique. Privacy preserving design is a high priority. A spatio-temporal
representation is introduced to capture users' interest within a behavioral-
space. Users identify similarity of interest based on their position in such
space. The design philosophy begins by intensive analysis of measurements from
the target context that drives the modeling and protocol design through a
systematic framework, called TRACE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Components of TRACE
include: 1. Tracing and monitoring of behavior, 2. Representing and Analyzing
the data, 3. Characterizing behavioral profiles using data mining techniques,
and 4. designing mobile user behavioral models and efficient protocols for
future mobile societies. This project tackles the design and development of
profile-cast and TRACE, and quantifying the extent to which they are privacy-
preserving, scalable, efficient, flexible and robust.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of this research include enabling new classes of socially
valuable service, from navigation of mobile societies, to emergency alert
systems. The mobility models developed will provide novel and key elements for
the success of future mobile networks. The project includes education plan to
involve students at the university in using profile-cast devices and to
integrate the research into curricula both at the University of Florida, and
into K-12 schools in north-central Florida.