* 0832335
* U.S.-Australia Workshop:   Ice e-Mysteries Polar e-Book - An Innovative Approach to Science and Literacy Education
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2010
* Allan Miller, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* R.  Clive Woods
* 06/30/2010
* USD 49,939.00

This award supports a U.S.-Australia workshop for the refinement and assessment
of an innovative middle school science education pedagogy that links science,
art activities and creative writing, and uses international collaboration. The
workshop will be held in Hobart, Tasmania bringing together scientists and
teachers from Alaska and Tasmania following the teachers completion of a pilot
project with their students studying polar science and collaboratively writing
Arctic/Antarctic mystery e-books. The workshop and pilot project will be
organized and led by Elena B. Sparrow from the International Arctic Research
Center at the University of Alaska Fairbanks, G. Andrew Page from the University
of Alaska Anchorage, Allan Miller from the Alaska Statewide Mentor Program, Andy
Baird from the Tasmania Art Gallery and Museum, and Sandra Zicus from the
International Antarctic Institute and the University of Tasmania. The workshop
will serve as a forum to explore the 2008 Fall/Winter pilot project and to
evaluate the processes and outcomes in order to investigate the development of a
scaleable, sustainable model linking science and literacy education. Particular
emphasis of the pilot project and future scale-up will be to broaden the
participation of underserved students (Native Alaskans and other ethnic
minorities, economically disadvantaged and/or geographically isolated) and
teachers from remote schools. This activity integrates with the NSF funded IPY
GLOBE (Global Learning and Observations to Benefit the Environment) Seasons and
Biomes Project and GK-12 TASK (Teaching Assistants Sharing Knowledge) project.