* 0832011
* Mountain Empire MATH PAYS Partnership
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Debra Colley, Mountain Empire Community Col
* Standard Grant
* James Hamos
* 09/30/2011
* USD 299,703.00

Project Description

The Partnership is between Mountain Empire Community College (MECC), the
University of Virginia College at Wise (UVA-Wise) and five contiguous rural
Virginia school districts. Supporting partners are the Virginia Department of
Education and Virginia's Gaining Early Awareness and Readiness for Undergraduate
Programs (GEAR UP). The latter is an initiative supported by grants from the US
Department of Education to provide services to high poverty, middle and high
schools. GEAR UP funds are also used to provide college scholarships for low
income students. The project's preliminary vision centers on three long-term
goals (i) to attract, prepare and support K-12 teachers of mathematics by
providing high quality, research based, standards-based in-service professional
development including the provision of leadership skills; (ii) to bridge the gap
between K-12 and higher education mathematics courses; and (iii) to increase the
number of students that complete more mathematics courses in high school. The
Principle Investigator is from Mountain Empire Community College (MECC) and 78%
of the students in the area attend a Virginia College. The Leadership Team led
by the PI is comprised of representatives from UVA-Wise and key administrators
(Supervisors, Superintendents and Directors of Curriculum and Instruction) from
all five K-12 district partners. The project will collect and analyze a wide
variety of data to thoroughly assess the professional development needs of
teachers, students and their readiness to succeed in college level mathematics,
and counselors, principals and Superintendents and their professional
development needs, and parents, to gather information on their needs to better
counsel their own children. Analysis of this data should lead to greater
alignment of policies and practice, which will ultimately improve student
achievement. Analysis of the data will also identify the needs that will be the
focus of any intervention. Based upon this effort a plan for the program will be
designed for a Targeted Partnership to achieve the three long-term goals. The
project has the potential to add to the knowledge base on pre-service education
from the aspect of the role that community colleges play in the preparation of
teachers and in promoting a more successful transition for students from high
school to higher education. The lessons learned could contribute to the
knowledge base on the educational engagement and attainment of students with low
aspirations.