* 0832298
* SGER: Collaborative research in rapid assessment of algal physiology using synchrotron-based Fourier transform infrared imaging supported by chemometrics
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2009
* Carol Hirschmugl, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 05/31/2009
* USD 128,544.00

In this collaborative Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) funded by the
Analytical and Surface Chemistry (ASC) program of the Chemistry Division Prof.
Carol Hirschmugl of the University of Wisconsin Milwaukee and Prof. Frank Vogt
of the University of Tennessee will combine innovative spectroscopic
(Synchrotron-based infrared imaging with a multi-element detector) and
computational(chemometrics) methods for in-vivo studies of algal cells
responding to a changing environment. The project goal is to achieve a better
understanding of the strategies microalgae adopt to allocate resources focusing
on the responses to changes in the availability of carbon and nitrogen. The
newly developed methodology will enable the study of the role of carbon dioxide
(a green house gas) on algal systems in great detail. Notably, methodologies
presently used to study algal cells include tedious biochemical analyses, which
are difficult to impossible to use in the studies of living cells. This research
could potentially impact important environmental science and engineering
research fields including climate change research, potential production of
biodiesel, and ecology. Several graduate students across several disciplines
will be involved in these research efforts. In addition, high school students
and teachers, REU students and students from Appalachia will participate in this
project.