* 0832120
* NeTS-NECO:   Some Fundamental Problems for Performance Study of Opportunistic Spectrum Utilization
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2013
* Xiang-Yang Li, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 12/31/2013
* USD 265,982.00

NeTS-NECO: Some Fundamental Problems for Performance Study of Opportunistic
Spectrum Utilization

Summary of Proposed Research Activities: This work will develop, design, and
implement efficient wireless network protocols for better spectrum utilization
and study some fundamental performance bounds for networks with opportunistic
spectrum utilization. This work will study the Nash Equilibrium points of the
spectrum sensing game and spectrum access game when secondary users are selfish.
This work will design stable distributed link scheduling and routing methods to
maximize throughput, and derive some necessary and/or sufficient conditions on
attainable flows. This work will also develop tractable and insightful metrics
and models for wireless networks using SOPs; obtain upper and lower performance
bounds for these metrics for a given set of models; define the negotiation
between application and network for picking the operating point.

Intellectual Merit: This work not only identifies unexplored important problems
(i.e., finding equilibriums of spectrum sensing and access games, studying the
capacity limits of networks with SOPs) and offers methods to solve them, but
also proposes novel approaches to existing interesting problems. By modeling and
analyzing the interactions of secondary users, this work can improve the design
of distributed radio resource management algorithms with particular interest
towards characterizing the algorithms' steady-state, convergence, and stability
properties.

Broader Impact: Today new wireless technologies are struggling for bandwidth.
Dynamic sharing of spectrum can provide a system some flexibility. Our society
will gain substantial benefits, both in the short run and in the long run, from
introduction of SOP sharing. This work will greatly improve the network
performance, and have broad impact on the efficient usage of scarce spectrum
resource in networks and furthermore, our society. This project is expected to
improve the overall wireless spectral efficiency; enable wireless devices or
systems to make full use of spectral resources in an autonomous and distributed
manner; stimulate new applications to take full advantage of cognitive radios
for better QoS; and provide an excellent vehicle for educating students with
hands-on experience.

