* 0832772
* U.S.-China Planning Visits to Develop Partnerships for Research and Education on SiGe Power Devices and dc-dc Power Converters
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2010
* Jiann-Shiun Yuan, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* James Z. Wang
* 09/30/2010
* USD 15,180.00

0832772&lt;br/&gt;Yuan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a U.S.- China
planning visit to develop partnerships for research and education on SiGe
(silicon-germanium) power devices and dc-dc power converters. The visit will
enable Professor Jiann Yuan in the Electrical Engineering Department at the
University of Central Florida in Orland to meet with Professor Jun Xu, Director
of the Microelectronics Institute at Tsinghua University in Beijing, China and
Professor Dehong Xu, Vice Dean for the College of Electrical Engineering at
Zhejiang University in Hangzhou, China. Their proposed project will involve the
design and analysis of a power converter on a chip concept. Their objective is
to achieve a record-setting 40% on-resistance reduction with a low cost CMOS
(complementary metal oxide semiconductor). The ultimate goal is to provide
research and education experiences for U.S. students in China. Energy
conservation and environmental protection are two major challenges faced by
today?s communities. Power management technology holds the key to potential
annual savings of $400 billion in electrical energy worldwide. A high
performance SiGe power MOSFET (metal oxide semiconductor field effect
transistor) in the power management market will help meet the challenge in
conserving energy and protecting the environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is
sufficient overlap of interests between faculty at the three universities to
indicate that the researchers can successfully pursue the activities proposed,
and that the interaction will benefit both sides. The research will have broad
impact in the power management area. It is anticipated that the inclusion of two
U.S. graduate students in this visit will provide them unique training and
education opportunities by providing them a global research experience. These
early collaborations between the scientists and students from each country will
likely lead to long-term collaborations that will benefit both institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;