* 0832002
* Building Connections within the Engineering Education Research Community
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2011
* Odis Griffin, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Cheville
* 07/31/2011
* USD 367,154.00

This research project would hold an NSF-Engineering Education grantees meeting
for invited PIs from engineering Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU),
Research Experiences for Teachers (RET), Department-Level Reform (DLR),
Engineering Education Programs (EEP), Faculty Early Career (CAREER); pre-college
outreach coordinators from Engineering Research Centers (ERC). In addition
selected students from REU sites, selected teachers from RET sites, and guest
presenters would be invited. Meeting activities will include a keynote speaker,
poster sessions, networking opportunities and hour-long workshops for awardees.
With an engineering education department and facilities in the northern Virginia
Region, Virginia Tech is uniquely positioned to host this meeting. The
university?s Continuing and Professional Education office provides professional
meeting coordination services under the supervision of junior faculty, whose
networks and professional reputations will be expanded by hosting this meeting.
This meeting will serve as the impetus for forming a professional group of
engineering academic deans, who will receive invitations from the NSF as the
principal audience for the research to be discussed at this meeting. Like other
administrators, engineering academic deans should have a formal group that meets
annually to share strategies and learn about cutting-edge research in
engineering education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bringing together leading
researchers and practitioners in engineering education is a key activity to
advancing engineering education as a research discipline. Representation of
diverse projects and initiatives in engineering education ensures that exciting
new connections and ideas will be sparked by this meeting. This meeting provides
the opportunity for investigators, RET teachers, REU students, distinguished
guest speakers, graduate students and NSF program officers to interact across
NSF Engineering Education and Centers programs. The networks that will form
across these programs will enhance the infrastructure for research and education
improvement in engineering. The meeting will advance discovery and understanding
while promoting teaching, training, and learning through its dual focus on
research and education projects. Society will ultimately benefit from this
meeting through NSF?s ongoing engineering education projects, which will be
enriched by the information and connections made at this meeting.&lt;br/&gt;