* 0832914
* A Mental Models Approach to Ethical Decision-Making
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2013
* Julie Downs, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Layne
* 12/31/2013
* USD 299,987.00

This project, supported by the cross-NSF program in Ethics Education in Science
&amp; Engineering, investigates the ethical decision-making process for graduate
students in science, technology, engineering and math (STEM). Graduate students
and faculty in STEM areas typically get very little training or education in
research ethics. Instead, faculty and students bring intuitive beliefs and
implicit frameworks as the basis for the judgments they make in their work. In
traditional research ethics training, student discussions of cases of plagiarism
or falsification of data tend to be about right-versus-wrong with little
consideration of cultural or other contexts. This approach is limited in
expanded global scientific networks because consideration of cultural values and
morals must extend beyond those that are held by the majority of one culture. To
the extent that students' intuitive frameworks include questions not addressed
in training, they may have difficulty reconciling their intuitive beliefs with a
curriculum that seems to have neglected important considerations. In the complex
environments in which today's research is conducted, it is important to
understand these cognitive frameworks and address them in teaching ethical
decision-making. This project will provide an explicit, systematic approach for
determining what concepts ought to be covered in two key domains of graduate
research ethics training: privacy and transparency. Privacy is concealing and
transparency is revealing. Both complementary domains are important to research
interests, and balancing the two is critical to the development of technology
and the scientific enterprise itself. This project first develops an expert
model on these two ethical issues by soliciting input from practicing
researchers with international and interdisciplinary experience in science and
technology. Secondly, the mental models held by graduate students in science and
technology are elicited, characterized and compared to the expert model.
Finally, this comparative method will provide a guide for developing an
education module that can bring graduate students' ethical decision-making
closer to the expert level.