* 0832508
* Collaborative Research: Advanced Space Technologies Research and Engineering Center
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2008,11/30/2010
* Winser Alexander, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 11/30/2010
* USD 168,000.00

Full Center Proposal (Phase I) for an I/UCRC for Advanced Space Technologies
Research and Engineering Center

0832517 University of Florida; Norman Fitz-Coy 0832508 North Carolina State
University; William Edmonson The purpose of this proposal is to start a new
I/UCRC "Advanced Space Technologies Research and Engineering Center (ASTREC)"
that will develop new knowledge, tools, hardware, and personnel required for
advanced space technologies. ASTREC will establish this multi-university
collaboration between two research institutions in the southeast, University of
Florida (UF) and North Carolina State University (NCSU). The proposed research
aims at advancing knowledge by performing multidisciplinary research and
providing breakthrough technologies in each of the satellite subsystems for
pico/-nano-class of satellites. By focusing on small satellites of the pico- and
nano-class drives the technology research to be constrained by low power, mass
and volume. Through a Design-Build-Fly (DBF) philosophy, the center?s research
mission is to perform leading-edge research that is industry driven to produce
technologically small satellites and components, which will be on-orbit
validated and demonstrated. The proposed work is important because it seeks to
develop more agile space assets through developing innovative technologies and
processes. Due to the diverse technologies that make up a satellite, those
involved in the center?s research will come from engineering, the physical
sciences and biological sciences.

The efforts of ASTREC will provide the space industry with a class of satellites
that cost less to develop and build without becoming technologically dated at
launch. Through the success of its DBF philosophy, ASTREC will assist in the
transformation of the space industry from risk adverse towards risk tolerant
design. The Center plans to engage K-20 students in all aspects of small
satellite design through hands-on cradle-to-grave experience to create the next
generation of "rocket scientists". ASTREC has a strong diversity plan that
ensures the participation of underrepresented groups in all levels of the
Center. Extensive experience in fostering participation of underrepresented in
research and education will add value to the center.

