* 0832202
* FIND:  Davis Social Links
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Norman Matloff, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2012
* USD 700,000.00

This research project examines fundamental issues in the current Internet
architecture, namely "routable identity", explicit trust/reputation control, and
security/privacy considerations for online social networks such as Facebook and
SecondLife. It posits a dramatic change in Future Internet/networking design to
facilitate future social communication systems. The research builds and
evaluates this new design, and examines the potential social impacts and
insights from it. The following research objectives are being studied: (1) Can a
social peer generate, manipulate and protect all layers of routability toward
his/her own identity? (2) How should the notions of trust and reputation be
explicitly and formally represented and embedded in a large-scale communication
architecture? (Trust/reputation become central in a network architecture based
on social identities). (3) What are the trade-offs between the utilization of
the social information by the network and the privacy protections needed for it?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For evaluation and validation, a social-network based
communication system, named Davis Social Links (DSL), is being built, over
Facebook, both to mimic the human communication model and to integrate social
trust relationships into the network service infrastructure. Among its benefits,
due to the routability design, the DSL architecture will offer a new take on
prevention of unwanted traffic (denial of service and so on), a costly and
urgent problem in the architecture as it is now. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The DSL
project additionally investigates the communication model and its security and
safety issues under virtual reality social systems such as SecondLife. The
ultimate goal of the DSL project is to study a dynamic, scalable, trust-based,
decentralized communication system/architecture for large-scale networks (10
million ~ 10 billion nodes).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This multi-disciplinary
project is a joint effort among academic researchers and industrial
collaborators from computer science, sociology, statistics, and techno-cultural
studies. The broader impacts of the research advance potentially both the
understanding and the innovation of communication networks. As communications
networks exist to support social purposes, the DSL research team carefully
examines a number of implications regarding societal relationships and how the
Internet user community can directly benefit that relationship.