* 0832584
* Collaborative Research: Development of 2D IR Spectroscopy as a Quantitative Probe of Protein Structure, with Applications to Membrane and Aggregated Proteins
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Martin Zanni, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2012
* USD 840,000.00

Prof. Martin Zanni at the University of Wisconsin in Madison, and collaborators
James Skinner (UW-Madison), Daniel Raleigh (SUNY at Stony Brook), and Sean
Decatur (Oberlin College) are supported by the Collaborative Research in
Chemistry Program to devise and test methods based on two-dimensional infrared
(2D IR) spectroscopy for characterization of protein structure and function. The
techniques are particularly important for studying systems for which NMR and
x-ray crystallography are difficult to apply, such as proteins in cell membranes
and protein aggregates. The work brings together a diverse and complementary
team of researchers to develop a rigorous protocol for calculating 2D IR spectra
from atomistic structural models through a novel combination of theory,
experiment, and synthesis. To develop the theoretical methodology, well-
characterized proteins are either isotope-labeled or mutated at individual
residues so that the linewidths and/or couplings of specific residues can be
measured with 2D IR spectroscopy.

While the work is primarily directed toward developing 2D IR as a tool for
protein kinetics, it can be applied to other systems as well. Undergraduate and
graduate students and postdocs involved in this study are being trained to work
in a collaborative interdisciplinary and inter-institutional environment.
Participation of underrepresented groups derives from exchange programs among
Oberlin, Howard University, Stony Brook, and Wisconsin. Cyber-infrastructure
components include web-conferences to discuss research progress and
dissemination of user-friendly software for the theoretical calculation of
spectra. An undergraduate physical chemistry lab experiment is being developed
to show how FTIR spectroscopy can be used as a tool for protein secondary
structure determination; the experiment will be tested in the physical chemistry
lab courses at Wisconsin, Stony Brook, Oberlin, and Howard, and then made
available to the broader academic community. Institutions that lack the needed
instrumentation will be able to incorporate this experiment into their
curriculum by taking advantage of the web-based remote access features being
developed.