* 0832795
* Collaborative Research: Understanding, Coping with, and Benefiting From, Intractability
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2015
* Assaf Naor, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 07/31/2015
* USD 1,132,994.00

Computational intractability imposes a limit on the ability to understand nature
and design systems. Intractability is a stumbling block for postmen, travelling
salesmen, map colorers, and millions of others who would like to complete their
tasks as efficiently as possible, yet it is the foundation of 21st century
cryptography, which in turn is a pillar of electronic commerce. In order to
understand, manage, and exploit intractability it is imperative that progress be
made on proving intractability in many forms and computational models, and on
unraveling the interconnections among different forms and uses of
intractability. This Expedition will explore an array of diverse but
interrelated topics in computational intractability including algorithms,
complexity, cryptography, analysis, geometry, combinatorics, and quantum
mechanics. A "Center for Intractability," the first of its kind, will be based
at Princeton. Addressing some of the deepest and hardest theoretical problems
standing in the way of significant advancements in computer science, this
Expedition involves a high degree of collegial interactivity through
collaborations among geographically local participating institutions. Outreach
includes an active "Women in Theory" program as well as programs targeting
undergraduate and high-school students.