* 0832697
* Filling the gap: improving education on the ethics of animal use in biological field research
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Gad Perry, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 12/31/2012
* USD 299,512.00

Federal regulations control the use of animals in research in the life sciences
to ensure that ethical issues are dealt with in planning and carrying out
experiments using animals. Most of the experiments are conducted in laboratory
settings after review by Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees (IACUCs),
required by law to review and approve every study involving live vertebrates.
However, the existing language is written broadly and also applies to field
studies. The latter are conducted under very different conditions and typically
focus on the well-being of free-living populations or species, making the
existing ethical guidelines problematic. The IACUSs often find themselves
struggling to apply the language and prescribed methodologies of laboratory
research to the questions and methodologies of field biological research. This
can result in two types of undesirable consequence: first, studies that should
be performed would be inappropriately curtailed; and second, studies that should
be avoided might erroneously be approved. This research addresses this problem
by 1) identifying appropriate ethical guidelines for field biological research;
2) devising a methodology for instructing the current and next generation of
field researchers on this topic at a model institution; 3) evaluating the
effectiveness of this methodology and modifying it based on the findings; and 4)
generating materials for national testing of the program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact is substantial to the host institution
which is implementing an Ethics Initiative aimed at encouraging discussion of
ethical issues among students and faculty and to all research institutions with
IACUCs asked to review field studies with animals. &lt;br/&gt;