* 0832325
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Yuthu: The Symbolic and Everyday Limits of an Early Andean Community
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Allison Davis, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2009
* USD 13,030.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Joyce Marcus, Allison R. Davis will analyze data
gathered during her excavations at Yuthu, a village site in Cusco, Peru,
occupied from ca. 600 BC to AD 200. Although Cusco is well-known as the capital
of the much later Inka Empire, almost nothing is known about the daily lives and
political organization of early villagers in the area. Davis's excavations are
(1) the first designed to identify houses and community buildings for the early
village period and (2) the first to collect data on the activities carried out
within them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One goal of this project is to determine
whether the ancient villagers of Yuthu were self-sufficient to meet their
subsistence and non-subsistence needs at the level of the household, the
village, or multi-village network. Villagers may have considered themselves to
be part of a network of settlements that was not necessarily the same group who
provisioned their everyday activities. Indeed, based on studies of early
villagers elsewhere, one comes to expect that the perceptions of membership and
the actual practices that define the limits of a human community are fluid and
may even vary independently of one another at times. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
the Andes today various economic networks integrate settlements spanning many
ecological zones. In addition, a set of beliefs ties individuals and families to
a sacred landscape that extends well beyond the limits of their village. These
enduring concepts structure the lives of people today and this project will
allow one to determine whether similar beliefs shaped the lives of people in the
past. This project will compare the use of non-local items in domestic contexts
to items used in ceremonial contexts at Yuthu, one village in a multi-village
network, in order to understand how archaeologists can define community at two
levels: (1) the actual reliance on distant places to provision daily activities
and (2) the role of distant places in the conception of community membership
that is reinforced in periodic rituals of integration. Results will show whether
or not the perceived and practical limits of a community, evident in the
material remains of ceremonial and domestic practices, co-varied as villages
lost autonomy and became part of a regional polity for the first time.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to helping archaeologists and other social
scientists understand community organization in high-altitude environments
throughout the world, this project will train Peruvian and U.S. students in
archaeology. The project results will be made available to the scientific
community through scholarly journal articles in English and Spanish, conference
presentations, and the Ph.D. thesis of Allison R. Davis. Results will be
presented to the local community of Collana-Cruzpata-Chequerec in site reports
and oral presentations made in their town meetings.