* 0832785
* NSEC: Center for High-rate Nanomanufacturing
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2009,05/31/2015
* Joey Mead, Northeastern University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Carole Read
* 05/31/2015
* USD 12,949,641.00

3. Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;Transferring breakthroughs in nanoscale science
into new technologies requires that we understand and overcome barriers to
nanoscale manufacturing. In addressing the NNI Grand Challenges and the many
hurdles identified at NSF Workshops on Nanomanufacturing, CHN has identified the
following critical&lt;br/&gt;questions, which define the fundamental technical
barriers to nanomanufacturing:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. How can we assemble
different nano-scale elements? What are the mechanisms leading to the assembly
and orientation of nanoscale structures? How do we control these
mechanisms?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. How can we scale up assembly processes in a
continuous or high rate manner? How do we control the interfacial behavior and
forces required to assemble, detach, and transfer nanoelements at high
rates?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. How can we test for reliability in
nanostructures? How can we detect and mitigate defects?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4.
How can nanomanufacturing processes meet existing and future environmental and
health regulations?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CHN is developing the processes and
tools to overcome these fundamental barriers, with a synergistic team of three
universities: Northeastern University, Boston; University of
Massachusetts&lt;br/&gt;Lowell; and University of New Hampshire, Durham. These
equal partners form the Center for High-rate Nanomanufacturing (CHN). This
ongoing collaborative effort has demonstrated that this effective and unique
partnership, combining the skills of 39 engineers, physicists, chemists,
material scientists, business&lt;br/&gt;and humanities investigators with
diverse expertise has the capacity to tackle these critical
barriers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Goals&lt;br/&gt;The Center for High-rate
Nanomanufacturing goals are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Understand the fundamentals
of synthesis and control at the nanoscale to enable high-rate/highvolume bottom-
up, precise directed assembly of nanoelements&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Translate
nanoscale science to practical applications in energy, biomedical, electronics
and materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Develop responsible manufacturing by
identifying and managing potential risks of
nanotechnology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4. Educate the current and emerging
nanomanufacturing workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Programs&lt;br/&gt;The CHN?s
approach to nanomanufacturing processes is fully integrated. The CHN has made
major strides to advance our vision for High-rate/high-volume nanomanufacturing.
This vision includes synthesis and/or functionalization of nanoelements ; uses
templates for directed assembly ; transfers assembled structures ; integrates
assembled structures into test beds and emerging applications. Combined with
responsible manufacturing, and cross-cutting research including modeling,
reliability, and defect mitigation, the above barriers define the CHN research
thrusts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thrust 1: Synthesize nanoelements and create
versatile nanotemplates&lt;br/&gt;Thrust 2: Employ nanotemplates to enable high-
rate/high-volume manufacturing&lt;br/&gt;Thrust 3: Proof of Concept Test Beds,
Emerging Applications, and Manufacturing Readiness&lt;br/&gt;Thrust 4:
Concurrently assess the environmental, economic, regulatory, and ethical impacts
of nanomanufacturing&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CHN is defining and developing
high-rate nanomanufacturing processes that will enable: Consistent nanoscale
directed assembly over large areas (measured in inches or feet), fast nanoscale
directed assembly (measured in minutes or seconds), assembly of a large volume
of nanoelements, repeatable and&lt;br/&gt;high yield assembly processes, and
assembly of reliable structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CHN process flow chart
shown here illustrates how the different research thrusts and tasks are
connected starting with nanoelements and nanotemplates (Thrust 1), continuing to
their assembly and transfer (Thrust 2) and then on to the realization of test
beds and applications (Thrust 3), all while&lt;br/&gt;evaluating environmental
and economic impacts (Thrust 4). The flow chart illustrates the highly
integrated nature of CHN and also shows how a system-level focus drives the
research from discovery through proof-of-concept test beds. It also shows how-
multi scale modeling is used to understand and guide fundamental mechanisms in
synthesis, assembly and transfer.&lt;br/&gt;