* 0832975
* 2008 Bridge To The Doctorate (BD)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2008,12/31/2010
* Neville Parker, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 12/31/2010
* USD 987,000.00

The New York City Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (LSAMP),
under the leadership of the City University of New York, 2008 Bridge to the
Doctorate (BD) program will recruit and retain recent LSAMP STEM Graduates into
a research/academic career that leads to the completion of a Ph.D. degree.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent Tier 1 LSAMP graduates from the National LSAMP pool
of graduates, and LSAMP graduates who have completed no more than one full-time
semester equivalent of graduate study shall constitute the group that will be
invited to apply for the Bridge to the Doctorate program in 2008. LSAMP senior
undergraduates are allowed to participate in Bridge activities. Bridge students
will be beneficiaries of a proactive retention and professional enrichment
program that will include academic and research mentoring, GRE workshops,
roundtable discussions with advanced doctoral students, faculty and
administrators, and attendance and participation at local and national
professional conferences. The at-large faculty pool associated with the CUNY
Graduate Center, and CUNY Institute/Center Directors will serve as Bridge
faculty/research advisors. The Alliance will continue to partner with Brookhaven
National Labs to provide cutting-edge research training during the academic year
and summer terms. International research experiences will also be integrated
into the training of all selected BD scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Progress and
results of the Bridge to the Doctorate program will be disseminated at the NYC
LSAMP Urban University Conference Series, and through its Virtual Community
(http://nyc-amp.cuny.edu), and Newsletter. The Urban University Conference
Series, held annually since 1998, attracts over 5,000 participants, and among
other networking opportunities, provides the opportunity to recruit enrolled
undergraduate scholars to CUNY for graduate study, or to other doctoral granting
institutions. The BD scholars represent a resource of STEM trainees that are
poised to be involved in Informal Science and Math
Education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NYC LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate program
will add 89 students to the Ph.D. pipeline from Cohorts 1-6 (2003 through
2010).&lt;br/&gt;