* 0832923
* 2008 Washington-Baltimore-Hampton Roads Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation - Bridge to the Doctorate (Cohort VI)
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2010
* Clarence Lee, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 07/31/2010
* USD 987,000.00

The Washington-Baltimore-Hampton Roads Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation (WBHR LSAMP) Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) Program is a
collaborative effort between the National Science Foundation and higher
education institutions in Washington, DC and Virginia to increase the quality
and quantity of underrepresented minorities matriculating to completion of the
doctoral degree in science, technology, engineering and mathematics fields
(STEM) fields. The program at Howard University prepares students to meet the
challenges of completing doctoral programs of study and for academic careers in
higher education. In addition, the program develops leadership skills necessary
for success in the STEM workforce nationally and internationally.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Integrating research and education, the BD fellows will be nurtured
over two years as a cohorted community that will benefit from a program of
academic and personal development activities as well as social support to
sustain their commitment and success to the terminal Ph.D. STEM degree. Program
activities include linkages to the Howard University/University of Texas-El Paso
collaborative Alliance for Graduate Education in the Professoriate(HUTEP AGEP)as
well as other NSF-funded research and education projects, including programs
that provide mentoring opportunities for undergraduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A total of 12 students from underrepresented minority
populations in STEM fields will participate in the program at Howard University
during the 2009-2010 academic years. Results from this support will broaden the
participation of African-Americans, Hispanics, Native Americans, and Pacific-
Islanders in the STEM pipeline, U. S. workforce and abroad. Results from
rigorous evaluation of the project will add to the body of literature in the
recruitment and retention of underrepresented minority students in STEM fields.
&lt;br/&gt;