* 0832871
* 2008 OKLAHOMA Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation Bridge to Doctorate - Cohort 3
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Mark Payton, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* John Rand
* 07/31/2012
* USD 987,000.00

The Oklahoma State University Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
(OKAMP) Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) Program is a collaborative effort between
the National Science Foundation and Oklahoma higher education institutions to
increase the quality and quantity of underrepresented minorities, particularly
students from Native American communities, matriculating to completion of the
doctoral degree in science, technology, engineering and mathematics fields
(STEM) fields. The program at Oklahoma State University (OSU)prepares students
to meet the challenges of completing STEM doctoral programs of study and for
academic careers in higher education. In addition, the program develops
leadership skills necessary for success in the STEM workforce nationally and
internationally.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Integrating research and education, the
BD fellows will be nurtured over two years as a cohorted community that will
benefit from a program of academic and personal development activities as well
as social support to sustain their commitment and success to the terminal Ph.D.
STEM degree. Program activities include linkages to the Oklahoma Experimental
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (OK-EPSCoR), the NIH Native Americans
in Biological Sciences (NABS) program, as well as other NSF-funded research and
education projects, including programs that provide mentoring opportunities for
undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A total of 12 students from
underrepresented minority populations in STEM fields will participate in the
program at Oklahoma State University during the 2009-2010 academic years.
Results from this support will broaden the participation of Native Americans,
Hispanics, African-Americans and Pacific-Islanders in the STEM pipeline for the
U. S. workforce and abroad. Results from rigorous evaluation of the project will
add to the body of literature in the recruitment and retention of
underrepresented minority students in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;