* 0832272
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Documenting Variability in Environmental Exploitation and Settlement Structure in the Central Scioto Valley
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2010
* Kevin Nolan, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2010
* USD 15,000.00

Kevin C. Nolan, under the supervision of Dr. William S. Dancey, will examine the
pattern of environmental exploitation and the village structure at the Fort
Ancient (AD 1000-1650) Reinhardt site. Recent investigations shed light on
important aspects of local variability for the Fort Ancient Tradition and other
Ohio Valley Late Prehistoric groups. However, there is a paucity of investigated
Late Prehistoric sites in the Central Scioto Valley. This investigation will add
valuable knowledge about the variability of the human condition during the Fort
Ancient period.

First, Nolan will examine the availability and use of resources by the Reinhardt
inhabitants. The subsistence choices of the villagers will be reconstructed by
recovery of floral and faunal remains from a sample of remote-sensing identified
features. The recovered material will be compared against expectations based on
the distribution of habitat types and the availability of specific resource
types. This will allow examination of relative procurement costs incurred by the
village inhabitants for specific resources and may give clues as to resource
stress.

Second, this project will contribute to understanding the range of variability
in Fort Ancient settlement organization. Knowledge of community organization is
important for evaluating intra-community social relations. Fort Ancient sites
have been argued to exhibit variability in settlement structure through time.
However, many investigations expose only small portions of sites. Specifically,
previous studies in the Central Scioto Valley have either exposed small portions
of the village or were conducted prior to modern excavation and recording
methods. As a result, there is little data on the organization of Fort Ancient
communities in the Central Scioto Valley and no concept of variability. This
project provides an opportunity to document the site structure of an Early Fort
Ancient site in the Central Scioto Valley through a combination of geophysical
survey, intensive surface collection, shovel test sampling, and feature
excavation.

This project contributes to current trends towards documenting local cultural
variability. The appropriate starting point for such an analysis is the
individual site. This project will build a model of Fort Ancient subsistence and
settlement structure that captures spatial and temporal variability. This model
is built from the site outwards, combining the Reinhardt site results and
several recent projects utilizing the digital state site records database.
Understanding of variability and persistence are crucial to building
theoretically informed narratives of cultural change over time.

In addition to helping Nolan to complete his doctoral degree, this project will
inform local educational outreach efforts. Nolan already incorporates current
archaeological knowledge into public outreach presentations and has funding to
facilitate the production of pamphlets to accompany these outreach
presentations. The pamphlets and the future presentations will present a nuanced
illustration of Ohio Late Prehistory that is understandable by the general
public and embraces the goals of public education. In addition, this project
will facilitate preservation planning by and for the City of Columbus, Ohio. NSF
support, coupled with funding already obtained, will aid in the preservation,
education, and presentation of significant cultural remains for the people of
Ohio.