* 0832861
* Development of Educational Materials for and a Pilot Graduate Course in Engineering Ethics
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Charles Harris, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Carter Kimsey
* 08/31/2011
* USD 254,748.00

Engineering graduate students typically do not receive but need formal education
on how to pursue an engineering solution that accounts for the ethical
implications of the technical problems they are trained to deal with. Their
undergraduate curriculum does not adequately address the unique needs of
graduate education, e.g., graduate programs in engineering include many more
international students, who may have very different conceptions of appropriate
standards of behavior both as students and as engineers; graduate students face
moral questions related to research and teaching that most undergraduate
students do not; and, in addition, with a master or doctoral degree, graduate
students typically qualify for positions within industry or academia that carry
greater authority, responsibility ? to peers, clients, and the public ? and
decision-making power. This project promises to fill a critical need to develop
educational materials and a graduate course on engineering ethics that are
designed specifically for engineering graduate students. The overall goal for
the proposed project is to determine what should be taught to graduate
engineering students about ethics. The research has a theoretical component that
will identify what should be taught, as well as a practical component to develop
a pilot graduate course in engineering ethics. Other activities include an
Engineering Ethics Seminar Series (EESS) and evaluation of the effectiveness of
the pilot course and the educational materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research and management structure of the project and the interdisciplinary
makeup of the research team address the EESE interest in providing support for
interdisciplinary partnerships among the engineering, social sciences, and
humanities. The research promises to improve our understanding of the ethical
problems that today?s graduate students are facing and are likely to encounter.
In particular, thick case studies, not currently available, are being developed.
Incorporating the developed course materials into a graduate course will
contribute to the education of engineers. Finally, the methodology used in this
project to develop thick cases will provide a model for other scientific fields,
such as chemistry or biology, that also need professional ethics courses and
educational materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is based on the
integration of teaching and research. Graduate students are key participants in
the interdisciplinary research to identify the ethical issues and construct
educational materials that address such issues. Through their evaluations and
participation in the pilot course, students are shaping the direction of future
graduate level engineering ethics. Disseminating the developed research case
studies formally in academic venues, including journals and the engineering
ethics website at Texas A&amp;M University, will impact the larger educational
community.&lt;br/&gt;