* 0832109
* NEDG:   Mechanisms for Efficient and Reliable Routing in Hybrid Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,04/30/2010
* Haiying (Helen) Shen, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Sajal Das
* 04/30/2010
* USD 218,889.00

Hybrid wireless network combining ad-hoc network and infrastructure network
increases the throughput capacity of wireless networks. In spite of the
tremendous technological advances in hybrid networks over the last few years,
few routing protocols have been provided particularly to fully exploit the dual-
faceted nature of hybrid networks. For reliable routing, routing schemes depend
on reputation system to choose trustworthy relay nodes. However, most
traditional reputation systems are not sufficiently effective and efficient.
This project is devoted to the research of highly efficient and reliable routing
to increase the capacity of hybrid wireless networks by synergistically
leveraging the dual-faceted nature of ad-hoc and infrastructure networks. The
project has four components: (1) Distributed three-hop routing mechanism (DTR).
DTR avoids the fundamental problems in the previous routing approaches; (2)
Integrated global reputation and account management system (GRAM). GRAM relies
on a hierarchical structure for efficient global reputation information
collection and query; (3) Locality-aware P2P-based infrastructure (LP2P). LP2P
is innovatively constructed and integrated into the hybrid network for efficient
operation of DTR and GRAM; (4) Theoretical framework and analysis. A theoretical
framework will be established to investigate the impact of different factors on
the proposed mechanisms, and on the network capacity and performance.
Understanding and insight gained as a result of this project will be
disseminated through technology transfer to industry partners, in addition to
publication and software release channels. The multi-disciplinary nature of this
research also lends itself to cross-disciplinary education and well-rounded
training of students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;