* 0832598
* 2008 SUNY LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate: Cohort 3 at Stony Brook
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* David Ferguson, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 07/31/2011
* USD 987,000.00

The State University of New York Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation (SUNY LSAMP) will sponsor its third cohort of Bridge to the
Doctorate (BD) during academic years 2008-2010. The alliance provides resources
that greatly assist current efforts to increase the number of underrepresented
minority (UREP) science, technology, engineering and mathematic (STEM) doctoral
students and continue to bring about improvements in graduate education that
will help not only UREP students but all graduate STEM students. Results will
serve to increase the number of underrepresented minorities prepared to
participate in the STEM professoriate at U. S. colleges and
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals and objectives of the program are
to recruit 12 LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate students for matriculation in
academic years 2008-2010 by:&lt;br/&gt;(1) Continuing to build recruitment
pathways that target the state and national LSAMP pool in collaboration with
AGEP and other NSF and New York State programs;&lt;br/&gt;(2)Using existing
resources and information to identify students able to successfully complete
doctoral degrees and to design and implement a program that helps students
successfully complete two years of STEM graduate study and enter and complete
doctoral study by integrating BD students into the existing network of
activities and program to help them successfully complete a STEM graduate
degree.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will add to current efforts by SUNY
LSAMP to build research capacity in STEM education in the area of graduate
education. The lessons learned from the study of the Bridge to the Doctorate
Program will be put into the context of broader issues of systemic change and
disseminated to a broader audience. Lessons learned will be strategically
refined to help increase the number of underrepresented minority students in
STEM fields who successfully complete doctoral degrees and eventually increase
the number of well-prepared STEM professionals in the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;