* 0832867
* Kokes Awards for the 21st North American Catalysis Society Meeting in San Francisco, CA: June 7-12, 2009
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2010
* Susannah Scott, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 03/31/2010
* USD 20,400.00

0832867 Scott Intellectual Merit The biennial North American Catalysis Society
(NACS) Meeting is considered the premiere conference in the area of catalysis,
surface science and reaction engineering. The 21st National meeting will be held
from June 7 - 12, 2009, in San Francisco, CA. The objective of the Meeting is to
bring together leading researchers for intensive scientific exchange and
interactions. Young investigators represent the next generation of scientists
and engineers, and their contributions are expected to lead to scientific
breakthroughs and technological innovations that benefit the US economy. For
example, advances in catalysis can come in the form of more energy-efficient and
environmentally-friendly chemical processes, improved fuel cell performance,
efficient hydrogen production, and a cleaner environment.

Financial support that offsets some of the associated costs of participation
(specifically, travel and shared hotel accommodation) will encourage graduate
students to attend and participate meaningfully in this conference. The funds
sought in this proposal will support the Richard J. Kokes Travel Award program.
Graduate students eligible for these merit-based Awards are those studying full-
time at a North American university and who will present a paper at the Meeting.
NSF funds will be used exclusively to support the participation of US graduate
students.

Broader Impacts The NACS has traditionally sought to encourage graduate student
participation at its National Meetings, and has found that providing financial
support is the most effective means to do so. Attendance by graduate students
contributes significantly to their scientific training and communication and
presentation skills. The students will be exposed to the leading researchers
from the US and abroad; they will meet peers from other universities; they will
learn about cutting-edge results that could benefit their research projects; and
they will become active participants in the catalysis community.