* 0832125
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Archaeology and Behavioral Ecology of Human-Landscape Interaction at Gordion, an Ancient City on the Anatolian Steppe
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2010
* John Papadopoulos, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2010
* USD 10,030.00

Under the supervision of John K. Papadopoulos, John Marston will undertake the
analysis of archaeological plant remains from more than 2000 years of occupation
at the ancient city of Gordion in central Anatolia, modern Turkey. Over this
span of time, Gordion was the capital of the indigenous Phrygian kingdom, and
later was governed successively by the Persian, Hellenistic Greek, Roman,
Byzantine, and Seljuk Turk empires. The site was finally abandoned in the
Medieval period. Marston's research focuses on the relationship between cultural
and environmental change, and how individuals made land use decisions within
those varied social and natural environments.

Research into past environments and human response to changes in the cultural
and natural landscapes can be addressed through the study of ancient plant
remains. Seeds and wood may be preserved as charcoal through incomplete burning
and become indicators of the agricultural and natural vegetation in the area.
Carbonized plant remains have been systematically recovered at Gordion since
1988, and this project includes the study of plant remains from more than 200
archaeological contexts. Marston will test the expectations of human behavioral
ecology models that predict that farmers and herders aim to maximize
agricultural yield while minimizing the risk of subsistence failure. Variables
investigated include consideration of the relative benefits of farming versus
herding, irrigation versus dryland farming, and foddering versus pasturing of
domestic animals. Certain classes of botanical remains derived from crop
processing debris, burned animal dung, and cooking accidents distinguished
archaeologically are chosen as proxy markers for statistical analyses to test
competing behavioral models. Comparison with contemporary archaeological
evidence for cultural affiliation will help determine whether cultural
transmission processes affect diet choice and subsistence strategies for
immigrant populations residing at Gordion.

In addition to the contribution this research makes to regional studies of
archaeology and ancient environment, broader impacts of this research include
implications for current policies of land use and conservation in central
Anatolia, new perspectives for presentation of the archaeological site of
Gordion, and training for archaeology students in the US and Turkey. This
research will contribute to a new site management plan for Gordion that includes
efforts to protect the numerous threatened burial tumuli and surviving patches
of native vegetation, and aims to present the local ecological and
archaeological landscapes to visitors. This will improve education of the
thousands of Turkish visitors, including many school children, and hundreds of
foreign tourists who visit the site every year. As part of the project, Marston
will train approximately 20 US undergraduate students in the identification and
interpretation of archaeological plant remains, in addition to his own graduate
training. The results of this project will be disseminated through publication
in refereed journals and conference presentations to the academic community, and
through public presentations in the Los Angeles and Philadelphia areas, as well
as in Turkey.