* 0832913
* GSE/EXT: Appalachian Information Technology Extension Services
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2015
* Peggy Meszaros, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 09/30/2015
* USD 2,665,099.00

Intellectual Merit: The Appalachian Information Technology Extension Services
(AITES) is a comprehensive, research-based Extension program of training and
consulting services. Its goal is to promote underserved young women's interest
in jobs requiring information technology (IT) skills in selected Appalachian
counties of Virginia, West Virginia, North Carolina, Kentucky, and Tennessee.
The overarching goal is to develop community capacity through a sustainable
program of change grounded in the Learning Partnership Model (LPM) and based on
business practices. This goal will give Community Cohort Teams (CCTs) of school
counselors, IT teachers, Family and Consumer Science and 4H Extension agents,
and community development professionals the tools they need to increase interest
among middle and high school girls in jobs requiring IT skills. Using a Unified
Program of Change, AITES will build community capacity to enhance middle and
high school girls' knowledge and interest in jobs requiring IT skills by:
&lt;br/&gt;1. Developing communities of practice that expand and strengthen
partnership networks among CCTs, parents, community economic development
professionals, IT industry partners, selected professional associations, and
state and regional consortia. &lt;br/&gt;2. Using content specialists in gender
equity, parent education, counselor education, the LPM, and IT curriculum to
train and support the CCTs in a Unified Program of Change addressing barriers
faced by underserved Appalachian middle and high school girls. &lt;br/&gt;3.
Providing consulting services to the CCTs as they implement research-based
Extension programs at the local level. &lt;br/&gt;4. Evaluating the
effectiveness of project initiatives and disseminating information to project
constituents to create a continuous feedback loop that leads to refinement of
project initiatives. &lt;br/&gt;5. Creating an interactive Internet portal that
builds community capacity by supporting social networking components and
communication among project personnel and constituents across five states and
provides access to information about resources, evaluation data, and participant
interaction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AITES extends and implements the research-
based recommendations reported in "Reconfiguring the Firewall: Recruiting Women
to Information Technology across Cultures and Continents" about effective
strategies for recruiting women to IT fields. AITES contributes to the
literature about science, engineering, and technology (SET) by shifting the
focus from a lens that emphasizes women's deficiencies to a response lens that
frames their occupational interests and success as embedded in community
capacity. It will demonstrate ways that the LPM and strategies of community
capacity can create communities of practice that promote positive environments
to support IT-enabled girls. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project
has a commitment to sustain its efforts. It will facilitate the formation of
networks at the community, state, and national levels through the creation of an
infrastructure that includes partnerships especially important in Appalachian
culture. The Partner Advisory Boards provide entree to a national network that
spans corporate sectors, educational communities, nonprofit organizations
dedicated to recruiting women to SET fields, government agencies, local
businesses and IT corporate giants like Microsoft, Apple, and CISCO. By
partnering this national presence dedicated to IT workforce development with
state and local communities of practice and building the local workforce through
a supportive environment for girls and IT jobs, AITES will create a model for
Appalachian IT workforce development. Outreach and communication activities
throughout the five years of the project will generate networks among members of
effective CCTs and potential partners from other counties and states to sustain
their initiative.