* 0832652
* Long Term Ecological Research Network Office
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2016
* William Michener, University of New Mexico
* Cooperative Agreement
* louis kaplan
* 04/30/2016
* USD 8,793,228.00

The Long-Term Ecological Research Network Office, or LNO, provides critical
services in support of the research and education goals of the LTER network of
26 field research projects, represents the network in its interactions with
other scientific networks and centers, facilitates the operation of the network
as a cohesive research entity, and fosters new, broadly-based initiatives that
extend LTER science, education, and cyberinfrastructure to new communities.
Significant changes in the vision for LTER network science have taken place
since the last renewal in 2003 and this proposal reflects those changes. The
decadal plan for LTER, the result of an intensive three-year planning effort by
the LTER network, describes a broad vision for LTER science that encompasses
substantial new levels of synthesis and transdisciplinary research. The proposal
includes support for continuing operations of the LNO to maintain the historical
trajectory of LNO operations and LTER network functioning. Continuing operations
include organization of two all scientists meetings in 2009 and 2012; basic
cyberinfrastructure support for the LTER network; stewardship of network
databases; continued development of the LTER network information system;
information technology, database, and web consulting to LTER sites; facilitation
of network governance meetings; development of a strategic communication plan;
communication of information about LTER to a variety of audiences; and creation
and maintenance of strategic partnerships. The proposal also outlines new
approaches to assess and evaluate the outcomes of activities to help inform a
flexible and responsive management strategy for the LNO.

The impact of the proposed work extends well beyond the bounds of LTER to
include the broader social-ecological and informatics communities. The LNO is
critical to the stimulation of the interdisciplinary interactions necessary to
begin to address LTER decadal plan goals. These developing collaborations will
encourage broader-scale transdisciplinary activities across the network as
envisioned in the decadal plan.