* 0832970
* Sustainable Democracy - A Conference Proposal
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2008,01/31/2011
* Regina Smyth, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 01/31/2011
* USD 49,792.00

The project provides support for a conference on Sustainable Democracy, to be
held at the Workshop in Political Theory and Policy Analysis at Indiana
University. The conference is designed to focus attention on new techniques and
theories as they relate to a canonical question: what factors sustain democracy?
The conference revisits a crucial set of democratic institutions, those that
define majority rule decision-making processes, as they interact with social,
economic, demographic, geographic, and cultural factors that can influence the
outcomes of group decisions, from legislatures to local community groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this proposal arises from its
interdisciplinary linkage of studies of democratic decision-making in different
contexts, from new or consolidating systems to established democracies and self-
governing systems, by characterizing factors that shape processes and outcomes
in a wide range of working democracies. This conference seeks to create linkages
that work in both directions, borrowing from other disciplines to characterize
the forces that shape individual preferences and other contextual factors, and
providing insights about democratic processes that contribute to other
disciplines, such as an improved ability to predict outcomes in Social-
Ecological Systems (SES). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this
conference lies in its role as a first step in a new research program aimed at
linking the analysis of a wide range of democratic systems. The goal is to move
toward an interdisciplinary linkage of studies of democratic decision-making in
different contexts, from new or consolidating systems to established democracies
and self-governing systems, by characterizing factors that shape processes and
outcomes in a wide range of working democracies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To these
ends, conference proceedings juxtapose theory and empirics, exploring how the
variation in democratic institutions and outcomes can be explained by the micro-
foundations of democracy: the preferences held by decision-makers, their
resulting incentives to cooperate and coordinate, and the political institutions
in which these behaviors take place. Twelve outside scholars from a variety and
disciplines, including Anthropology, Economics, and Geography. The conference
also initiates a new research and training agenda at the Workshop, one that
builds on its strengths and extends its focus. A second priority is to formulate
a plan for new graduate, undergraduate, and practitioner training programs at
the Workshop and elsewhere at IU based on this research program. These
initiatives will be the subject of near-term training by the investigators
working with other scholars. Finally, theories developed from the conference
should provide some guidance to policymakers seeking more effective means of
democratic decision-making.