* 0832678
* PRAC Collaborative Research:   Testing Hypotheses about Climate Prediction at Unprecedented Resolutions on the NSF Blue Waters System
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* James Kinter, Institute of Global Environment and Society
* Standard Grant
* Irene Qualters
* 08/31/2013
* USD 5,703.00

This proposal is for a provisional allocation of time on the Blue Waters
computer system, due to become operational in 2011, and for travel funds to
support technical coordination by various collaborators with the Blue Waters
project team and vendor technical team.

The project team will use Blue Water resources for investigations designed to
test two hypotheses about the Earth's climate system. The first is that the
transport fluxes and other effects associated with cloud processes and ocean
mesoscale eddy mixing are significantly different from the theoretically derived
averages embodied in the parameterizations used in current-generation climate
models, and that these differences explain a large portion of the errors in
these models. The second is the hypothesis that a more faithful representation
of these eddy-scale processes will increase the predictability of the climates
generated by climate models. To test these hypotheses, the project team plans to
perform three sets of numerical experiments using three cutting-edge climate
models, the Community Climate System Model, a new version of the Community
Climate System Model that includes an innovative treatment of cloud processes,
and the Colorado State University Global Cloud-Resolving Model.

The proposed, high-resolution simulations will also provide a dataset that will
allow study of the variability of regional climate as the global-scale climate
evolves and provide information about the interplay of weather and climate.

The proposed project will answer an important question about the intrinsic
reliability of current generation climate models whose predictions are important
for understanding the likely impacts of climate variation and strategies for
their mitigation. It will improve the quality of information provided to policy-
makers and expand its range, providing more information about regional climate
variability and its influence on precipitation. The project is led by a member
of a demographic group that is under-represented in geosciences research.