* 0832416
* Collaborative Research on Team versus Individual Play
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2007,12/31/2008
* David Cooper, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 12/31/2008
* USD 77,067.00

We propose a series of experiments comparing the behavior of teams and
individuals in decision-making. Many important decision-making environments
involve groups or teams, yet much of the relevant theoretical and experimental
work does not distinguish between team and individual decision making. Recent
research shows large and important differences between team and individual
behavior in settings where strategic interactions (and hence the ability to
anticipate others' choices) are important. In such environments teams generate
positive synergies, performing better than the sum of their parts. In addition,
teams, unlike individuals, exhibit positive learning transfer, taking what they
have learned in one game (e.g. a setting with strategic interactions) and
applying it correctly in another related game. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our new
experiments follow up on and extend these results. (1) In earlier work we have
used dialogues between teammates to gain insight into how teams learn to act
strategically. Comparable procedures will be implemented to study the learning
processes of individuals and provide a basis of comparison with teams. (2)
Previous work shows an important role for meaningful (as opposed to abstract)
context in subjects' ability to apply what they have learned in one game to
other related games. New experiments are proposed to better understand these
processes. (3) In real world settings, team memberships change frequently. A
third set of experiments is proposed to study how this affects the speed of
learning to act strategically. (4) Research to date has focused on learning
transfer between closely related games. We plan to study transfer between more
distantly games. (5) Hidden profile problems - the apparent inability of team
members with different information sets to pool their information to achieve
more optimal decisions - have been studied extensively in the psychology
literature. We plan to study whether providing clear incentives and better
devices for remembering private information will alleviate these
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;