* 0832999
* 2008 NCLSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate Fellowship Program at North Carolina State University
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Linda Adams, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 07/31/2011
* USD 987,000.00

The North Carolina Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (NCLSAMP)
Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) Program at North Carolina State University is a
collaborative effort between the National Science Foundation and the alliance
research and educational institutions to facilitate increased cross-disciplinary
exchange for 12 science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)post-
baccalaurate students from underrepresented minority populations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integrating research and education, students will engage
in cutting edge research experiences over a two-year period. The program
provides financial and cost of education support for two years of study leading
to the STEM doctoral degree.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Program activities provide
student graduate opportunities and linkages to the North Carolina OPT-ED
Alliance for Graduate Education in the Professoriate and other graduate
associations as well as the commitment of support for graduate education through
the STEM doctoral degree.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A total of 12 students from
underrepresented minority populations in STEM fields will participate in the
program at North Carolina State University during the 2008-2010 academic years.
Results from this support will broaden the participation of African-Americans,
Hispanics, Native Americans, and Pacific-Islanders in the STEM pipeline, U. S.
workforce and abroad. Results from rigorous evaluation of the project will add
to the body of literature in the recruitment, retention and graduation rates of
underrepresented minority students in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;