* 0832186
* Collaborative NETS-NECO:   Wireless Underwater Multi-tiered Acoustic Networks (WUMAN)
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Urbashi Mitra, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Min Song
* 08/31/2012
* USD 250,000.00

Significant advances have been made over the past decade to establish high
performance acoustic communication links for many ocean environments. However,
there has been limited development on underwater acoustic networks, the fact
that is in stark contrast with the terrestrial wireless networks. In an
underwater environment, network nodes&lt;br/&gt;are neither small nor
inexpensive, and the harsh environment renders network deployment difficult.
Network design is challenged by the fundamental nature of underwater sound
propagation: channel attenuation depends on the distance and signal frequency,
resulting in a distance-dependent bandwidth; extensive time-varying multipath
causes delay spreads of tens or hundreds of milliseconds, and low speed of sound
(1500 m/s) results in severe motion-induced Doppler distortion and extreme
channel latency. These facts necessitate dedicated design of communication
algorithms and protocols on all network layers, their cross-coupling, as well as
careful consideration of the overall system topology and architecture.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the design of underwater wireless networks, the
challenge is to exploit, rather than avoid the peculiar effects of acoustic
propagation. Towards this goal, emphasis is placed on three areas: architecture
design (determining the degree of hierarchy and multi-hopping, and associated
algorithms and protocols), system optimization, and resource allocation (power
and bandwidth). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, no analytical results exist on
optimized network deployment; furthermore, system capacity is unknown. Anaytical
Results that are based on physical laws of acoustic propagation, and not on
radio-like models, are expected to provide useful tools in the design of future
networks challenged by high latency and limited resources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;