* 0832990
* ECCS/IHCS-SGER: Exploring Artificial Neural Networks to Develop Self-Adaptive Threat Detection Techniques for Bio-Implantable System-on-Chip
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Allen Cheng, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2009
* USD 75,000.00

The objective of this exploratory research is to develop a cyber-enabled
autonomic threat-management system aimed at transforming today's vulnerable bio-
implants into resilient bio-implantable systems-on-chip. The goal is to realize
next-generation bio-implantable systems that are capable of dynamic
reconfiguration to react to unexpected threats in the complex and unpredictable
human body. The research explores how to model unexpected threats and how a bio-
implant knows that there is a threat. To this end, the research focuses on
threat modeling and injection schemes using statistical and probabilistic
approaches and self-adaptive threat detection schemes using biologically-
inspired artificial neural network techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect
to intellectual merit, this research aims to reproduce the inherent threat
resilience of the central nervous system, which handles unpredictable threats
via self-adapting mechanisms. Specifically, the proposed artificial neural
network technique is intended to mimic its biological counterpart in the human
brain by capturing the brain's highly parallel and self-organizing nature and
the brain's ability to recognize complex non-linear relationships among
different manifestations of unexpected threats in a dynamical human-implant
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to broader impacts, this research has
the potential to facilitate future research and development of reliable bio-
implantable technologies for the understanding of biological systems, the
diagnosis and treatment of disease, and human augmentation. Integration of
research and education is achieved through training of Ph.D. students,
development of new educational material, and online tool dissemination. This
project will use existing university outreach programs to attempt to broaden the
participation of females and other students from underrepresented groups and to
expose K-12 students to engineering.