* 0832129
* Minority Led Program Partnership Model for Integration of NanoBiotechnology among Research Centers and the K-12 Classroom
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Shaik Jeelani, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* James Hamos
* 09/30/2011
* USD 300,000.00

The State of Alabama has committed to expanding and sustaining its bioscience
and nanotechnology resources, providing opportunities for K-20 synergism and
leveraging of state resources. With an ultimate objective to have all students
prepared and well grounded in math and science technology, thereby improving the
economic landscape for future scientists, researchers, and technicians, this
MSP-Start project is researching, planning, and developing a full MSP
Partnership between an EPSCoR program, nano- and biotechnology industries in
Alabama, the Alabama Department of Education, and Alabama public school systems.
A distinctive characteristic of this work is that it brings together the highly
organized Alabama Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(ALEPSCoR) into a partnership to promote STEM education in K-12 schools, with a
vision of using ALEPSCoR programming and institutions to raise academic
standards and student performance. The long-term goals of the new partnership
are: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; 1. To improve current K-12 programs by raising
student achievement levels through cooperation of existing NSF-supported
nanotechnology, biotechnology and sensor ALEPSCoR research groups, the Alabama
Math, Science, and Technology Initiative (AMSTI), and school districts
throughout Alabama. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; 2. To change the culture of higher
education through training of ALEPSCoR-sponsored graduate students - the next
generation of researchers and innovators - on education and outreach activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; 3. To research and evaluate a method for incorporating
EPSCoR research-based activities into K-12 programs in other EPSCoR states as an
innovative partnership model. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MSP-Start project builds
on existing educational partnerships to form a comprehensive new MSP
Partnership, through a process led by Alabama teachers and faculty at Tuskegee
University, Alabama A&amp;M University, Alabama State University, Auburn
University, and campuses of the University of Alabama system. The scope of work
for the participants in the MSP-Start project is to develop plans to leverage
their strengths while evolving the new partnership, especially addressing all of
the components of the national MSP program.