* 0832049
* Environment, Energy, and Sustainability Science:  An Institute for 21st Century Teacher Leaders
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Victor Donnay, Widener University
* Standard Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 09/30/2012
* USD 299,498.00

This MSP-Start Partnership, led by Widener University, in partnership with Bryn
Mawr College, Delaware County Community College, Philadelphia University,
Lincoln University, and Haverford Township School District, is developing the
Greater Philadelphia Environment, Energy, and Sustainability Science (ES)2
Teacher Leader Institute. Additional partners include the Center for Social and
Economic Research at West Chester University, Delaware Valley Industrial
Resource Center, Energy Coordinating Agency, US EPA Region 3 Office of
Innovation, National Center for Science and Civic Engagement and its SENCER
program, Pennsylvania Campus Compact, Philadelphia Higher Education Network for
Neighborhood Development, Project Kaleidoscope, Sustainable Business Network of
Greater Philadelphia, and the 21st Century Partnership for STEM Education.
Building on a base of relationships developed over the past five years by many
partners in the Math Science Partnership of Greater Philadelphia, the project
brings together faculty and resources from multiple institutions (a "Mega-
University" model) to develop a coherent, innovative, and content-rich, multi-
year curriculum in environment, energy, and sustainability science for an
Institute that leads to a newly developed Master's degree. Teachers
participating in the Institute (A) improve their STEM content knowledge in areas
critical to human environmental sustainability, (B) improve their use of project
based/service learning and scientific teaching pedagogies in their teaching, (C)
engage in real-world sustainability problem solving in an externship with a
local business, non-profit or government organization that is active in the
newly emerging green economy, and (D) develop important leadership skills as
change agents in their schools to improve student interest, learning, and
engagement in STEM education. The Institute aims to serve as a regional hub,
connecting educational, business, non-profit and government organizations to
strengthen the STEM education and workforce development pipelines in the region
and simultaneously support positive social change toward environmental
sustainability and citizenship. The project's "Mega-University" and "Institute
as a regional connector-hub" approaches are powerful models of collaboration
that could have widespread and significant national applicability as
organizations and systems adjust to the new challenges of our global economy and
to the needed transition to sustainability.