* 0832735
* SGER: Hybrid MIMO Sphere Decoder VLSI Architecture
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2009
* Dejan Markovic, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Zygmunt J. Haas
* 07/31/2009
* USD 69,998.00

The objective of this research is to advance multi-antenna wireless
communication devices by providing signal processing hardware that can adapt to
varying operating conditions. The approach is based on layered optimization that
spans signal processing algorithms, hardware architectures, digital circuits,
and the underlying semiconductor devices. The goal is to demonstrate
improvements of several orders of magnitude in both deployed algorithm
complexity and hardware cost.

With respect to intellectual merit, this project provides a hardware solution
that leverages the fundamental tradeoff between diversity and spatial-
multiplexing in multi-antenna wireless channels. High algorithm complexity
limits current practical systems to 4-by-4 antenna arrays and a single operating
mode. This work supports adaptive antenna arrays (up to 16-by-16) and multiple
operating modes, with reduced hardware cost. This flexibility is being realized
in hardware, resulting in a 100 times improvement in energy efficiency compared
to general-purpose processors. An objective is to use silicon area more
effectively to provide higher data rates, improved services to mobile devices,
and access to a variety of existing and new applications.

With respect to broader impacts, the multidisciplinary nature of the proposed
work naturally stimulates collaboration among circuit design, signal processing,
and communications areas. This collaboration has the potential to provide new
insights for practical algorithm development and hardware design strategies. The
results are being integrated into the curriculum to overcome the artificial and
historic boundaries between these disciplines. In the future, concepts from this
work are expected to be transformed to parallel data processing in healthcare
systems. The potential long-term social and economic impact of this work
includes sustaining the evolution and growth of semiconductor technology to new
application domains.