* 0832864
* Reversing Global Warming: Chemical Recycling and Utilization of CO2, July 9-10, 2008, Los Angeles, CA
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2010
* George Olah, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 06/30/2010
* USD 54,930.00

A workshop will be held proposed under the sponsorship of the Chemistry Division
(CHE) of the National Science Foundation (NSF). This workshop will (i) explore
the research that is presently being carried out to constructively utilize
carbon dioxide, (ii) identify the gaps in our present knowledge about the
reductive chemistry of CO2, and (iii) indicate new directions in CO2 activation
and reactivity that might be most productive for
future&lt;br/&gt;Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rise of carbon dioxide
levels has contributed to global warming. Can we, instead of collecting and
sequestering CO2, effectively chemically recycle it and use it as a renewable
carbon source and thereby mitigating its effect on global warming? To address
the global warming challenges that greenhouse gases present, chemical scientists
must better understand the chemistry of CO2, its reactivity, and its potential
uses. Carbon dioxide is a highly stable molecule - it isn't combustible and is
nontoxic. The very thermodynamic stability of the CO2 makes its activation
energy intensive and challenging. Can we reuse carbon dioxide as a chemical
building block and potentially recycle it through synthetic transportation
fuels? In the workshop, breakout and discussions sessions are anticipated on the
chemical, electrochemical, photochemical and thermochemical conversion of
CO2.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A stronger basis of understanding of the chemical
issues related to carbon dioxide activation will enable and facilitate the
constructive use of carbon dioxide, and contribute to its conversion to value-
added products. Carbon dioxide is a valuable carbon source and nature recycles
it through photosynthesis. However, total reliance on nature to produce biofuels
is increasingly becoming untenable and not practical. The broader impact of the
proposed workshop is to encourage basic research towards a reduction of
increasing levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide, and towards the mitigation of
global warming. In particular, the upcoming generation of broad diversity of
chemists needs to be sensitized to the important challenges awaiting them in
this critical area of CO2 research. These new areas of research will be
translated to a new school of students and coworkers. A broad long-lasting
stimulation of thought in new basic science thrusts of interest to NSF may be
stimulated. Such basic science work incorporated wholly or in part in existing
and future sponsored research will lead to the development of a backbone of
scientific progress critical to the realization of greenhouse gas control
technologies. These new areas of research will be translated to a new school of
students and coworkers to carry such research forward in future decades.