* 0832700
* Collaborative Research Center for Fundamental Studies of Advanced Sustainable Iron and Steel
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2011
* H. Y. Sohn, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 09/30/2011
* USD 112,000.00

Full Center Proposal (Phase I) for an I/UCRC for Fundamental Studies of Advanced
Sustainable Iron and Steel &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0832427 Michigan Technological
University; S. Kawatra &lt;br/&gt;0832700 University of Utah; H. Sohn
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this proposal is to start a new I/UCRC
entitled "I/UCRC for Fundamental Studies of Advanced Sustainable Iron and Steel"
to develop new knowledge, tools, hardware, and personnel required for the iron
and steel industries. The proposed center will be a collaborative project
between Michigan Technological University (MTU), and the University of Utah
(UoU). The proposed center will promote research to improve the understanding of
iron reduction and steelmaking processes. The research to be conducted at the
center has the potential to develop new process methods that should break away
from the process restrictions imposed by the current blast furnace steelmaking
operations. It would also involve investigation of different ways to convert
iron oxides to metallic iron, and to investigate methods for conducting life
cycle analysis and the reduction of wastes and emissions generated by the steel
making process. The proposed projects will take advantage of the tremendous
strides that have been made in instrumentation, materials characterization, and
reaction modeling to advance the understanding of iron oxide
reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the proposal are that the
processing operations of other alloys have the potential to benefit from the
information gained in studying the iron and steel systems. The staff and
students of the educational institutions and member companies will benefit by
learning and understanding the mechanisms involved with the reduction of iron
oxides. The industry will, in general, benefit as the close cooperation between
the two universities and the member companies will accelerate the dissemination
of information. The proposal has a well defined outreach program to broadening
participation and ensuring diversity of involvement by partners, student
outreach to under represented groups, and teachers at various institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;