* 0832862
* University of Michigan Comprehensive Ethics Training Program in Basic and Social Sciences and Engineering
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Myron Gutmann, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Carter Kimsey
* 08/31/2011
* USD 300,000.00

This project is creating a comprehensive research responsibility and ethics
(RRE) training program for undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral scholars and
researchers at the University of Michigan in the basic and social sciences and
engineering. By virtue of its size, this campus presents unique challenges and
opportunities. This interdisciplinary program is based on a comprehensive
library of web-based podcasts, which serve as the basis for discussion of case
studies by interdisciplinary small groups of students and postdocs as they
attempt to solve problems of research responsibility and ethics
(RRE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The discussion groups use the podcast library of
lectures, panel discussions, mock IRB boards, and interviews with researchers
and ethicists. Subjects range from ethical and moral reasoning and values
presented by faculty from the Philosophy Department through issues of mentoring,
fraud, fabrication and plagiarism to specific problems in social science
research and professional ethics and regulatory issues. To reinforce the
information discussed in the small groups, interdisciplinary "ethics slams" are
held among course participants. Evaluation of the project is through periodic
questionnaires, long-term follow up through self-reported behavioral data, and
outside evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To broaden the impact of the program
beyond the reach of its website, the materials are being shared with the NSF-
sponsored Michigan AGEP alliance schools (Michigan State University, Wayne State
University and Western Michigan University), the 400 institutions in the Inter-
university Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR), the University
of Michigan ADVANCE program, the Office of Student Success (that sponsors the
Summer Institute and Summer Research Opportunity Program for under-represented
students in the graduate programs), the Undergraduate Research Opportunity
Program (that sponsors 1000 undergraduate researchers per year), and the Bouchet
Society, an honor society for underrepresented minority graduate students.