* 0832361
* I/UCRC Safety, Security and Rescue Research Center (SSR-RC)
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2009
* Richard Voyles, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 06/30/2009
* USD 10,000.00

University of Denver is planning to join the existing multi-university
Industry/University Cooperative Research Center (I/UCRC) for Safety, Security,
and Rescue Research (SSR-RC). The current center is built upon the knowledge and
expertise of multi-disciplinary researchers at the University of Pennsylvania
and the University of Minnesota (lead university). The primary focus of the
proposed site will be on developing novel, heterogeneous, and modular mobility
and sensing components; and integrating these diverse capabilities into reliable
systems. The proposed site also brings some novel research aspects that are not
represented in the universities currently participating in the SSTR-RC. For
example, the proposed research site has recognized expertise in the development
and delivery of infectious disease cultures and their vaccines. Furthermore, the
University of Denver brings expertise in software engineering that is critical
to the systems aspects of the center?s agenda and also valuable to companies
looking to commercialize medium term academic research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
activities proposed by the University of Denver (UD) research site will impact
many important technology needs in the commercial and public sectors. Together,
with the support of partner companies and other campuses, new small-scale
sensors will be developed and integrated with robust mobile platforms and truly
human-centric interfaces, leveraging close cooperation with the user community
in real application scenarios. The site director has a diversity plan for the
I/UCRC that makes specific efforts to attract under-represented groups to fill
research, undergraduate and graduate positions. &lt;br/&gt;