* 0832982
* GSE/DIF Girls in Science:  Key Research Findings on Gender Equity in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2010
* Catherine Hill, American Association of University Women
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 12/31/2010
* USD 249,136.00

Intellectual Merit: The American Association of University Women (AAUW) proposes
to produce and widely distribute a report highlighting key findings from
research on gender in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM).
AAUW will work closely with researchers to translate key findings into simple,
compelling prose that will spark the attention of the public and media outlets.
The resulting publication will feature key findings in an accessible format that
seeks to reach a general audience broader than is typically reached by academic
and national policy reports. Focusing on top findings, rather than comprehensive
overview, the AAUW report will highlight themes across disciplines and across
educational levels. Each chapter of the report will focus on topics such as
gender differences in spatial skills, stereotype threat, girls' interest in
science and engineering, or college recruitment and retention. Case studies and
personal stories will be used to illustrate common themes across STEM
disciplines and across stages of education and work-life progression.
Throughout, reasons behind the persistent gender inequity in STEM will be
explored. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. Building on its extensive
membership network and its reputation with national and state media outlets,
AAUW will distribute the report in a variety of formats, including electronic
and traditional paper reports as well as additional web-based formats. In
addition, through a partnership with the National Girls Collaborative Project,
the report will be made widely available to practitioners in girl-serving
organizations across the country. The report will raise scientific literacy by
communicating recent new knowledge on gender and STEM education. The work of
researchers and educators will be more widely promoted, further enhancing the
societal benefits of their academic work and research investments. Since the
field of study is characteristically interdisciplinary and cross-cutting, the
report will also help the community of researchers and educators understand the
breadth and depth of the field.