* 0832755
* The Role of Resource Legacy on Contemporary Linkages Between Biodiversity and Ecosystem Processes in a Cold Desert  Ecosystem: The McMurdo Dry Valley LTER Program
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2008,07/31/2010
* Diane McKnight, Portland State University
* Continuing Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 07/31/2010
* USD 2,030,854.00

The McMurdo Dry Valleys (MCM) LTER project focuses on aquatic and terrestrial
ecosystems in a cold desert region of Antarctica. Located on the western coast
of McMurdo Sound it forms the largest relatively ice-free area on the continent
yet is still subject to extreme environmental conditions: perennially ice-
covered lakes, ephemeral streams, extensive areas of exposed soil, limited
precipitation, and salt accumulation. All ecosystems are in some way shaped by
climate and material transport yet nowhere is this more apparent than at MCM,
where life approaches its environmental limits and subtle changes in climate
have a major influence on the generation of liquid water. This in turn produces
a cascade of processes influencing biological reproduction, productivity,
biodiversity, and biogeochemistry. Research has shown that the Dry Valleys
ecosystems are very sensitive to small variations in solar radiation and
temperature so, while Antarctic ice sheets respond to climate change on the
order of thousands of years, the glaciers, streams, and ice-covered lakes here
respond almost immediately. &lt;br/&gt;The overall objectives of MCM are to
understand 1) the influence of physical and biological constraints on the
structure and function of Dry Valleys ecosystems and 2) the modifying effects of
material transport on these ecosystems. The most recent stage of MCM research
investigated the legacy of past climate change still strongly overprinting
present ecological conditions. This new stage will explore the role of resource
legacy and extant processes on determining contemporary biodiversity and
ecosystem processes. Hypotheses will be tested through a combination of on-going
monitoring and experimental programs plus new research within a vigorous
modeling component designed to integrate and synthesize the data on a landscape
scale. The new activities will enable biodiversity issues to be addressed in a
more definitive manner, especially the interplay between physical dispersion and
habitat suitability, and efforts will continue to focus on the integration of
the biological processes in both aquatic and terrestrial components of the study
site. Stoichiometric and molecular diversity components will be incorporated
into the biogeochemistry research to provide a common currency integrating all
ecosystem components through the documentation of landscape scale elemental
transformations and genetic variation. The broader impacts include the training
of graduate and undergraduate students, public education, and international
cooperation. Outreach activities include the Schoolyard LTER program, Teachers
Experiencing Antarctica, scientific presentations to dignitaries and other
visitors to the field site, and the continued dissemination of results in
scientific literature and through the lay media. &lt;br/&gt;