* 0832320
* Progressively Complex Numerical Studies of Infrasound Generated by Atmospheric Convection
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* David Schecter, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 08/31/2011
* USD 365,958.00

Recent field experiments in the High Plains of the United States indicate that
severe thunderstorms emit infrasound at frequencies between 0.1 and 10 Hz much
more intensely than non-severe weather systems. The unsteady motion of a
developing or mature tornado is one likely source of the relatively strong
signal. This hypothesis motivated a field study by the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration to evaluate the use of infrasound detection for
tornado warning. The results were promising, but in order to improve the skill
in distinguishing vortex signals from extraneous noise, it is essential to
advance current knowledge of the various mechanisms that produce infrasound in a
convective storm. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the general theory of vortex
acoustics is highly developed, current understanding of the structure and
unsteady motions of a developing tornado is limited. Consequently, there is no
definitive theory for tornado infrasound. Moreover, there is insufficient
understanding of the infrasound that is produced by other flow structures or
diabatic cloud processes within a convective storm. In the absence of detailed
observations, numerical modeling provides the best method for obtaining the
missing knowledge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will involve a systematic
computational study of the production of infrasound by progressively complex
forms of atmospheric convection. The forms considered will include a dry
thermal, a non-precipitating cumulus, a towering cumulonimbus and a non-
supercell tornado. The dominant sources of 0.1-10 Hz infrasound will be
identified. The scaling of acoustic power (intensity) and peak emission
frequencies with the control parameters of each convective system will be
investigated. Sensitivity to modifications of microphysics and subgrid
turbulence parameterizations will be examined. The principal studies will be
carried out with a fully compressible version of the Regional Atmospheric
Modeling System. Adaptation of the NCAR Weather Research and Forecasting model
(WRF) for the purpose of studying infrasound will also be pursued.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This research will explore a new
frontier of atmospheric modeling: the simulation of infrasound generated by
turbulence, microphysical processes and vortices in convective storms. The
intellectual merit of this project lies in the effort to elucidate the physical
processes that are responsible for generating detectable infrasound, and to
clarify the exact structure of the acoustic emissions. The results will build a
foundation for improving current methods to connect observed emissions to
specific events or objects within an evolving storm.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The principal broader impact of this
study is the potential for improvement of tornado warning by contributing to the
refinement of infrasonic detection methods that are intended to compliment radar
systems. In addition, this project will further develop a synergy between the
atmospheric science and aeroacoustical engineering communities.