* 0832803
* Creative Collaboration in Online Virtual Worlds
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2008,11/30/2009
* Celia Pearce, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 11/30/2009
* USD 86,677.00

This is an exploratory study of the convergence of play and creative
collaboration in the University of There (UOT), a formal learning environment
conceived, created, and run entirely by players within the virtual world
There.com. With 147 instructors, 27 staff members and 1869 registered members of
its Student Union, UOT is both a large-scale collaborative project and a
distributed learning environment. Fieldwork will be conducted primarily in-world
through participant observation, interviews, analysis of player-created virtual
artifacts, and extra-virtual collaboration environments and tools such as
forums, as well as a survey instrument.

This project builds on the investigator's previous research, which identified
the phenomena of "emergent authorship" and "productive play." Contrary to prior
assumptions that games were inherently unproductive, this research found that
highly engaged players could become motivated to transition into a mode of
creativity and productivity, especially those inspired by a strong connection to
their communities. Thus engaged in a process of cultural production, players
were motivated to embark on often complex and challenging collaborative,
creative endeavors. This research will use a mixed-methods approach, including
qualitative and quantitative data collected from administrators, instructors and
students, to analyze specific ways that players initiate and maintain creative
collaboration in online virtual worlds and how players leverage, subvert and
augment networked play software for work-related tasks.

This exploratory research will provide insight for researchers in computer-
supported collaborative work and related fields in order to understand the
synergies between play and work and how those might be applied in work-related
collaboration tasks. This will include how to use techniques and tools from
networked play software for enhancing creative collaboration and knowledge
sharing in the workplace. Outcomes will include a preliminary set of design
guidelines and hypotheses upon which larger-scale research could be based in
future.