* 0832963
* Podcasting the 2008 RESNA Student Design Competition
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/2008,04/30/2009
* Nell Bailey, Rehabilitation Engineering and Assistive Tech Society of NA
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 04/30/2009
* USD 34,938.00

This is funding to support this year's Student Design Competition (SDC), which
will be part of the 2008 annual RESNA conference to be held June 26-30 in
Washington DC. RESNA is the one organization with an international focus that is
devoted solely to technology for individuals with disabilities. Comprised of
over 1,000 individual and 200 institutional members - researchers,
manufacturers, clinicians, suppliers, professionals and end-users of technology
devices and equipment - the organization has as its purpose to improve the
health and participation of people with disabilities in mainstream society. To
this end, RESNA supports those individuals engaged in research, development,
education, advocacy and the provision of technology through a number of programs
and activities, which in addition to the annual conference include a
credentialing program for assistive technology practitioners, suppliers and
rehabilitation engineering technologists, as well as sponsored projects. RESNA
serves as the ANSI-designated national body for development of voluntary
standards for products used by persons with disabilities. The first SDC was held
in 1980 as part of the inaugural RESNA conference. Since then, over 200 designs
have been identified as winning entries, chosen from more than 600 submissions
by students from over 110 different universities. SDC entries must represent the
work of STUDENTS ONLY, including the documentation of the design, but both
undergraduate and graduate students are eligible to submit entries. Many past
participants in the event are now leaders in service, research, and educational
areas related to technology for people with disabilities. Support for past SDCs
has been provided by nationally recognized disability organizations such as
Easter Seals and Paralyzed Veterans of America, as well as by a subsidiary of
the Johnson &amp; Johnson Company. NSF has been a supporter since 2005, and this
year's funding will enable the SDC to be further expanded and enhanced so as to
include more entries and support for more design teams, especially from
minorities, women, and individuals with disabilities. A call for participation
has been posted on the conference website, and also sent out to major colleges
and universities with engineering and design schools, including Historically
Black Colleges and Universities. A team of 5 judges will pre-select entries from
up to 10 teams, who will be invited to attend the conference. During a half-day
session in which the teams will make presentations before the judges and public
audience at the conference, 5 teams will ultimately be selected as the final
winners. Judges will have an opportunity to ask questions and make suggestions
and recommendations to the design teams. A platform session will be held in
which the 5 finalists will make presentations to the general conference
attendees. All SDC teams invited to the conference will have an opportunity to
present their projects in a poster session during the general conference time.
More information is available online at
http://www.resna.org/Conference/Conference.php. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The annual RESNA Conference and the Student Design Competition combine
to create a forum for interaction between working and experienced rehabilitation
engineers and students who are about to enter the field. Unique in its primary
focus on undergraduates, the event will provide participants with experience and
skills that assist them to be successful in their engineering and design
careers, and will further encourage, support and mentor students in various
disciplines to become involved in the assistive technology and rehabilitation
engineering fields. In an effort to help communicate and disseminate information
about this important opportunity to impact the lives of individuals with
disabilities, and to increase participant diversity even further both with
respect to individuals and universities, NSF funding will be used in part this
year to podcast the SDC for the first time.