* 0832243
* Collaborative Research thru NSF I/UCRC Planning Grant: Center for Integration of Composites into Infrastructure (CICI)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2009
* Hota GangaRao, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 07/31/2009
* USD 10,000.00

Planning Grant for an I/UCRC for Integration of Composites into Infrastructure
(CICI) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0832243 West Virginia University; Hota GangaRao
&lt;br/&gt;0832240 Rutgers University, New Brunswick; Perumalsa Balaguru
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Western Virginia University (WVU) and Rutgers University
(RU) propose a planning grant for a collaborative center "Center for Integration
of Composites into Infrastructures" (CICI) for infrastructure systems such as
highways, bridges, buildings, pipelines, flood control systems and utilities are
all necessary for a healthy economy and comfortable standard of living. The
proposed center intends to focus on innovation and mass-production of advanced
polymer composite members and subsystems and integrate them into infrastructural
systems through advanced construction methods such as rapid-modular deployment.
Development of lighter materials and modular construction and re-construction
will enhance disaster response and recovery both domestically and abroad. CICI
will address the challenge of making these materials viable for commercial
application through the combined intellects of academia and industry. CICI will
integrate scientific endeavors complementing WVU and RU strengths to advance the
composite knowledge base and applications, with education modules development to
train both present and future engineers. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed
activities of the center will enhance the international competitiveness of the
American industry in the area of composites including modular construction. The
nation as a whole would benefit as composite use would, in general, lead to
structures of higher safety, shorter construction times and longer life spans at
a reduced overall cost, new job opportunities and creation of new industrial
sectors. The proposed projects of CICI will provide the intellectual tools to
reshaping the infrastructure as well as train the skilled practitioners for
designing the materials and structures required. Through the various mechanisms
available at each university, CICI plans to recruit graduate students from
under-represented groups, including minorities and women to broaden their
participation in engineering.