* 0832530
* Collaborative Research: Center for Pharmaceutical Manufacturing and Formulation (CPMF)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2010
* Charles Middaugh, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 07/31/2010
* USD 10,000.00

Planning Grant for an I/UCRC for Pharmaceutical Manufacturing and Formulation
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0832469 Georgia Tech; Andreas Bommarius &lt;br/&gt;0832530
University of Kansas; Eric Munson &lt;br/&gt;0832478 Duquesne University; James
Drennen &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Georgia Institute of Technology, University of
Kansas, and Duquesne University propose a planning grant for a collaborative
center "Center for Pharmaceutical Manufacturing and Formulation (CPMF)" to
address current challenges in the pharmaceutical industry with the aim of
developing solutions towards more selective and robust manufacturing processes,
more stable formulations, and better characterized and consistent products. The
Center will provide a mechanism for collaborative projects between scientists
from government, academia, and industry to develop innovative methods towards
more selective and robust processes with less environmental footprint and to
improve the safety of the nations drug supply. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
agenda includes manufacturing, formulation, and analytical. The manufacturing
focus is on transitioning to microscale and continuous process from the current
norm of batch processes. The integration of manufacturing, formulation, and
analyses of the approaches to testing and rapid identification of counterfeit
and degraded drugs will lead to an advancement in knowledge in the field.
Advances in these areas would help mitigate production costs, and would help
keep the companies viable. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will improve
the ability to develop safe drugs and drug formulations. Collaborations with the
pharmaceutical industry will add value by promoting the rapid dissemination and
application of technologies and information. The proposed center (CPMF) will
promote learning by participant students as they conduct their research. CPMF
will also place emphasis on recruiting under-represented groups in the graduate
education, including presentations and visits to colleges and universities that
serve under-represented groups, especially where the faculty are alumni.