* 0832561
* CAREER: Shock-Tube Studies of Ignition and Oxidation Kinetics at Practical Conditions
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2008,01/31/2011
* Eric Petersen, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Arvind Atreya
* 01/31/2011
* USD 262,566.00

CBET-0832561&lt;br/&gt;Petersen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since the Earths population
continues to grow and counties continue to develop industrially and
technologically, our reliance on energy resources remains at the forefront of
world science, technology, and politics. Although alternative sources of energy
have been pursued for several years, all estimates indicate that the major
energy sources for the next 50-100 years or more will continue to be from
chemical means. At the heart of this production of energy, whether for
electricity or transportation, is the combustion process inside of an engine.
Examples include internal combustion engines for automobiles, large gas turbine
engines for power plants, and jet engines for aircraft. However, global and
local concerns regarding energy conservation, pollution, and dependable fuel
supplies place an ever-increasing need for more efficient and cleaner-burning
engines. Such demands are often beyond the limits of existing combustion science
and technology. To meet the seemingly conflicting demands of increased energy
production, fuel flexibility, and emissions reduction, we must understand the
combustion processes at the fundamental combustion level and at conditions that
are representative of practical devices. A modern frontier in this area includes
the chemistry of fuel oxidation at elevated pressures since most engines operate
at pressures much greater than atmospheric pressure. The goal of this CAREER
award is to better understand the chemistry of fuel ignition and oxidation
through experimental research using a facility that is ideal for reproducing
high-temperature, high-pressure engine conditions in a laboratory environment: a
shock tube.&lt;br/&gt;An important global topic such as energy production
requires not only advances in scientific research, but trained people to carry
it out. Engineers and scientists with a worldview will certainly further the
advancement of science at an international level. A critical aspect of this
CAREER award therefore involves the participation of students in related
research abroad in countries such as Germany and Ireland. Each summer, a student
will spend 3 months conducting research at the host international university
laboratory. At the grassroots level, the development of future scientists and
engineers begins at high school, middle school, and even elementary school.
Exposing young students and their teachers to scientific research will help to
instill the excitement of science and the desire to pursue careers in scientific
research. This CAREER effort includes a K-12 outreach component including a
panel of local teachers to serve as an advisory committee for ideas and plans
for involving students at a young age in engineering and science. In fact, this
5-year CAREER award alone will give more than a dozen university students
several being female or of minority status a first-hand experience in scientific
research. Many others will be impacted by the proliferation of ideas and
resources into university and K-12 classrooms. &lt;br/&gt;In summary, this
CAREER effort will acquire much-needed, higher-pressure chemical kinetics data
and expose several students at both the university and K-12 levels to the
scientific research process. The focus of the study will be on the oxidation
kinetics of CO/H2 and certain lower-order hydrocarbons at pressures up to 100
atm, with emphasis on the 10-to-30 atm range and temperatures between roughly
800 and 2000 K. The overall effort is divided into seven tasks: 1) design and
construction of a low-temperature, high-pressure shock tube; 2) conduct ignition
and oxidation experiments; 3) perform kinetics modeling studies; 4) measure rate
coefficients of key reactions; 5) incorporate research experiences at
international and industry laboratories; 6) launch a K-12 outreach program to
encourage interest in engineering research at an early age; and, 7) instigate a
program that involves undergraduate students conducting research year
round.&lt;br/&gt;The Combustion and Plasma Systems Program and the Office of
International Science and Engineering cofund this project.