* 0832944
* Integrating Microethics and Macroethics in Graduate Science and Engineering Education: Development and Assessment of Instructional Models
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Joseph Herkert, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Layne
* 09/30/2012
* USD 299,915.00

This research and education project, supported by the Ethics Education in
Science &amp; Engineering program at NSF, will design and refine innovative
instructional models for graduate students in emerging areas of science and
technology. The project will assess the strengths and limitations of each
instructional model, and develop models that reflect a recent imperative of
ethics education in science and engineering: the integration of microethical and
macroethical issues. "Microethics" refers to moral dilemmas and issues
confronting individual researchers or practitioners. "Macroethics" refers to
moral dilemmas and issues that collectively confront the scientific and
engineering community, as well as broader societal issues in science and
technology. The project's goals are to: 1) formulate educational outcomes for
the integration of micro- and macroethics in graduate science and engineering
education; 2) develop and pilot different models for teaching micro- and
macroethics to graduate students in science and engineering; 3) assess the
comparative effectiveness of the instructional models; 4) facilitate adoption of
the instructional models and assessment methods at other academic institutions;
and 5) provide for widespread dissemination of course materials and assessment
results in the engineering, science, and ethics education communities. The
project has four components: a Coordination Workshop; development of four
instructional models for integrating micro- and macroethics in graduate science
and engineering education; comprehensive project assessment; and a Results
Dissemination Workshop. The instructional models include a stand-alone course on
societal implications of science and engineering, micro- and macroethics
material embedded in a required science course, online instructional modules,
and engagement of ethics in laboratory settings. Assessment research will focus
on student outcomes in moral judgment maturity and sensitivity to ethical issues
in science and engineering, efficacy of learning outcomes for integration of
micro- and macroethics, and the influence of instructor-student communication on
learning. The project team includes faculty in ethics, science, engineering,
science &amp; technology studies, and communication at Arizona State University,
an Advisory Council of faculty from four other universities; and three
consultants with national reputations in science and engineering ethics
education.