* 0832751
* Land Use Considerations and Siting Assessment for Renewable Energy Facilities
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/2008,04/30/2010
* Jonathan Miles, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 04/30/2010
* USD 19,800.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;OISE-0832751&lt;br/&gt;Jonathan Miles, James Madison
U.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is made as part of OISE?s NSF International
Planning Visit program and will support travel on two occasions of a team of
faculty members from James Madison University (JMU) to meet with their
counterparts at the University of Malta (UM) in Malta for the purpose of
planning and initiating an interdisciplinary, collaborative research project on
?Land Use Considerations and Siting Assessment for Renewable Energy Facilities.?
(The term ?siting? is used within the renewable energy industry to denote the
process of identifying, evaluation, and selecting the best locations for
renewable energy systems with the intention of minimizing impacts to water
supply and other resources.) This focus is especially timely given the
challenges that exist in both nations with respect to siting of large-scale
renewable energy projects and the opportunity for an interdisciplinary and
trans-national research team to develop appropriate tools and strategies that
could further a broad understanding how to optimize renewable energy sites. The
visits proposed will enable a diverse team of JMU and UM faculty members to
engage, in Malta, in a structured program of research preparation that would be
difficult to undertake by remote means. In particular, these visits will entail
in depth discussions for the purpose of outlining and organizing the
collaborative research project, to identify and assess the appropriate resources
on the UM campus, and to visit the sites throughout Malta, where parts of the
research project will be conducted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL
MERIT&lt;br/&gt;This project will lead to development of a tool that considers
land use issues and constraints, and provides a quantitative means to assess the
suitability of sites for renewable facilities, is inherently interdisciplinary
and must factor (i) impacts on agriculture, water quality, the coastal and
marine environments and other natural resources; (ii) benefits to air quality by
virtue of emission offsets; (iii) diversification of the energy portfolio; (iv)
economic impacts and social justice concerns; and (vi) legal considerations and
constraints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS&lt;br/&gt;This project will
provide the motivation to support collaborative research efforts between JMU and
UM that will subsequently inform a steady stream of new case studies, and also
provide exceptional opportunities for world-class, interdisciplinary,
collaborative research between the two partnered institutions to develop. A
strong component of this project and all future collaboration includes
international research training for students, both graduate and
undergraduate.&lt;br/&gt;