* 0832345
* Fourth Northeast Control Workshop, held on April 26-27, 2008 at The University of Maryland, College Park.
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2009
* Nuno Miguel Martins, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 04/30/2009
* USD 12,320.00

This proposal requests funds to support the fourth Northeast
StudentWorkshop&lt;br/&gt;on Systems and Control, to be held at The University
of Maryland, College&lt;br/&gt;Park, from Saturday, April 26, through Sunday
April 27, 2008. The goal of the&lt;br/&gt;workshop is to offer educational
opportunities to graduate students, postdoctoral scholars, and junior
researchers to learn about the latest developments in control systems research,
particularly in emerging application areas; to present their research results;
and to share and discuss ideas with their peers, as well as with faculty members
from other universities. The proximity of the universities in the Northeast
provides an excellent opportunity to realize this goal with minimal travel cost.
In contrast to previous editions, this year the Northeast Student Workshop on
Systems and Control will include panels on careers in industry and on funding
opportunities. The former will give students and postdoctoral scholars the
opportunity to interact with industry representatives and learn about research
careers in industry. The panel on funding opportunities will give postdoctoral
scholars and junior researchers a unique perspective on the funding
opportunities at various funding agencies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of the proposed activity is that it will provide a stimulus
for sustained research in control systems theory, as well as increased number of
applications in other fields of science and engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad impact resulting from the proposed workshop will
be the encouragement of a broader and more diverse group of students (than those
who are already able to attend major conferences in the field) to pursue
research careers. A directed effort has been made to attract faculty and
students from Historically Black Colleges and Universities to attend this
workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;