* 0832760
* NSEC on Templated Synthesis and Assembly at the Nanoscale
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Paul Nealey, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Cooperative Agreement
* Michael J. Scott
* 08/31/2015
* USD 14,700,000.00

The University of Wisconsin Nanoscale Science and Engineering Center (UW NSEC)
addresses grand challenges associated with directed assembly of nanoscale
materials into functional systems and architectures through the use of self-
assembly, chemical patterning, and external fields. To realize that mission, the
NSEC includes interdisciplinary research teams to 1) explore and develop new
materials and processes for advanced lithography in which self-assembling block
copolymers are directed to adopt morphologies that advance the performance of
nanomanufacturing processes, 2) explore directed assembly at the nanoscale
through the synthesis of biologically-inspired organic nanostructures in which
functional side-chains display unique ordering, in terms of both sequence along
a backbone and three-dimensional arrangement in space, and 3) explore and
harness non-equilibrium processes, including the use of external fields, to
manipulate the assemble nanoscale objects, including particles and
macromolecules in simple and complex fluids. The outcomes of the NSEC?s
transformative and interdisciplinary activities are to revolutionize
nanomanufacturing and the discovery and control of new materials and material
architectures. Examples of applications of the NSEC?s fundamental research
include bit patterned media for data storage, potential manufacturing techniques
for the semiconductor industry to keep pace with Moore?s Law, new materials with
antifungal properties, development of optical mapping platforms for high-
throughput analysis of entire genes, and development of liquid-crystal plasmonic
based sensors for toxicants and biomolecules. UW NSEC research teams are also
proactively engaged in 1) investigating the biological effects and environmental
fate of engineered nanoparticles, with a particular emphasis on understanding
how surface chemistry impacts uptake and biological activity in a zebrafish
embryo model and is influenced by environmental weathering, and 2) basic
research on communication effects and public opinion that will help us build an
in-depth, empirical understanding of the psychological processes through which
lay audiences make sense of complex information conveyed through the Internet.
Shared facilities support these efforts as well as provide state-of-the-art
infrastructure for internal and external users from academia and industry alike.
The breadth and scope of the research programs and associated investigators
provide the foundation for extensive interactions with companies, particularly
the semiconductor industry and members of the NSEC-enabled UW Advanced Materials
Industrial Consortium. Finally, the NSEC operates an ambitious and unique
education and outreach program aimed at cultivating the next generation of
nanoscale science and engineering experts with diverse and interdisciplinary
backgrounds. Key programs include research experiences for undergraduates,
research experiences for teachers, an NSEC fellowship program, an international
research program for graduate students with collaborators on five continents,
SCI ENCountErs, a highly successful pilot after-school program involving the
Boys and Girls Club of Dane County that excites predominantly middle school
students from underrepresented groups with innovative hands-on science
activities, and a partnership with the Independent Laboratory Access for the
Blind project to increase access to scientific careers for those who are blind
and visually impaired.

