* 0832594
* CSR-EHCS(EHS), SM:   Efficient Dynamic Combinatorial Models (EDCM) for Reliability Analysis of Complex Dynamic Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Liudong Xing, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2012
* USD 250,126.00

In the area of system reliability analysis, dynamic and dependent behavior such
as functional dependence, cascading failures, and state dependence has been
recognized as a significant contribution to problems in overall system
reliability. However, with the incorporation of the dynamic and dependent
behavior, resulting dynamic system reliability models cannot be efficiently and
accurately solved by existing state space based methods such as Markov methods.
This is due to two key limitations: the state-space explosion problem, and the
inability to handle arbitrary failure distributions. This project explores
efficient combinatorial models, formal methods, and transform methods to address
these two limitations, providing a viable solution to the accurate reliability
analysis of practical large-scale computer-based systems with complex dynamic
behavior. The research has four major components: 1) reliability modeling and
evaluation of dynamic and dependent behavior, 2) verification and performance
analysis of the proposed reliability models and evaluation methods, 3) case
studies/industrial applications, and 4) GUI-based reliability software tool
development. The new reliability models and evaluation methods developed through
this project are fundamental contributions to the body of knowledge on the
computer system reliability. This project has broader impact through its
contributions to computer system reliability research, graduate and
undergraduate education, and the reliable design of complex and dynamic
industrial systems. A project website provides publicly available access to the
publications generated from the project, software tools and tools-related
materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;