* 0832922
* Responsible Conduct of Research in Science and Engineering Education: Moral Motivation and Ethical Sensitivity in Multi-National Graduate Students
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Thomas Drummer, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2013
* USD 299,614.00

The goal of this research is to contribute to our knowledge of the relationship
of values (i.e., moral motivation and moral commitment) to ethical sensitivity
and ultimately to moral functioning, an area of the theory of moral pedagogy on
which little research has been done, especially within ethics education in
science and engineering. To these ends, the PI will first inventory the personal
and professional values of a diverse group of graduate students. He will then
assess the impact of such values on ethical sensitivity to issues of responsible
conduct of research (RCR), using a tool created as part of this study to measure
ethical sensitivity. The research will examine role concept and moral motivation
as predictors of ethical sensitivity within a sample of multi-national science
and engineering graduate students. The PI will seek correlations between these
students' personal and professional values, and their ability to discern
multifaceted aspects of situations involving issues in RCR such as intellectual
property, plagiarism, etc. Using value surveys, the PI will gauge students'
moral motivation for, commitment to, and emotional engagement with issues
involving RCR. Ultimately, he hopes to discover which value-sets, both personal
and professional, are indicative of greater or lesser levels of ethical
sensitivity to RCR. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research
addresses one of the major challenges facing graduate student ethics education.
This is because, relative to undergraduates, the graduate science and
engineering student population represents a far more diverse cultural and
national demographic, and brings with it a greater diversity of personal and
professional values. Project outcomes will help other educators and researchers,
by providing them with the information they need to modify their own teaching
methods appropriately and to spur research into creative and innovative
approaches to educating graduate science and engineering students in ethics.
This will be accomplished through presentations, journal publications, and
dissemination through Michigan Tech?s Center for Educational Technology,
Research, and Assessment (CETRA). The impact of this work will extend not just
to universities but also to society at large, since today's students will be
tomorrow's faculty members and researchers in private industry.