* 0832958
* SGER:  New Compound Materials for Energy Conversion and Fuel Cell Membranes
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Alexander Roytburd, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Ardell
* 06/30/2011
* USD 198,005.00

TECHNICAL: In this interdisciplinary project, PI plans to perform a combined
experimental and theoretical study of a new complex compound alloy
BaxSr1&amp;#8722;xCo1&amp;#8722;yFeyO3&amp;#8722;ä (BSCF) with the ABO3
perovskite structure, which has a high potential for applications in energy
conversion. The large number of prospective metal-metal compositions embedded in
this structure and their diversity of properties provide a major opportunity for
exploring and developing a new materials function for the next generation of
fuel cell electrodes and membranes. It also represents an outstanding challenge
for both experimental and computational studies as they face with the fact that
these compounds are non-stoichiometric in oxygen content which gives many
degrees of freedom in theoretical modeling and experimental analysis. To attack
the problem, PI will use the state-of-the-art large scale parallel computer
modeling based on the first-principles electronic structure calculations in
conjunction with combinatorial growth techniques and a comprehensive range of
characterization tools. PI will study, atomistically, the catalytic properties
of BSCF, a new class of quite exotic magnetic alloys, including an interaction
of an oxygen molecule with alloy surfaces, a mechanism of its reduction,
transport through and along the electrode, and role of structural/impurity
defects and material composition on the efficiency of the oxygen transport.
Experimental studies will be closely coordinated with relevant
theoretical/computational activities. This is a challenging high risk/high
payoff, transformative project, which represents a preliminary work on largely
untested and novel ideas; PI intends to optimize materials composition, to
understand its properties, and to maximize its function of converting energy. If
successful, this state-of-the-art study will yield two important breakthroughs:
it will gain the fundamental understanding of the structure-property-function
relationship in a series of new class of multi-component semi-metals and give a
specific guidance for developing more efficient and compact devices. NON-
TECHNICAL: New advanced materials are desperately needed for the sustainable
21st century and for new sources of ecologically clean energy. The new compound
materials under study, BSCF, are extremely complex multicomponent magnetic
alloys, which differ considerably from both traditional metals and oxides, and
are yet to be synthesized, studied, and understood. In this project, PI plans to
explore these novel advanced semi-metals baring in mind their potential use as
cathodes of solid fuel cells for ecologically clean conversion of the chemical
energy into electricity and new generation membranes for gas separation, in
particular, green house CO2 gas in power plants. This may not only deliver a new
material (or a class of new materials), but also open up new opportunities in
materials design. This is of enormous technological importance and is expected
to have a tremendous impact on energetics, economy and society. Even incremental
knowledge to be obtained in this study that would allow us to determine the
rate-determining steps in the course of the oxygen reduction on alloy surfaces
and further transport across the material, will result in providing valuable
guidance to developers and engineers on how to increase efficiency of existing
fuel cell devices. Should the research be comprehensively fruitful, it will
bring about a vastly new concept of converting energy, which will be based on
the manipulation of the materials composition and materials by design.