* 0832730
* SGER: Nanoparticle Incorporated Transferable Wrinkle Free Films
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2010
* Ilsoon Lee, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Robert Carter
* 06/30/2010
* USD 65,932.00

The research objective of this project is to perform the preliminary work
developing the nanothin transferable wrinkle-free polymeric composite films
capable of preventing or unfolding the wrinkles or folds in human skin.
Recently, the investigator has demonstrated how the incorporation of
nanoparticles into multilayer polymer films can prevent the film from wrinkling
when compressed or heated to high temperatures. Based on the discovery, the
investigator is proposing the next step toward the actual development of a
nanoscale transferable wrinkle-preventing film. The fundamental aspects of the
nanocomposite film design principle, process, adhesion, transfer, durability,
and stress will be systematically studied. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful,
the developed nanoscale functional film may completely remove or alleviate all
undesired wrinkles or folds in a human's skin. Therefore, the proposed work is
an emerging and potentially transformative research idea. For the feasibility of
this high risk but high impact research, pre-wrinkled or folded artificial skin
made of polymers will be tested first, before animal or human skin testing.
Later further work will involve investigation using animal or human skin test
with specialists. A functional film capable of unfolding wrinkles or preventing
wrinkles has a broad range of potential impacts in microelectronic devices,
implantable biofilms, artificial skin, tissue scaffolds, as well as cosmetic and
anti-wrinkling applications. The project will also have a significant education
component, through training of graduate and undergraduate research participants,
as well as through formal coursework. Knowledge gained through the research will
be disseminated by the investigator through a new Molecular Self-Assembly and
Engineering course. Nanoscale processing, dispersion, and characterization will
be incorporated into a chemical engineering junior laboratory course which is
being renovated by the investigator. Results of the research will be
disseminated through conference presentations, journal publications, and a
website developed for this project.