* 0832606
* Computational Relativity and Gravitation at Petascale: Simulating and Visualizing Astrophysically Realistic Compact Binaries
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Joshua Faber, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Thomas F. Russell
* 08/31/2014
* USD 38,103.00

ABSTRACT/0832606&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides travel funds to
support technical coordination between the Blue Waters project team and a team
of astrophysical researchers to explore the readiness of an astrophysics code
for use on the Blue Waters system. If successful, it is anticipated that the
code will be used for investigations of a series of problems associated with the
merger of pairs of very dense astrophysical objects. These include: the merger
of asymmetric black hole binaries, of neutron star binaries, and the merger of a
black hole and a neutron star. Through accurate simulations, the researchers
hope to characterize the gravity wave signatures of these events with a view to
contributing information that will be useful in the diagnosis of gravity wave
signals when these are received in terrestrial detectors. In the case of the
slower process of neutron star merger, the oscillation modes of the neutron
stars prior to merger are believed to be dependent on their internal structure
so that comparison of numerical simulations and detected gravity wave signals
should provide indirect information about the internal structure of neutron
stars. A further topic of investigation is the dynamical behavior of
relativistic accretion disks around black hole ? neutron star and neutron star ?
neutron star mergers. One aim of these latter investigations is to characterize
the highly energetic electromagnetic radiation generated through the interaction
of the disrupted neutron star and the accretion disk.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research to be done with Blue Waters will involve a number of graduate students
and undergraduates. Results of the work will be included in undergraduate and
graduate courses. Results will be disseminated through a visitor program in
addition to scientific publications. The project team includes researchers from
under-represented groups and young investigators. The project team plans to
engage local high-school classes through presentations and high-school students
through participation in a two-week academic program for high-school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;