* 0832978
* 2008 CSU-LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate at California State University, Los Angeles (Cohort 6)
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2010
* Juanita Barrena, University Enterprises, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 07/31/2010
* USD 987,000.00

California State University Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
(CSU-LSAMP) Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) Program is a collaborative effort
between the National Science Foundation and the California State University
system higher education institutions to increase the quality and quantity of
underrepresented minorities matriculating to completion of the doctoral degree
in science, technology, engineering and mathematics fields (STEM) fields. The
program at California State University-Los Angeles (CSU-LA) prepares students to
meet the challenges of completing doctoral programs of study and for academic
careers in higher education. In addition, the program develops leadership skills
necessary for success in the STEM workforce nationally and
internationally.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Integrating research and education, the
BD fellows will be nurtured over two years as a cohorted community that will
benefit from a program of academic and personal development activities as well
as social support to sustain their commitment and success to the terminal Ph.D.
STEM degree. Program activities include linkages to the in the Professoriate(UC
System AGEP)as well as other NSF and NIH-funded research and education projects,
including programs that provide mentoring opportunities for undergraduate
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A total of 12 students from underrepresented
minority populations in STEM fields will participate in the program at CSU-LA
during the 2009-2010 academic years. Results from this support will broaden the
participation of African-Americans, Hispanics, Native Americans, and Pacific-
Islanders in the STEM pipeline, U. S. workforce and abroad. Results from
rigorous evaluation of the project will add to the body of literature in the
recruitment and retention of underrepresented minority students in STEM fields.
&lt;br/&gt;