* 0832673
* The Computational Microscope
* CSE,OAC
* 05/15/2009,04/30/2015
* Klaus Schulten, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Irene Qualters
* 04/30/2015
* USD 40,000.00

This proposal is for a provisional allocation of time on the Blue Waters
computer system, due to become operational in 2011, and for travel funds to
support technical coordination by various collaborators with the Blue Waters
project team and vendor technical team.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
involves molecular dynamics simulations of three cellular systems and processes:
viral infection, morphogenesis of intra-cellular membranes, and the
photosynthetic chromatophore. The actions of these biological processes unfold
in time and it is difficult to follow such evolution with crystallography.
Molecular dynamics simulations will provide insights into the evolution of these
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Planned work with the poliovirus involves the
use of numerical simulation to study the changes at the atomic level that are
responsible for the process by which a poliovirus enters a cell. It is thought
that this will be representative of this process for a class of viruses, the
non-enveloped RNA viruses, that include the agents of diseases such as hepatitis
A, the common cold, and viral meningitis. The planned studies of how proteins
shape intracellular membranes will provide insights into an important aspect of
organelle and vesicle formation. The work on photosynthesis involves studies of
the chromatophore in purple bacteria, a system involving over 200 proteins and a
step along the route of being able to model an organelle. This will allow
researchers to determine the statistically preferred routes for quinones as they
couple distant proteins, and how the light-generated electrical potential
spreads as it drives ATP synthesis and cellular
transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The molecular simulation codes used in this work
will be made widely available, providing tools for other researchers in the
chemistry, biochemistry and materials research communities. There will be
substantial involvement of post-doctoral researchers and graduate students in
the projects for which the allocation is requested. The results of the work
should be of use in medicine and bio-engineering.&lt;br/&gt;