* 0832788
* Collaborative Research: Computational Sustainability:Computational Methods for a Sustainable Environment, Economy, and Society
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2014
* Mary Lou Zeeman, Bowdoin College
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 07/31/2014
* USD 192,835.00

Balancing environmental, economic, and societal needs for a sustainable future
encompasses problems of unprecedented size and complexity. With naturally
occuring settings, global scale, dynamic and uncertain behavior, mixture of
discrete and continuous effects, and highly interactive components, problems
associated with sustaining the earth's resources can greatly benefit from
computational methods and thinking. There is a key role to be played by
computing and information sciences in increasing the efficiency and
effectiveness in the way humanity manages and allocates natural resources.
Toward that objective, this Expedition aims to establish and nurture a new field
of study--Computational Sustainability--driven by a wide range of hard
computational problems and critical challenges in the area of sustainability.
This applied theoretical Expedition will pursue interdisciplinary research
across three computational sustainability themes: conservation and biodiversity;
balancing socio-economic demands and the environment; and renewable energy. With
the view that natural problems may have a special structure discoverable by
machine learning techniques that allows them to be solved even though they are
NP-hard, this research attempts to stimulating new research synergies that cross
boundaries and merge ideas from combinatorial optimization, dynamical systems,
machine learning and constraint reasoning. An "Institute for Computational
Sustainability" will be based at Cornell to serve as the nexus of foundational
science advancements and practical applications in sustainability. Part of its
mission and outreach is to establish a vibrant and diverse research community in
the area of computational sustainability, drawing new students into the field
from all backgrounds including students from underrepresented groups via summer
research experiences and other such proactive activities.