* 0832000
* XPLR:   Scheduling and Routing in Pigeon Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Jiang Li, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2012
* USD 224,999.00

CNS ? 0832000&lt;br/&gt;Li, Jiang&lt;br/&gt;Howard University&lt;br/&gt;XPLR:
Scheduling and Routing in Pigeon Networks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project applies the concept of pigeon post with extension to computer
networking. Such networks, called pigeon networks, are formed by autonomous
mobile wireless devices emulating pigeons. Each of these devices, called
messengers, is dedicated to one or more other devices (called home devices) that
are the ultimate senders and/or receivers of data. Like pigeons, messengers move
back and forth between home devices, carrying and forwarding data, but they can
also do much more when they communicate between themselves and cache data
intelligently. The research of the project will focus on the algorithm design
for scheduling the movement of messengers, their data pickup (from home devices)
and the interactions between the two aspects. The concepts and results will be
brought into related courses in the CS Department at Howard University to
educate students (mostly minority) about the forefront of computer
networking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. Pigeon networks target
communications under unconventional conditions such as disaster response and
surveillance in remote wide areas where traditional computer networks cannot
work. If successful, this model may lead to an innovative way of building
computer network architectures that can provide people with communications even
in the most difficult environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since the network model
carries critical distinctive properties that have rarely been studied, the
project will study a number of interesting and yet challenging problems. Some of
the problems have strong connections with industrial management and
transportation. The project will hence benefit from previous research in that
area. More importantly, it will contribute to the latter, which has broad social
and industrial applications. The PI has been conducting research in computer
networking and has been teaching the majority of the computer networking courses
in his department. In particular, his research team has already begun the study
and produced preliminary results. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The
project will help foster computer networking research at Howard University as a
historically black college and university (HBCU). At present, the Department of
Systems and Computer Science (that the PI is affiliated with) only offers a
Master degree, and the research in the department needs to be strengthened.
Hosting active funded networking research programs in the department will help
attract minority students into networking, and prepare them for more advanced
graduate degree programs. The activities are also hoped to raise Howard's
reputation in computer networking research. In the Internet era, that will not
only attract students into this research area, but will eventually also help
attract students into the computer science discipline overall, which has been
experiencing significant enrollment downturn in recent years. All the results
produced by the project will be submitted to academic conferences and journals,
and be published online for public access. Since the results have natural
applications in some other disciplines such as industrial management and
transportation, articles will also be submitted to conferences and journals in
related disciplines to further broaden the impacts of the project. &lt;br/&gt;