* 0832367
* Collaborative Research: Spatial Inference and Prediction with Biogeographical Data
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2007,06/30/2009
* Jennifer Miller, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 06/30/2009
* USD 9,813.00

Maps of actual or potential species distributions are required for many aspects
of resource management and conservation planning including biodiversity
assessment, habitat management and restoration, single- and multiple species and
habitat conservation plans, population viability analysis, modeling community
and ecosystem dynamics, and predicting the effects of climate change on species
and ecosystems. A growing number of quantitative methods are being used both
inferentially, to identify the parameters that determine habitat suitability,
and predictively, to assign habitat value to locations where biological survey
data are lacking (most of the earth's surface). There are three impediments to
the effective use of these modeling tools by both researchers and conservation
and resource managers: a) too few of the existing applications explicitly
incorporate the spatial dependence inherent in biospatial data into the modeling
methods b) the statistical and GIS modeling tools are not always well
integrated, and, c) the proliferation of potential methods and conflicting
results regarding their efficacy is daunting to users. The investigators will 1)
synthesize existing information on spatial prediction using biogeographical
data, 2) strategically plan and execute a set of modeling experiments, and,
based on these, 3) develop a framework to guide the operational use of these
methods for biodiversity assessment and landscape management. Comparative
modeling experiments will be executed using species distribution and abundance
data spanning the three major ecological regions in southern California (desert,
mountain, coastal), for plants from vegetation surveys and reptiles and
amphibians (herptiles) surveyed in a multi-year monitoring program. The methods
tested will include parametric and non-parametric statistical (generalized)
models, machine learning approaches, and those incorporating spatial dependence
(regression kriging, spatial autoregressive models).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research is innovative because it will provide a broad comparison of
modeling methods for real biological datasets that vary in their sample design,
measurement scale, and spatial dependence, but were collected in the same
bioregion, and will focus on biogeographical modeling of spatial dependence in
plant and animal species distribution and abundance. It will result in a
framework that can be used by researchers and resource managers to select an
approach to modeling that is best suited to their biogeographical data and
questions. The project will directly benefit society because it is collaborative
with the Biological Resources Division of the US Geological Survey, the federal
agency with a leadership role in spatial data archiving and analysis and
biological information infrastructure. Thus, the framework and recommendations
will be directly conveyed to resource and data managers.&lt;br/&gt;