* 0832247
* Mathematics Teacher Transformation Institutes
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2008,06/30/2015
* Marcie Wolfe, Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Continuing Grant
* John Haddock
* 06/30/2015
* USD 5,000,000.00

The "Mathematics Teacher Transformation Institutes" (MTTI) project is a
research-based investigation of how leadership emerges and is expressed through
mathematics knowledge, student-focused instructional practices, and influences
on schools' mathematics outcomes. In particular, this research is broadening the
knowledge base on teaching and learning in mathematics through new understanding
of how the study of conceptually-challenging mathematics, particularly in
algebra and geometry, benefits second-stage teachers (4-10 years' experience);
of how classroom-based action research contributes to critical and analytical
understanding of the relationships between teaching practices and student
learning; and of how multi-levels of support prepare second-stage teachers for
leadership roles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve these research objectives,
the City University of New York (CUNY), Herbert H. Lehman College is partnering
with New York City Department of Education Districts 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12.
Lehman College faculty in mathematics and mathematics education, staff of
education centers and institutes who work in Bronx schools, and the
Superintendents of Bronx districts work together to engage 80 experienced middle
or high school teachers in the Bronx in 330 hours of professional development
over 3 years to strengthen their leadership abilities, mathematics abilities,
and educational practices. These MTTI teacher participants are further supported
on-site at their schools and through on-line discussion forums and are provided
opportunities to showcase their work. MTTI cultivates a professional network of
mathematics teacher leaders who provide leadership to 200 additional middle and
high school mathematics teachers as they enact a variety of roles including
mentor, peer coach, presenter, conference participant/speaker, and active member
of school curriculum and professional development teams. Additionally, they
participate in local and national discussions of current policy, practice, and
research, and they develop informed understandings of the strengths and
challenges of culturally and linguistically diverse classes. Upon completion of
the Institute, participants receive a Certificate for Secondary-School
Mathematics Specialists through CUNY's School of Professional Studies of the
Graduate School and University Center, registered with New York State Education
Department.