* 0832810
* Limits of Information Flow in Networks of Two-Way Channels
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Serap Savari, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* William H Tranter
* 08/31/2009
* USD 112,581.00

Communication networks are critically important in the&lt;br/&gt;dissemination
of information in today's technological&lt;br/&gt;society. Several academic
disciplines have undertaken&lt;br/&gt;the study of various aspects of their
operation, but&lt;br/&gt;an integrated theory of networking has been
elusive.&lt;br/&gt;The objective of network optimization theory is
to&lt;br/&gt;most effectively use network resources, but recent&lt;br/&gt;work
in network coding has demonstrated that a standard&lt;br/&gt;assumption of flow
conservation from this theory has&lt;br/&gt;imposed artificial restrictions on
the workings of&lt;br/&gt;communication networks. Network information
theory&lt;br/&gt;considers more general models of communication
and&lt;br/&gt;offers some bound on the limits of information
transfer&lt;br/&gt;in a communication system involving multiple
senders&lt;br/&gt;and receivers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research fuses
aspects of network optimization&lt;br/&gt;theory and network information theory
in order to find&lt;br/&gt;and specify new limits of information transfer
across&lt;br/&gt;a communication network. The investigators use
the&lt;br/&gt;two-way channel from information theory as a
general&lt;br/&gt;model of the transmission medium between
neighboring&lt;br/&gt;processors of a communication network and
address&lt;br/&gt;fundamental optimization problems pertaining to
the&lt;br/&gt;analysis and design of networks of two-way channels.&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators seek optimal routing algorithms in&lt;br/&gt;multicast settings
and a broad classification of&lt;br/&gt;situations where network coding can or
cannot improve&lt;br/&gt;upon routing. The investigators further aim
to&lt;br/&gt;categorize network scenarios in which a bidirected&lt;br/&gt;cut
set bound derived using information theoretic&lt;br/&gt;arguments is tight and
to explore a network information&lt;br/&gt;counterpart to Kirchoff's law when
the bidirected&lt;br/&gt;cut set bound is not tight. The research
also&lt;br/&gt;involves extending the notion of minimal cost flow&lt;br/&gt;as
an initial approach to treating quality-of-service&lt;br/&gt;issues and devising
networks with least cost or&lt;br/&gt;capacity that meet requirements on
information transfer.&lt;br/&gt;