* 0832026
* Mathematics Teacher Leadership Center
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2009,06/30/2015
* Robert Mayes, University of Northern Colorado
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 06/30/2015
* USD 5,379,593.00

Abstract 0832026 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A Mathematics Teacher Leadership Center
(Math TLC) is proposed by the University of Northern Colorado and its Core
Partners, the University of Wyoming, Greeley School District #6 (CO), Morgan
County School District (CO), Poudre County School District (CO), Laramie County
School District 1 (WY), and Carbon County School District 1 (WY).&lt;br/&gt;Math
TLC is an integrated partnership to improve mathematics in middle, secondary and
post secondary education in the north Rocky Mountains region. Key to this
Teacher Institute project is working with teachers and districts to retain new
and continuing teachers in the field and develop leadership capacity. The
Partners will develop and implement a Master's degree in Secondary Mathematics,
and a Teacher Leadership Program in mathematics for teachers, grades 4-12.
Research is to be carried out on the impact of both these programs on student
achievement.&lt;br/&gt;The Master's program (32 credit hours) will support 4
cohorts of 15-18 teachers per year and the Teacher Leadership program (24 credit
hours) will support 3 cohorts of 10-12 teachers per year, over the five year
project. The courses will be a combination of face- to-face and on-line
delivery. More than 95,000 students from grades 4 through 12 are potentially
impacted over the life of the project: 23,700 directly by teacher enrolled in
the master's program and 71, 000 students of teachers who will work with Teacher
Leaders. An intensive recruitment program is planned to attract teachers from
Native American school districts in Colorado (Southern Ute Indian Reservation
and Ute Mountain Indian Reservation) and Wyoming (the Wind River
Reservation).&lt;br/&gt;The research program will study the impact of
professional development (PD) on teachers' mathematical understanding,
pedagogical content knowledge and cultural competencies for teaching diverse
students in Colorado and Wyoming. The study will track teacher change and its
effect on student achievement, grades 6-12, and will advance knowledge of
teacher leadership development through a quantitative design experiment of the
leadership model proposed by the project. &lt;br/&gt;The transformative concept
in Math TLC is the development of the online master's degree shared jointly by
the Universities of Northern Colorado and Wyoming in combination with a
leadership program. Success will require substantive institutional affiliation
and will transform PD for isolated rural teachers by providing significant
mathematics content integrated with culturally informed pedagogical methods, by
creating master teachers and teacher-leaders that have the expertise to
intellectually engage underserved groups.&lt;br/&gt;The comprehensive
dissemination plan includes a web portal for the online distribution of research
and implementation outcomes, publications of findings in peer reviewed journals
and presentations at regional and national meetings. The Partnership will
actively work in the future to broaden the collaborative to include additional
school and university partners.&lt;br/&gt;The benefits to society are improved
mathematics teaching and learning in socio-economically, culturally, and
ethnically diverse classrooms.