* 0832161
* NEDG:    Contention-Awareness in Mesh Transport:   Theory and Practice
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Ramesh Govindan, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Min Song
* 07/31/2012
* USD 200,000.00

Contention-Awareness in Mesh Transport: Theory and
Practice&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multi-hop wireless mesh networks are becoming
increasingly important elements of edge networks in the Internet. These networks
of static nodes provide community networking, distributed sensing, and Internet
access. In each case, the primary advantage of a mesh is its easy deployability
and upgradability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite these advantages, mesh networks
have not seen widespread adoption. The primary reason for this is a lack of
attention to the transport performance of such networks, which leads to poor
end-user experience. The central challenge to improving transport performance in
mesh networks is to make the transport protocol aware of the complex
interference that exists in multi-hop wireless networks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. This work will explore the design
space of transport protocols for mesh networks. It will focus on two classes of
designs: a) easy to implement, fair and efficient schemes that ensure that
competing traffic is correctly throttled when congestion is detected inside the
network, and b) near-optimal schemes estimate available network capacity and
apportion it to flows in a fair and efficient manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad
Impact. The proposed work can spur the adoption of mesh networks in a future
Internet, and influence architectural choices in its design. Mesh networks are
already becoming the networking technology of choice in a variety of locations
including airports, hotels, convention centers, shopping malls, education
facilities, and hospitals. With their increasing economic importance, this
project is poised to make impact, seeking as it does to improve the performance
of mesh networks.&lt;br/&gt;