* 0832338
* SGER: Adenovirus UV Treatment - Exploration of fundamental mechanisms of disinfection
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2010
* Karl Linden, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Paul L. Bishop
* 02/28/2010
* USD 69,484.00

CBET-0832338&lt;br/&gt;K. Linden&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Control of
viruses in drinking water is critical for public health, and disinfection is the
primary barrier against disease-causing microorganisms. UV disinfection is now
the method of choice for wastewater and is becoming a very important tool for
disinfection of large and small drinking water systems due to the concerns over
chlorination byproducts and the need to inactivate Cryptosporidium. Cell culture
infectivity data generated over the past 10 years on UV treatment of
adenoviruses using 254 nm low-pressure (LP) UV disinfection was used to set 2006
US EPA standards for disinfection requirements of all viruses at a level almost
5 times the typical UV dose of 40 mJ/cm2 used in practice. However, recent
research by the PI and various co-investigators has found that use of newer
polychromatic UV sources (medium pressure [MP] and pulsed UV) significantly
improves the UV disinfection of adenoviruses. These differences between UV
sources indicate that a fundamental understanding of how UV irradiation affects
adenoviruses is lacking. Numerous authors have called for an increased
understanding of the fundamental molecular mechanisms involved in viral response
to UV as well as molecular methods for accurate pathogen detection. This
research will enhance the understanding of the mechanisms behind UV disinfection
of viruses and methods used will provide powerful tools for further disinfection
investigations with important positive results for protection of public health.