* 0832622
* Self-Organized Aggregates in Photonics (SOAP): A Comprehensive Approach to Multiphoton Absorbing Supramolecular Assemblies
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Artem Masunov, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,825,625.00

Prof. Kevin Belfield at the University of Central Florida, and collaborators
Florencio Hernandez and Artem Masunov at UCF and Tatiana Timofeeva at New Mexico
Highlands University are supported by the Collaborative Research in Chemistry
Program to develop a predictive capability for the design of stable
supramolecular aggregates that will exhibit specific two- and three-photon
absorption properties. The work entails a multidisciplinary approach involving
materials synthesis, characterization (NMR, linear and non-linear absorption,
fluorescence, excitation anisotropy, and X-ray crystallography), and theory. Use
of these aggregates represents one of the most promising avenues for developing
practical multiphoton-based photonic materials and devices. With the knowledge
and data gained in this research, an expanded multiphoton absorption-
supramolecular structure-property database will be developed, leading to scaling
relations, validation or modification of theory, and a predictive capability for
materials design and behavior yet to be realized. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
approach taken in this program involves highly collaborative laboratories in
which undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral researchers receive
cross-disciplinary training, positioning them to make significant scientific and
technical contributions in the photonic materials fields. The PI and co-PIs
actively recruit and engage students that are traditionally underrepresented in
the sciences, facilitating the preparation of a highly skilled and diverse
workforce. Through this collaborative research program, a "Pathway to the Ph.D."
will be developed for NMHU students to pursue their Ph.D. at UCF and elsewhere.
Through participation of high school chemistry teachers in the proposed
research, along with partnerships with Space Florida and NHMU/Gear Up, a network
of teachers will be created to help disseminate the project's findings and
incorporate appropriate content into the curriculum, extending the impact to
younger students.