* 0832843
* Collaborative Research: The Responsible Conduct of Computational Modeling and Research
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2013
* Michael Loui, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2013
* USD 241,177.00

Across all science and engineering disciplines, research is conducted in
theoretical, experimental, and computational modes. In some disciplines, such as
meteorology, the dominant mode of research is computational. Yet extant
instructional materials for responsible conduct of research focus on ethical
issues that arise in experimental research, and do not address specific issues
that arise in computational modeling and research. In this project which
encompasses a combination of research and education, the PIs will determine
empirically the ethical issues and accepted standards for the responsible
conduct of computational modeling and research, in a form suitable for teaching
graduate students. Specifically, the PIs will articulate the standards for model
integrity and validity, model robustness, representations and visualizations,
data and code integrity, and intellectual property. They will develop
instructional materials, case studies and associated commentaries to teach these
standards to graduate students in science and engineering, will assess the
quality and effectiveness of the instructional materials, and will disseminate
them through conferences, journals, and the Web. The expertise of the project
team includes computational dynamics, computational biomechanics, engineering
ethics, instructional design, and educational
assessment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: In collaboration with both
graduate and undergraduate students, the PIs will develop cases based on actual
situations, and commentaries on the cases for teaching the professional
standards of computational modeling to graduate students in science and
engineering. These materials will be tested and assessed with students and
instructors in two institutions, and with professionals at technical
conferences. The materials will be disseminated through academic conferences and
archived at the Online Ethics Center of the National Academy of Engineering. The
standards will be proposed for inclusion in the publication guidelines of
research journals.