* 0832317
* 2009:  Institute of Mathematics and its Applications (IMA) Workshop on Dense, Granular Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Christine Hrenya, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Theodore L. Bergman
* 08/31/2009
* USD 10,000.00

CBET-0832317&lt;br/&gt;Hrenya&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The
purpose of this proposal is to solicit funds in support of participants to the
2009 Institute of Mathematics and its Applications (IMA) Workshop on Dense,
Granular Flows (January 5-9, 2009; Cambridge, United Kingdom).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Granular flows are prevalent in a range of natural and
industrial systems, yet a basic understanding of many phenomena is lacking. The
IMA workshop provides a unique forum for the exchange of fresh scientific ideas.
A guiding principle of this workshop includes the presentation of new,
unpublished work followed by free, unhampered discussion among participants from
disciplines that normally do not intersect, namely, the physics and engineering
communities. This IMA workshop will include speakers from a wide range of
disciplines, including Engineering, Physics, Mathematics, Mechanics, and
Materials Science, and will involve participants from around the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to move beyond incremental research, cross-
fertilization of participants is needed, which involves not only bringing these
scientists together, but also providing an environment that promotes their
interaction. The structure of the IMA workshop accomplishes this task via a
smaller number of participants (~60), formal discussion periods after every
talk, poster sessions, and shared meals and onsite
housing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. With the help of NSF, financial
support will be provided to emerging scientists (students, postdocs, and junior
faculty) and underrepresented groups to ensure a diverse audience. The diversity
of disciplines and promotion of intensive discussions will provide an
environment in which new collaborations can be forged to help tackle
longstanding problems, and one in which young scholars can intermingle with
established researchers. Such interaction is critical in helping to address the
national need for training of U.S. students in the area of particle science.