* 0832873
* Ethics Education for Participatory Urban Sensing
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2008,06/30/2012
* Jeffrey Burke, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2012
* USD 298,183.00

The mobile phone network is emerging as the largest sensor network on the
planet. Mobile phone users, however, are generally unaware of the dual uses of
this network, in which their communication devices are also information
gathering devices. In participatory urban sensing, everyday mobile devices
become a platform for coordinated investigation of the environment and human
activity. But transforming phones into data collection instruments raises both
technical and ethical challenges. The PI believes that researchers should
utilize this network of sensors with the consent and active participation of
users. Facilitating responsible, socially trusted, and participatory ethics for
data collection and analysis with urban sensing systems remains an open problem,
and is the challenge undertaken in this research and education project. In this
project, the PI and her team will formalize and qualitatively assess an
important test case in participatory ethics: a participatory approach to
managing privacy in urban sensing applications. They will create both an
immersion curriculum (using a hands-on laboratory approach) and an
interdisciplinary seminar-style curriculum to teach participatory ethics for
urban sensing to diverse STEM undergraduate and graduate students, and will
evaluate these curricula and synthesize classroom findings into best practices
which will then be disseminated for education in participatory urban sensing
ethics to urban sensing, ubiquitous computing, and broader technology education
communities through white papers, guest lectures, video presentations and
discussions, and an active website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This
work will benefit many areas of mobile and ubiquitous technology research. The
multidisciplinarity and rapid pace of system development, the social diversity
of users, and the diversity of urban sensing applications are exhilirating yet
pose significant challenges to developing a participatory ethics framework. Much
as traditional human subjects research guidelines apply to a broad and diverse
research scope, the PI believes that similarly powerful principles can be
specified for human sensing research. The pedagogical tools developed in the
education phase of this project will train a diverse group of STEM students to
align technological advances with human practices and ethics. Involving students
in discussions and practical implementation of participatory ethics will
integrate considerations of values into their research and design practice.
Students and researchers trained in participatory urban sensing ethics will
design systems that reflect participatory ethics and balance technical and human
values. Students will also bring the ethical thinking and value commitments
formed during their education to careers in academia, technology industries, and
policy arenas. As a critical test case in participatory ethics for urban
sensing, formalizing and refining participatory privacy regulation will
contribute to fields struggling with meaningful privacy design, including mobile
and ubiquitous computing, social networking, and web community systems design.