* 0832115
* Western Kentucky Math Science Partnership
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2008,03/31/2011
* Heather Johnson, Western Kentucky University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 03/31/2011
* USD 257,879.00

The Western Kentucky Math Science Partnership (WKYMSP) is a Start-Partnership
comprised of core partners Western Kentucky University, as the lead, three
regional campus'-Elizabethtown, Glasgow, and Owensboro-, Hopkinsville Community
College, Bowling Green Community College, the Greater River Regional Educational
Cooperative (GRREC), Christian County Public Schools, and Hart County Schools.
The intent of this proposal is to establish an expanded Partnership to address
the documented state, local and national challenge of improving teaching and
learning in middle school to insure access to and success of ALL students in
rigorous high school mathematics and science.

The WKYMSP employs an evidence-based problem-solving process to collect and
analyze data directly related to: declining mathematics and science scores of
middle school students; systematic STEM and Education faculty-school
practitioner engagement in inquiry related to the problem; consideration of
research-based solutions and planning school curriculum; and instructional and
professional development strategies to be implemented and tested for measurable
results. The project work includes an effort to increase the diversity of the
teaching force.

Two key action groups in this process are the 200 teachers of middle grades
mathematics and science, along with their Partnership middle schools, and
twenty-five mathematics, science and education faculty members from the six
partner postsecondary institutions. These faculty members will be trained as
participant facilitators to interact with teachers of middle grade mathematics
and science, school leaders, and parents on data collection, data
interpretation, strategic planning, and pilot testing of some identified
implementation design strategies. This process will be supported by a four-
person Management Team, a three-person university Data Team, a ten member
STEM/ED/school practitioner Work Groups, and a ten member Advisory Board
representing key partnership role groups and mathematics and science experts.

An external evaluator will collect and analyze data on the engagement and
interaction of partner groups in the establishment of the new targeted
partnership and development of solutions to declining mathematics and science
scores of middle school students.