* 0832698
* Petascale Research in Earthquake System Science on Blue Waters (PressOnBlueWaters)
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Jacobo Bielak, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Thomas F. Russell
* 09/30/2014
* USD 40,000.00

This award facilitates scientific research using the large new computational
resource named Blue Waters being developed by IBM and scheduled to be deployed
at the University of Illinois in 2011. It provides travel funds to support
technical coordination between the principal investigators, the Blue Waters
project team and vendor technical team and a provisional allocation of
supercomputing time on the system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves the
preparation, by the research team, of three seismic and engineering modeling
codes. These model fault rupture, propagate seismic energy through a detailed
structural model of Southern California, predict ground motion, and model
building response to broadband ground motions. The goal is to combine the use of
these codes to understand building damage likely to result from realistic,
strong earthquakes. The researchers will attempt to predict likely damage from
major earthquakes in the Greater Los Angeles Basin (GLAB) as follows. For a
given fault rupture scenario, a regional earthquake simulation will be
performed. The GLAB will be divided into sub-regions. In each sub-region, a
simulation will be made of ground motion and the resulting deformation of
structures such as buildings and bridges, including the nonlinear effects of
different types of soils and feedback in the interactions between ground motions
and built structures. The potential for structural damage will be determined
from calculations of inter-story drift and local deformation in buildings, and
the damage potential for buried pipelines will be determined from predictions of
soil deformation, lateral spreading and liquefaction along
pipelines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improved simulation of earthquakes, the
associated ground motion, and its impact on buildings will provide better
seismic hazard assessment and inform the design of safer building codes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;