* 0832852
* GILEE: Establishing a Graduate Interdisciplinary Liberal Engineering Ethics Curriculum
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2012
* Ishwar Puri, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 07/31/2012
* USD 299,996.00

GILEE: Graduate Interdisciplinary Liberal Engineering Ethics
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a team of engineering science,
engineering, humanities and&lt;br/&gt;business educators is developing a
graduate interdisciplinary liberal engineering ethics curriculum, known as
GILEE. It addresses how issues of engineering ethics and cultural identities are
necessarily intertwined within a globalized workplace and has a four-prong
approach: 1) develop a course for graduate students and seniors interested in
transitioning to graduate school, which will consist of various ethics training
modules; 2) conduct a two-track summer training workshop, one for students and
the other for faculty; 3) establish a seminar series in which scholars,
practitioners, and senior graduate students speak on matters related to
engineering ethics; and 4) include ethical issues in the Ph.D. preliminary
examination and require graduate students to present ethics learning modules as
part of the examination. The team includes partners from Virginia Tech, North
Carolina A&amp;T State University, and University of Illinois at Chicago. Test
institutions include Politecnico di Milano, Italy and Jadavpur University,
India. The evaluation and assessment plan includes both formative and summative
evaluations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GILEE curriculum is grounded in the
relevant research literatures of engineering education, science and technology
studies, philosophy, and business management and builds a community of graduate
students from engineering, humanities, and business who better understand each
other's disciplines and are thus better prepared to be productive and
collaborative members of an increasingly diverse society and its
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts are both national and
international for graduate students in science and engineering. It offers a
method to integrate mentoring programs, infrastructure development, faculty
capacity building, and graduate-student involvement in program development.