* 0832091
* College Ready In Math and Physics Partnership
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2009,06/30/2015
* Pete Joenks, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 06/30/2015
* USD 7,288,152.00

The College Ready in Mathematics and Physics Partnership (College Ready) is
comprised of thirty-three school districts in Arkansas and Oklahoma, the
University of Arkansas at Fort Smith, and the University of Arkansas,
Fayetteville, which will serve as the lead among these core partners. In
addition, the following are supporting partners: the American Association of
Physics Teachers (AAPT), American Physical Society (APS), College Board,
Mathematical Association of America (MAA), Maplesoft, Northwest Arkansas
Community College (NWACC), and the UAF Center for Mathematics and Science
Education (CMASE). College Ready intends to build vertical and horizontal
learning communities among school and college faculty in order to improve major
articulation issues that impact the successful transition of students from high
school to college. College Ready focuses its work on a number of critical
junctures and therefore is centered on articulation issues between school and
college - teacher preparation in college for work in schools and student
preparation in school for college mathematics and science - and among colleges
and disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major intents of College Ready are
to:&lt;br/&gt;1) Prepare students for college success, especially in STEM
Areas&lt;br/&gt; a. Smooth the transition to college by improved
articulation&lt;br/&gt; b. Provide improved placement mechanisms for college
mathematics&lt;br/&gt;2) Enhance teacher capacity to deliver rigorous,
successful courses and &lt;br/&gt; curricula&lt;br/&gt; a. Build learning
communities of school and college faculty&lt;br/&gt; b. Sort out and negotiate
competing standards and accountabilities&lt;br/&gt;3) Build vertical and
horizontal learning communities to improve articulation &lt;br/&gt;4) Prepare
teachers to serve as curriculum and pedagogy leaders who can&lt;br/&gt; a. serve
as peer mentors to fellow teachers&lt;br/&gt; b. encourage pedagogy that is
correctly connected to content, and &lt;br/&gt; c. create synergism between
mathematics and science classes &lt;br/&gt;5) Make effective learning resources
available, including the production of&lt;br/&gt; supporting materials for
ongoing professional development and embedded &lt;br/&gt; English Language
Learner (ELL) instruction &lt;br/&gt;6) Strengthen pre-service
education&lt;br/&gt;7) Improve the number of pre- and postsecondary teachers,
including &lt;br/&gt; recruitment and
retention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultimately, College Ready will demonstrate an
impact on student outcomes through decreases in college remediation rates in
mathematics, increases in student proficiency scores on state assessments,
increased numbers of students enrolling in Advanced Placement (AP) mathematics
and physics courses and scoring 3 or better on the AP exams, and increased
graduation and college-going rates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;College Ready will
achieve these ends through a series of interconnected activities including
vertical alignment of high school and college expectations, intensive content
driven workshops, articulation conferences, university course revisions, the
creation of professional learning communities, and the opportunity to earn
advanced degrees and endorsements. It builds on and looks to establish synergy
between established efforts of PhysTEC and PMET. The College Ready endeavors are
complemented by a set of three research questions to be pursued: Is there a
unifying construct in the way units are used in physics, economics, public
discourse, and in 9-14 mathematics? What measures best determine college
readiness and placement in mathematics, and how can placement testing in
mathematics be better aligned with high school curricula? What educational
opportunities influence students to choose a career in secondary physics
teaching, and which elements are replicable?