* 0832571
* CAREER: Molecular Recognition and Biological Function at Water-Bilayer Interfaces: Bridging Structure, Dynamics, and Function in Antimicrobial Peptides
* MPS,CHE
* 03/31/2008,06/30/2016
* Myriam Cotten, Hamilton College
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2016
* USD 546,240.00

With the support of a CAREER award from the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry
Program at the National Science Foundation, Professor Myriam Cotten of Pacific
Lutheran University will investigate structure-function-dynamics relationships
in amphipathic cationic antimicrobial peptides, important peptides belonging to
a large family of biomolecules active at interfaces. The long-term goal is to
identify common principles that will facilitate the design of pharmaceuticals
with broad-spectrum antibacterial activity, minimum induction of bacterial
resistance, and low toxicity to mammalian cells. A bottleneck in this area of
research is the lack of atomic level information on peptide-lipid interactions.
Professor Cotten's main objective is to characterize the secondary structures
and dynamics of selected antimicrobial peptides in the presence of lipids. This
knowledge will be used to identify factors optimizing specific molecular
interactions, initially at cell membranes, that are directly related to peptide
function and mode of action. Biochemical, biophysical, and spectroscopic methods
will be used to synthesize and purify selected antimicrobial peptides; and to
compare their atomic level structures, molecular interactions with lipids, and
dynamics under physiologically-relevant conditions to advance our understanding
of molecular recognition, specificity, mode of action, and potency. Piscidins,
the selected peptides, will be incorporated in aligned, hydrated lipid bilayers
and subjected to solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance techniques. Specific
parameters relevant to biological function will be tested.

With the support of a CAREER award, interdisciplinary research on important
antimicrobial peptides will provide results that will feed a larger body of
knowledge aimed at improving our fundamental understanding of how these peptides
recognize membranes and initiate their activities on different types of cells.
Broader impacts of the proposed activity are primarily the high quality science
education which will be offered to a diverse research group. This team will
include college and pre-college students from underrepresented groups, a future
high school teacher, and a postdoctoral fellow. All project participants will
engage in rigorous scientific inquiry and delightful discovery. They will
actively contribute to the proposed research, travel to national user facilities
equipped with state-of-the-art instrumentation, and present results at local and
national meetings. This program will help inspire students for professionally
and personally rewarding scientific careers that will contribute to continued
vitality of the sciences and workforce.