* 0832543
* Student Travel Support for the Fifth Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI)
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2009
* Thomas Anderson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 04/30/2009
* USD 15,000.00

Student travel support is provided to the Networked Systems Design and
Implementation (NSDI) conference due to the benefits to the communities and to
the areas of Network Technology and Systems (NeTS) and Computer Systems Research
(CSR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: After the significant success of
its first four meetings, Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI) has
become a very strong conference that fuses the research areas of networking and
systems. It has developed a strong focus on implementation and experience. Most
importantly, the cross-disciplinary emphasis of NSDI makes it well-suited for
student participation. NSF student travel support not only is beneficial to the
symposium, but also to students from diverse
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This support creates
educational opportunities for graduate students interested in interdisciplinary
research in systems and networks. NSDI is a small single track conference so the
students interact significantly with more senior researchers at the leading edge
of both fields. Diversity of participation in parallel with technical strength
of participation is an important goal of the travel funding. In the report for
last year's travel support, the fund was able to support a group consisting of
50% female students and 20% institutions not usually represented. A number of
the student participants have papers to present, but in addition, students are
engaged with volunteer activities as documented in last year's report.