* 0833022
* GSE/DIF:Science: It's a Girl Thing
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2008,03/31/2011
* Barbara Sprung, Academy for Educational Development
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 03/31/2011
* USD 249,975.00

Intellectual Merit: This project will develop and host Science: It's a Girl
Thing: A Web-Based Diffusion Initiative for Parents and Parent Influencers. This
initiative will foster awareness of the serious underrepresentation of girls in
STEM degrees and careers; enable parents and parent influencers to understand
the need for scientific thought and study for their daughters and other girls;
and provide strategies to do science at home, utilize science-rich resources in
the community; and advocate for gender equitable inquiry-based science in
school. Objectives will include synthesizing and adapting existing information
on girls and science for widespread distribution through the web and national
parent organizations; bringing content about girls and science to parents, who
have the greatest impact on girls; and advocating for gender equitable science
in school. The vehicle for bringing the Science: It's a Girl Thing message to
the widest possible audience is based on Playtime is Science, EEC's research-
based, award-winning program for students in grades K-3.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Science: It's a Girl Thing campaign is grounded in
research that parents play an important role in how girls think about themselves
in terms of science and science careers. Research indicates that parent
involvement is key to encouraging girls to try science. Research also indicates
that parents may unwittingly convey negative information to their daughters
about science, fostering stereotypes that only boys like science. Science: It's
a Girl Thing is grounded in the idea that science IS a girl thing, and that
positive, parent involvement is vital to encouraging girls to pursue science
studies and careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The campaign will be built around a
series of web-based and interactive strategies targeted to parents and parent
influencers. Playtime is Science materials will be synthesized for the Science:
It's a Girl Thing campaign; bringing this content directly to websites used by
the target population; and creating a Science: It's a Girl Thing social
networking site. EEC/AED will be supported in this initiative by Z2 Consulting,
a marketing firm specializing in development, implementation, and evaluation of
web-based strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The thrust of
Science: It's a Girl Thing is to reach parents and parent influencers where they
are and push content about girls and STEM out to them. The proposed campaign
will identify the most high-trafficked online locations of our targeted
audiences and suffuse them with content about parents' strategic role in
fostering STEM education for their daughters. The project will use wide-
reaching, cutting edge technology for diffusion: online parenting sites, such as
iVillage, Mommytalk, and parents.com; social networking sites such as Facebook
and YouTube and NING; parent influencer sites such as Edutopia, and Education
Week and Teacher Magazine; and national organizations such as the National
Coalition for Parent Involvement.