* 0833753
* iQUEST: investigations for Quality Understanding and Engagement for Students and Teachers
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2013
* Youwen Ouyang, California State University San Marcos Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Edith Gummer
* 12/31/2013
* USD 1,493,541.00

California State University at San Marcos, Rochester Institute of Technology,
San Diego County Office of Education, San Diego Science Alliance, K-12 High
Speed Network, California State Parks, and eight southern California middle
schools are collaborating to develop, implement, and evaluate teacher
professional development and student learning experiences to enhance science and
information and communication technologies (ICT) learning among underrepresented
and economically disadvantaged students (primarily Hispanic and Native American)
in grades 7 and 8. The major goal of the project is to promote workforce
diversity by working with focal students to ensure their readiness for, and
interest and participation in, ICT-intensive careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Major project activities include (1) developing ICT-
enhanced STEM learning modules and resources for use in middle school physics,
chemistry, and life science coruses, (2) preparing 32 ICT-savvy teachers from
target schools in five school districts, and (3) providing students with ICT-
intensive summer camps. The curriculum component addresses grade-appropriate
science and technology standards by developing classroom-based science
investigation modules that employ ICT technologies such as videoconferencing,
interactive games, probeware, visualizations, web resources, and social
networking tools (Moodle). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thirty-two teachers are
receiving professional development for two or three years by attending Summer
Academies and engaging in year-long activities that include Lesson Study and
action research. Project staff, scientists, and computer science graduate
students are providing ongoing classroom support. Project teachers will impact
an estimated 10,000 students. An additional 100 teachers in the region will be
exposed to project resources through workshops conducted by project teachers,
reaching another 15,000 students. The evaluation/research plan is using a quasi-
experimental study to investigate how participation in the project impacts
students' course selection in high school and career interests, and how teachers
implement project materials and change classroom practices.&lt;br/&gt;