* 0833767
* SGER:  Collaborative Research in Volcano Monitoring, CSU Chico and Universidad Nacional/ OVISCORI, Costa Rica
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2008,05/31/2010
* David Brown, Chico State Enterprises
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 05/31/2010
* USD 17,741.00

This award will support scientists and undergraduate students from USC-Chico
while they install a continuous temperature monitoring system for hydrothermal
systems associated with Costa Rican volcanoes. The basis for using water
temperature data to connect hydrothermal activity with magmatic activity has
been established for volcanoes in other regions, but it has not been done in a
systematic way for Costa Rican volcanoes. Recent volcanic activity at Turrialba
volcano, along with long standing volcanic activity at Poás, Rincon de la Vieja,
Irazú, and Arenal volcanoes help establish grounds for an interesting experiment
and test of methods that can be used to monitor magmatic activity. In the course
of this investigation, researchers will address the following questions: Is
hydrothermal activity at Costa Rican volcanoes linked to known magmatic events
and to seismic data, and can those relationships be used to better understand
volcanic activity and improve eruption forecasting? and How do the hydrothermal
and magmatic systems of Costa Rica compare to Lassen Volcanic Center, CA where
the data loggers have been tested? The students involved in this project have
participated in developing research methods at Lassen Volcanic Center so their
ability to participate in installation at Costa Rican field sites is an
important application of their efforts in an active magmatic environment.
Lastly, the project will strengthen research ties between an US academic
institution and a counter part in Costa Rica.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is co-funded by the following NSF programs: Office of International Science and
Engineering; Petrology and Geochemistry Program, and the Education &amp; Human
Resources Program in the Division of Earth Sciences.