* 0833349
* California State University, Long Beach Noyce II - Recruiting, Supporting and Retaining Mathematics and Science Educators
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2013
* Laura Henriques, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 08/31/2013
* USD 504,656.00

California State University, Long Beach Noyce II: Recruiting, Supporting and
Retaining Teachers is supporting 21 secondary science or mathematics teacher
candidates over the course of four years. The scholarship/stipends are for
$15,000 per year. Six scholarship recipients are receiving more than 1 year of
support to complete their undergraduate and post-baccalaureate credential
programs while 15 stipend recipients are receiving up to one year of funding to
support post-baccalaureate credentialing. A strong partnership with a community
college, Cerritos College, a Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI) like CSULB, is
providing another pipeline of interested students. Noyce II Scholars have extra
fieldwork as part of the program and are tutoring in partner school districts,
Long Beach Unified School District (approximately 90,000 students) and Whittier
Union High School District (approximately 14,000 students). Both districts
include schools which meet the high-need criteria. The tutoring and fieldwork
experiences culminate with the Scholars completing their student teaching
assignment in a partner high need school. In addition to the fieldwork, Scholars
participate in an on-campus seminar series, receive additional mentoring, and
are eligible for paid summer teaching and research opportunities. In addition to
supporting 21 scholars, this project is examining the successes and challenges
of the CSULB Noyce I program. Approximately 35 students received support through
the Noyce I grant. The evaluation component of this new grant is studying Noyce
I, particularly: 1) how Noyce I alumni are doing in the classrooms; 2) how
effective they are in the classroom; 3) how Noyce has influenced their careers;
and, 4) for those who dropped out, why they left the program.