* 0833106
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Pivotal Ponies: Horses in the Development of Emergent Political Institutions of Bronze Age Hungary
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Katherine Kanne, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2011
* USD 15,000.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Timothy Earle, Katherine Kanne will analyze
archaeological data collected from seven settlements and six cemeteries of the
Bronze Age (2800-800 BC) in Hungary. Bronze Age societies in Hungary showed
early sociopolitical complexity for Europe including the development of regional
chiefdoms with marked social stratification, an extensive trading system, new
metallurgical technologies, and the rise of a powerful warrior class. A major
shift in horse use appears to have occurred as these sociopolitical
transformations were underway. Based on some isolated cases, people stopped
eating horses and they increased in both size and number. Based on Kanne's pilot
studies, some people began to ride horses in this period and bury them in the
floors of their houses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks to reconstruct
how people may have changed their conceptions of horses and then reoriented
their raising and use of horses in attempts to affect political, economic, and
social change in Bronze Age Hungary. Horses use and production are valuable for
studying the emergence of the political economy, complex societies, and social
inequalities because horses can be used to accumulate, maintain, and demarcate
wealth, power, and control. This research tests the hypothesis that during the
Bronze Age in Hungary, aspiring leaders initiated intensive horse breeding to
mount an expanding warrior class, to provide swift and protected transport for
trade, and to create an additional commodity for exchange. As a result of this
scenario, horse ownership and riding would have become limited to the elite. To
test the hypotheses, Kanne will institute an integrative and comparative
research study that combines zooarchaeological, stable isotope, osteological,
and spatial analyses from settlements and cemeteries throughout Bronze Age
Hungary. Examination of multiple lines of evidence will reveal if people of this
period were riding horses, if riding became tied to elite warriors as they
sought political power, what cultural and economic significance horses held to
different segments of these communities, and if horses were standardized into a
special type for exchange.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research contributes to the
study of European prehistory, adds to general theories of political economy, and
advances a more theoretical orientation of human/animal studies in archaeology.
The innovative methods employed in this project have the potential to document
the earliest definitive physical evidence for horseback riding and should be of
interest to scholars investigating the domestication of the horse and the
beginnings of mounted use. Moreover, in a country still rich with horses and
equestrians, this work will be disseminated to Hungarians in their own language
in a translation of the dissertation and a scholarly article. The results may
also be incorporated into exhibits at the museums which house the materials
studied. Lastly, in the U.S. this research will be published as a dissertation,
released as scholarly and popular articles, and presented at professional
meetings and public lectures to further distribute the findings to the academic
community and the general public.