* 0833777
* Strategies: Building IT and Career Self-Efficacy in Young Women by Entering and Measuring the Universe:  The Universe Quest
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2013
* Carlton Pennypacker, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,475,277.00

The University of California's Space Sciences Laboratory, in collaboration with
ASA Academy and Community Science Center, Girl Scouts of Northern California,
and the Astronomical Society of the Pacific, will implement the Universe Quest
(UQ) project. Additional project partners include Sightspeed Video Conferencing
and Quest G, a leading video game developer. Universe Quest will provide a total
of 180 girls ages 13-16 from underrepresented populations in Oakland and
Richmond with a unique opportunity to learn IT skills in the context of studying
the universe with modern technology. The three year project includes hands-on
astronomy activities; image processing and SQL query development; bi-monthly
family sessions; technology talks (live and via videoconferencing); community
service; internships at technology companies; and leadership development. Young
women will also have a chance to author journeys and challenges in a multi-user
Universe Quest Internet game. To reach a broader group of participants, in years
2 and 3 girls will be introduced to Universe Quest through weekend and follow-up
sessions at the Lawrence Hall of Science (140 students at the Lawrence Hall and
40 students in the intensive ASA track). Universe Quest Teaching Assistants will
be drawn from UC-Berkeley and include young women pursuing science and
technology degrees. This project exposes participants to multiple paths in IT
careers. A comprehensive evaluation plan measures IT skills, self-efficacy, and
STEM career interests, while a longitudinal study will track students for 12
months to ascertain how science career efficacy and STEM career interest change
over time and how the change is related to extended participation in UQ.
Although this project will directly reach 180 girls with intensive and
introductory experiences, the completed Universe Quest game will be disseminated
broadly not only to Girl Scouts of Northern California, but to more than 3
million girls nationally as part of the Girls Go Tech initiative.