* 0833258
* STEM Colorado/Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Laurie Langdon, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 12/31/2012
* USD 500,000.00

The University of Colorado at Boulder (CU Boulder) is partnering with Adams 12
Five Star Schools, Boulder Valley School District, Brighton 27J School District,
and St. Vrain Valley School District to expand the current Noyce Fellowship
Program and address growing needs by recruiting six new students per year over
four years. The project seeks to increase the number of students traditionally
underrepresented in mathematics and science at CU Boulder and the number of
these students applying to the Noyce Fellowship program by engaging Noyce
Fellows in local informal science education efforts through the Science
Discovery program and Partners for Informal Science Education in the Community
at CU Boulder. The project is conducting longitudinal studies of the
effectiveness of the Noyce "treatment" on former Noyce Fellows' teaching and
studies of upcoming transformations of the certification program available to
the Phase II cohort. The Noyce Fellowship program is a part of a larger program
at CU Boulder that couples large-enrollment undergraduate course transformation
with the recruitment and preparation of future teachers through an Undergraduate
Learning Assistant Program, which impacts over 7000 students per year and has
engaged over 47 STEM faculty members in the process. This three-tiered research
project investigates content knowledge, pedagogical knowledge, and practice of
Noyce Fellows, Learning Assistants (LAs), former Noyce Fellows who are currently
teaching in K-12 schools, and a control group of students who completed the same
certification program but did not have the Noyce/LA treatment. When students
become Noyce Fellows at CU Boulder, they become a part of a community that they
will be a part of for many years to come. The Noyce Fellows participate in
discipline-based educational research, present their research at national and
local conferences, and mentor new Noyce Fellows. Noyce Fellows work closely with
STEM and STEM Education faculty and learn how to investigate the impact of
classroom innovations through research. The project is documenting and
disseminating the program design, the supporting research results, and
assessment instruments designed in the process to assist other universities
interested in working toward large-scale institutional change in STEM education.