* 0833524
* ITEST Study: Promoting STEM Career Interest in the Classroom: An Exploratory Study Linking Teacher Professional Development with Changes in Teaching Practices
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2013
* Carla McAuliffe, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,129,730.00

&lt;br/&gt;Classroom students need to engage with innovative technologies (IT)
in ways that better match computer literacy skills and applications in today?s
workplace. The NSF-funded ITEST teacher professional development projects
address this need by helping teachers effectively integrate real-world IT-based
investigations into K-12 curriculum. This ITEST Study will examine the ways that
ITEST teacher education projects lead to changes in classroom practice by using
two teacher-role models to examine technology-based professional development and
related changes in teaching practices: Teacher as Pedagogical Expert (teachers
using existing technology-based curriculum with or without adaptations) and
Teacher as Curriculum Developer (teachers creating new curriculum). The study
will explore these two models within the context of IT teaching and learning.
Specifically, we want to understand what kinds of professional development
activities promote and/or influence changes in teaching practices and the
integration of innovative technologies in the classroom. We will address the
following research questions: 1) What are the characteristics of the two
teacher-role models (curriculum developer or pedagogical expert) in teacher
professional development projects that immerse participants in professional IT
experiences? and 2) Does IT classroom implementation differ for teachers who
have and have not completed an IT-immersion professional development experience
and does the difference (if any) vary by model?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research design includes a review of current and past ITEST professional
development activities (surveys/interviews with project leaders and project
artifacts), a broad survey of teacher participants from ITEST teacher education
projects, and an in-depth study of a subset of ITEST teacher participants and
comparison teachers to trace classroom implementation over an academic year.
This project is a collaboration between Education Development Center (EDC,
Inc.), TERC and University of Maryland Center of Environmental Science, all of
which have extensive experience with the NSF ITEST program.