* 0833005
* 2008 Illinois LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate Program at University of Illinois at Chicago
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2011
* Elnora Daniel, Chicago State University
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 07/31/2011
* USD 987,000.00

Chicago State University, lead institution for the Illinois Louis Stokes
Alliance for Minority Participation (I-LSAMP) Bridge to the Doctorate (BD)
Program is a collaborative effort between the National Science Foundation and
Illinois Higher Education institutions to increase the quality and quantity of
underrepresented minorities matriculating to completion of the doctoral degree
in science, technology, engineering and mathematics fields (STEM) fields. The
program at the University of Illinois at Chicago (UIC) prepares students to meet
the challenges of completing doctoral programs of study and for academic careers
in higher education. In addition, the program develops leadership skills
necessary for success in the STEM workforce nationally and
internationally.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Integrating research and education, the
BD fellows will be nurtured over two years as a cohorted community that will
benefit from a program of academic and personal development activities as well
as social support to sustain their commitment and success to the terminal Ph.D.
STEM degree. Program activities include linkages to the Graduate Education in
the Medical Sciences (GEMS) program at UIC and the Ronald E. McNair Post
Baccalaureate Achievement Program as well as other NSF and NIH-funded research
and education projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A total of 12 students from
underrepresented minority populations in STEM fields will participate in the
program at UIC during the 2009-2010 academic years. Results from this support
will broaden the participation of African-Americans, Hispanics, Native
Americans, and Pacific-Islanders in the STEM pipeline, U. S. workforce and
abroad. Results from rigorous evaluation of the project will add to the body of
literature in the recruitment and retention of underrepresented minority
students in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;