* 0833076
* ESE: IM Extension Services in Engineering: Improving Instruction and Mentoring to Retain Undergraduate Women
* EDU,EES
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2017
* Susan Metz, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 03/31/2017
* USD 2,598,810.00

The Stevens Institute of Technology along with WEPAN and other partners will
deliver an Extension Service project that will include training, materials,
technical assistance, and mini-grants to improve instruction in engineering and
faculty mentoring skills, using research-based strategies to enhance retention
of undergraduate women of all races and ethnicities. The project will serve 30
engineering colleges over a five year period. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit. Using a train-the-trainer model, the project brings together a team of
nationally recognized, expert trainers who developed and tested the research-
based strategies being used in this project, including: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;?
Using relevant and engaging applications in engineering and STEM gateway courses
&lt;br/&gt;? Using activities to improve student spatial visualization skills
&lt;br/&gt;? Building faculty knowledge and skill to mentor students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experts will train three-five person, university-based
teams to serve as Extension Agents. Agents will train and work with
Practitioners?faculty who teach 1st and 2nd year engineering and STEM Gateway
Courses?to use new knowledge and practices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goal is to increase the capacity of engineering colleges to retain
undergraduate women in engineering. Selected strategies and activities will be
implemented in support of the overall goal. Desired project outcomes are:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;? All 30 participating universities will conduct training
in the three research-based strategies. &lt;br/&gt;? All 30 participating
universities will integrate relevant applications in their courses. &lt;br/&gt;?
At least 95% of the participating universities will integrate spatial
visualization skills into their curriculum. &lt;br/&gt;? More than 50% of the
faculty in 1st and 2nd year engineering courses and STEM Gateway courses will
participate in mentor training. &lt;br/&gt;? More than 50% of the faculty in 1st
and 2nd year engineering courses and STEM Gateway courses will integrate
relevant applications in their courses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact.
The project will directly impact up to 150 Agents at 30 US engineering schools.
These Agents will then impact the behavior of engineering faculty at their
institutions, improving students' instructional experience. The resources of the
project including an on-line manual, archived webinars and tools developed under
the Virtual Learning Community will be widely available on the project website
and through links from engineering education and women in science websites. With
these resources, interested faculty can change their own classes. Information
about the project, its resources, strategies and effectiveness will be widely
communicated using traditional methods but also using methods most likely to
reach those interested young faculty including establishing groups on Facebook
and posting on science and engineering education blogs.&lt;br/&gt;