* 0833012
* The University of Washington Noyce Scholars Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2014
* Loyce Adams, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 08/31/2014
* USD 749,881.00

This project capitalizes on a recently introduced revision of the University of
Washington's teacher preparation program, "Teachers for New Era", and is
benefiting from existing collaborations among science and mathematics
departments in the Colleges of Arts and Sciences and of Education, and three of
the largest school districts in Washington: Seattle, Highline, and Renton.
Thirty-six scholarships are being awarded, 9 each year over 4 years, balanced
between mathematics and science majors. The maximum amount of yearly scholarship
support is $15,000, to cover tuition and stipends for four quarters of full-time
graduate study leading to certification at the secondary level for either
mathematics or science. Participants may continue for an additional quarter to
receive a Master's in Teaching degree. The program offers one year of subject-
specific induction following graduation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: The Noyce Scholars Program is serving as a national model for attracting,
preparing, and retaining outstanding STEM major as teachers in high-needs
schools. The program benefits from years of intensive and broad based data
collection about the education, support, and retention of teachers. The extended
support for the Noyce Scholars after graduation is designed to offer a set of
induction experiences that helps ensure that these teachers remain in the
profession, refine their practices, and foster high levels of achievement in a
cadre of young students over time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The
four cohorts of secondary science and mathematics teachers trained by this
project will be placed in high-needs schools giving students from largely
underrepresented groups access to excellent instruction. Because of the
continued involvement of faculty in collecting data on the effectiveness of a
range of features of teacher training (e.g., selection of candidates, methods of
instruction, analysis of pupil data, induction support) this project is
contributing substantially to what is known about the design of preparation
experiences and induction experiences. Insights gleaned from this project are
being shared with colleges of education across the nation. Models for
preparation and induction support are being widely disseminated across a
spectrum of national audiences, educators, researchers, and policymakers.