* 0833300
* Get Educators in Mathematics and Science (GEMS)
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Florentin Maurrasse, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 09/30/2013
* USD 749,976.00

The GEMS (Get Educators in Mathematics and Science) project at Florida
International University (FIU) is building a model for recruiting, preparing,
and successfully inducting STEM discipline majors into the teaching profession.
FIU's status as a minority-serving institution offers the unique opportunity to
develop this model within a diverse community of traditionally under-represented
minorities and women. GEMS is opening new pathways into science and mathematics
teaching while supporting 7 undergraduates per year (totaling over 34 during the
lifetime of the project). Most GEMS graduates teach in South Florida's diverse
public school districts, where they have a significant impact on high needs
schools. GEMS is recruiting talented undergraduate Chemistry, Earth Sciences,
Mathematics, and Physics majors into the teaching profession. In addition to
providing strong pedagogical content knowledge, the project offers the Noyce
fellows further incentives through stipend support and an integrated pre- and
in-service support community, ensuring a high likelihood for success and
retention in the profession. As a member of the Physics Teacher Education
Coalition (PhysTEC), FIU's Physics Department and College of Education are
deeply engaged in the enterprise of producing more and better-prepared
elementary, middle, and high school teachers who are committed to interactive,
inquiry-based approaches to teaching. The GEMS program offers Noyce fellows: (1)
a mentor network including faculty mentors at FIU and in-service teachers in
local public schools; (2) enhanced early field teaching experiences both on
campus and in high school classroom; (3) dedicated on-campus space serving as a
central meeting place for the fellows' community; (4) access to guided inquiry-
based workshops as part of ongoing in-service teacher programs; (5) regular
meetings and events for pre- and in-service teachers; and (6) web-based
community access email lists and central web resources for asynchronous support.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is investigating factors that bring
participants to the program, critical factors for teacher preparation, and
factors necessary for successful induction into the teaching profession. GEMS is
providing insight into basic education research topics such as the benefits and
challenges of implementing a new teacher education program in a diverse urban
environment, the pedagogic development and shift in attitudes towards K-12
teaching by STEM discipline majors, and the changes by faculty in their
engagement with and beliefs of supporting teacher education programs. The
project's broader impact includes building an effective model for universities
contributing to the production of K-12 STEM teachers, strategies developed
within that model, as well as the direct impact of the scholarship recipients on
their future students.