* 0833985
* On Variable Terrains and Diurnal Variations in Surface Data Assimilation
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2008,10/31/2012
* Zhaoxia Pu, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 10/31/2012
* USD 235,745.00

Effective incorporation of single-level observations, especially those of air
temperature near the earth's surface, to accurately determine modeled initial
atmospheric conditions represents a major challenge in numerical weather
prediction. The exact reasons for this difficulty remain unclear, though
inadequate representation of the diurnal cycle is thought to play an important
role. This is particularly true in regions of complex terrain, where sharp
variations of elevation and corresponding surface temperature (which are
imperfectly resolved by coarse model grids) may lead to large differences
between model "first guess" fields and inserted local observations. This
challenge stands in the way of capitalizing fully on the bounty of new
observations coming from expanded surface observing networks. The research
supported here focuses on the use of observing system simulation experiments
(OSSEs) in conjunction with the Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) model to
address this problem. OSSEs will be used to supply synthetic observations at
sites where actual observations are being made. After incorporation of known,
representative errors these synthesized observations will in turn be assimilated
using both traditional variational (3DVAR) and more modern (but computationally
expensive) Ensemble Kalman filter (EnKF) techniques. Ensuing model forecasts
will be compared with actual observations at these selected sites to quantify
the impact of such errors as well as assess methods for their reduction. The
goals of this effort are thus to (1) identify and understand fundamental
problems interfering with the inclusion of surface observations in weather
forecast models, and (2) design and conduct numerical experiments to overcome
these obstacles and thereby improve forecast accuracy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this work centers upon identification of leading sources
of weather forecast errors and design of methods for their mitigation. Broader
impacts of this work will include: significant improvements to the community-
based WRF model; more complete and efficient utilization of data emerging from a
growing array of surface observational networks; and the education of a graduate
student under supervision of a PI from an underrepresented group.