* 0833250
* Project IMPACT: Improving Mathematics, Physics and Chemistry Teaching
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* Terry Wyberg, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 08/31/2014
* USD 599,267.00

Improving Mathematics, Physics and Chemistry Teaching (IMPACT), a Phase II Noyce
proposal, is a partnership of the University of Minnesota-Twin Cities College of
Education and Human Development (CEHD) and the Institute of Technology
(Departments of Chemistry, Mathematics, and Physics), St. Paul Public Schools
and Anoka-Hennepin Public Schools. IMPACT is designed to recruit, prepare, and
retain highly qualified teachers of physical science and mathematics. U.S. and
Minnesota schools report extreme teacher shortages in these areas and demand is
expected to increase in Minnesota with new high school graduation requirements
requiring mathematics coursework up to and including algebra II and a full year
of physics or chemistry. IMPACT provides scholarships of up to $10,000 for
approximately forty undergraduates and graduates seeking certification in
mathematics or physical sciences. Recruitment occurs through the PhysTEC
program, a new initiative designed to promote physics teaching as a career path
for undergraduates. PhysTEC students have opportunities to teach in non-major
physics classes as learning assistants and attend physics teaching seminars.
Undergraduate IMPACT scholars are enrolled in the CEHD DirecTrack program which
offers early coursework in education and school-based field experiences.
Preparation occurs through the CEHD M.Ed. Initial Licensure Program. Students
enter the 15-month program as a cohort, taking coursework in educational theory,
a nine-credit science or mathematics methods sequence, educational technology,
and working with English-Language-Learners. Students participate in extensive
practicum and student teaching experiences in high-needs partner schools at both
middle and high school level. Retention is addressed through the Science and
Mathematics Teacher Induction Network (TIN), an online induction program
developed in partnership with the Minnesota Department of Education, to provide
mentoring and professional development to secondary science and mathematics
teachers throughout Minnesota. IMPACT scholars receive on-going professional
development and mentoring through TIN. Evaluation studies, which include
longitudinal studies of previous cohorts of Noyce Scholars, are focusing on the
effectiveness of IMPACT to recruit highly qualified students into the teacher
preparation program, effectively prepare students to work in high need schools,
and retain and support the professional growth of these teachers in the schools.