* 0833624
* IT and College Pathways through application of Technology to explore Urban Ecological Challenges
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Eric Strauss, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Reed
* 06/30/2014
* USD 1,499,812.00

A pathway to STEM careers and college for inner-city high school students is
built around the use of cutting-edge geospatial and computer modeling to
investigate pressing urban ecological problems in their neighborhood. The work
in a previous ITEST grant that demonstrated an increase in student self-efficacy
and interest in science is expanded to integrate career discernment, college
preparation, and engagement with innovative technologies. With a project team
that includes a counseling psychologist, an educational researcher, a science
educator, an urban ecologist, an environmental lawyer and a cross-cultural
educator, the project designs an innovative program and conducts research on
both the design of the program and on student career discernment. The students
meet on selected Saturdays and after school during the school year. They receive
a stipend to attend a three week summer program. Students remain in the program
for three years working on projects of increasing sophistication in urban
ecology. Parents and care givers are integrated into the program by having them
engage in similar activities to understand the nature of STEM related careers.
Partnerships with the College Bound program and with two industries ensure
sustainability and that students understand the workplace and have access to
innovative technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;