* 0833378
* ITEST Strategies
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2013
* Philip Sadler, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Julia Clark
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,612,572.00

ITEST Strategies is a 3 year project for grades five through eight students and
teachers. Pooling resources from a host of collaborators and previously funded
projects such as ?From the Ground Up? curriculum created for use with the
MicroObservatory network of robotic telescopes, teachers engage students in
exploring themes that researchers have found to be difficult for middle school
youth. These themes include light and color, size and scale, laws of motion, and
more. Activities include programming and controlling robotic telescopes from
home and school. This involves imaging of galactic and extra-galactic objects
and manipulating images. Students also create animations and simulations of
common topographic and space-related features. Collaborators include Harvard?s
Earth and Planetary Science Department, the Initiative for Innovative computing,
the Amateur Telescope Makers of Boston, five public and charter schools, and the
Retirees School Volunteers.&lt;br/&gt;The project plan provides for a teacher
component that includes at least 60 hours of professional enhancement each year.
Additionally, the project plan includes a student component with a two-year
sequential curriculum having weekly sessions, summer activities, online courses,
and student-parent/guardian evenings. With this structure, the project advances
knowledge and understand across the fields of information and communication
technology and astronomy. The project leaders target 100 girls and disadvantaged
youth. Each year there are 120 hours of exposure for the students and 60 hours
of professional development for teachers. Students are involved for a minimum of
two years. &lt;br/&gt;The PI utilizes a quasi-experimental, non-equivalent
research design. The following questions drive the research:&lt;br/&gt;1) How
effective is the project in enhancing student STEM understanding, and in
creating and sustaining a link between the STEM experiences and ICT careers for
the participants?&lt;br/&gt;2) What factors or settings most effectively enhance
the ICT experiences for middle-school youth, and how well does the SED project
support that enhancement?&lt;br/&gt;3) To what degree do students perceive that
the skills and conceptual knowledge developed in the project are potentially
valuable for entering an ICT career or another STEM vocation?&lt;br/&gt;To study
these questions, the PI uses distracter-driven multiple choice concept
inventories developed by the Harvard Science Education Department to assess the
conceptual knowledge of teachers and students both as diagnostic pretests to
develop workshop content and as posttests of knowledge acquisition. &lt;br/&gt;