* 0833286
* Developing Urban Education Teachers in STEM subjects
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2008,09/30/2014
* Gary Hannan, Eastern Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* teri murphy
* 09/30/2014
* USD 749,846.00

The Noyce Program at Eastern Michigan University (EMU)integrates the recruiting,
advising, training, and mentoring activities of the internally funded Minority
Achievement, Retention, and Success (MARS) program housed in EMU's Office of
Urban Education & Educational Equity (OUEEE) with the science curriculum
enrichment activities of the Creative Scientific Inquiry Experience (CSIE)
Program. By linking gateway science courses with a field experience and seminar
that focuses on issues facing STEM teachers in high-need school districts, STEM
majors pursuing secondary teaching certification understand and respond to the
challenges and rewards of teaching in high-need schools. The resulting
curricular linkages promote the existing institutional focus on the preparation
of secondary STEM teachers in high-need school districts with a total of 25
scholars being supported by Noyce Scholarships, doubling the number of STEM
certified teachers over the five-year period of the grant. The Office of Urban
Education and Educational Equity coordinates field experiences in, and linkages
with, high-need school districts that are necessary for obtaining pre-service
Master Teacher mentors, classroom experiences for Noyce Scholars, job placement,
mentor teachers during teacher induction, and teacher evaluations. Participating
districts include the Ypsilanti Public Schools, Lincoln Consolidated School
District, Willow Run School District, Ann Arbor School District, Inkster Public
Schools, Wayne-Westland Public Schools, and Washtenaw Intermediate School
District.

The Noyce Program at EMU is testing the hypothesis that the MARS model is
suitably robust to produce similar retention success with motivated STEM
teachers in high-need high schools as it has for new teachers of other
disciplines (great than 98% over a period of 5 years). The evaluators use
qualitative methods to obtain information on the impacts of the CSIE/MARS
collaboration on pre-service-teacher retention and new-teacher persistence in
high-need schools. This research represents an extension of the studies of the
generalized effects of CSIE on STEM majors by focusing on secondary STEM
teaching majors.