* 0833178
* Interdisciplinary Nanotoxicity Center
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2008,02/29/2016
* Huey-Min Hwang, Jackson State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Victor Santiago
* 02/29/2016
* USD 5,249,996.00

The enhancement of research and educational programs at Jackson State University
(JSU) by supporting the multi-disciplinary Nanotoxicity CREST Center is
proposed. The Center will consist of faculty members from the JSU Departments of
Biology, Chemistry, Physics and Civil and Environmental Engineering. The
interdisciplinary group of researchers will perform comprehensive investigations
of nanomaterials that will strengthen the research infrastructure of Jackson
State University. The proposed projects include different aspects of the
development and production of nanomaterials and investigations of their
toxicity. There are five proposed research subprojects: ?Silver Clusters: A
Theoretical Study of Structure, Spectra, Paramagnetism, and Chemisorption?;
?Environment-Specific Issues in Nanoparticle Physics: Optical, Energy Transfer
and Relaxation Processes?; ?Nanomaterial Based Sensing of Environmental Toxin
Using hyper ? Rayleigh Scattering Spectroscopy?, ?Nanomaterials: a Study of
Toxicity Mechanism, Bioaccumulation Potential, and Application for Prediction
Modeling?, and ?Modeling and prediction of Physical Properties and Toxicity of
Nanomaterials?. There are strong links among all subprojects of the proposed
Center. One of the unique features is the two-way interaction between
computational and experimental groups. The theoretical group will model nano-
species studied by experimentalists. Based on the data from computational
calculations, experimentalists will be able to test new materials that are
predicted by theory to possess an enhanced property of interest.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New courses and laboratories will be developed and
executed by members of the Center in order to establish a graduate program in
Materials Science. The Center's activities will be focused on training minority
underrepresented graduate and undergraduate students and on lectures, workshops,
seminar series, and research summer programs for undergraduate students from
colleges surrounding Jackson and from HBCU/MI institutions. The collaborative
activities of the members of the Center will also include the organization of
two series of annual international conferences: ?Current Trends in Computational
Chemistry? and ?Southern Schools on Computational Chemistry and Materials
Science?. In addition to expanding the nation?s base for science and technology,
the Center will also increase the number of Ph.D. degrees in computational
chemistry awarded to African-Americans and will provide well qualified and
diverse faculty members for US universities and colleges. &lt;br/&gt;