* 0833614
* It's About Discovery
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Dean Cristol, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Reed
* 07/31/2013
* USD 858,666.00

The institution is The Ohio State University at Lima, the university partners
are the University of North Carolina at Greensboro and Fayetteville State
University. It's About Discovery is a unique partnership to engage students and
teachers in critical thinking skills in STEM content areas. The Ford Partnership
for Advanced Studies (PAS) new science curriculum is the foundation for the
project which will include over 700 students and 20-25 teachers. While the
primary focus is on students, throughout the life of the project all teachers
will participate in professional development focusing on the PAS units to ensure
the quality teaching and understanding of the content. Technology will be
integrated throughout the program to enable students to create inquiry based
projects across state lines and for teachers to continue their professional
development opportunities. Community partners will serve as mentors, host field
trips, and engage in on-line conversations with students. An interactive website
will be created for both teachers and students. The focus is on 8th grade
science as it relates to STEM careers, 9th grade physical science and 10th
science and mathematics. We are implementing a new Ford PAS curriculum module,
Working Towards Sustainability, which comprises of four modules: We All Run on
Energy, Energy from the Sun, Is Hydrogen a Solution? and The Nuclear Revolution.

Teachers across states will engage in a new professional development model.
Students will create projects through on-line conversations. A website will be
created for project participants and the ITEST community. These hands-on,
inquiry-based learning experiences engage students and prepare and encourage
them to pursue science, engineering, and technology in high school and beyond.
All PAS curricula use real world experiences, open-ended problems and result in
real world applications. Assessments are on-going and inquiry driven. Teamwork
and on-line resources and research are built into the curriculum design. The
evaluation consists of a multi-method pre-post design. Teachers complete a Pre
Survey at the beginning of the program and then again at the end of the school
year. Students complete a Pre Survey at the beginning of the school year and a
post survey at the end of the school year. In addition, teachers share students'
scores on curriculum assessments completed throughout the year, including
student scores on the Comprehensive Adult Student Assessment System's (CASAS)
Assessment of Critical Thinking in Science writing tasks.