* 0833291
* USM Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* Robert Kuech, University of Southern Maine
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 08/31/2014
* USD 899,999.00

The University of Southern Maine (USM) is recruiting and preparing 41 new
science and mathematics teachers by offering scholarships to undergraduate STEM
majors in initial teacher preparation programs, and scholarships and/or stipends
for STEM career changers in graduate-level initial teacher preparation, with an
emphasis on recruiting individuals from diverse linguistic and cultural
backgrounds. The program also provides professional development support for all
scholars from pre-service through their beginning years of teaching in
partnership with four school districts (Gorham, Portland, Lewiston, and Sanford
Public Schools). The project includes the use of Peer-Led Team Learning (PLTL)
to increase undergraduate student learning in chemistry and mathematics, improve
retention of pre-service STEM teachers, and recruit new STEM students into
teacher preparation programs. A Newcomer model is in place for recruiting
permanent resident aliens with diverse linguistic, racial, and cultural
backgrounds into teaching by building a program of academic and social supports
to facilitate their transition to the U.S. educational system as they pursue
their teacher preparation. A post-certification Master of Teaching and Learning
degree completion program employs master teachers as clinical faculty and
engages University faculty as content experts for a "virtual residency". A
network of graduated Robert Noyce Teaching (RNT) Scholars provides peer support
during the induction years. The project uses authentic K-16 partnerships to
provide outreach to beginning STEM teachers in the 36 districts participating in
USM's Southern Maine Partnership and to advertise the availability of USM's
Professional Development Center's numerous offerings for in-service teachers on
a wide range of topics, including content-based seminars and strategies of
particular interest to STEM teachers in high-needs settings. Recruitment
strategies include the use of advertisements on social networking internet
sites, such as MySpace.com and facebook.com, to recruit traditional-aged
students into teacher preparation programs. An educational technology lending
library is available for RNT Scholars and other USM graduates to use in their
K-12 STEM classrooms to enable them to become technically competent
practitioners and leaders of field and laboratory instruction.