* 0833316
* UMBC Noyce Scholars Program
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2008,08/31/2015
* Janice Zengel, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Lidia C. Yoshida
* 08/31/2015
* USD 750,000.00

The University of Maryland, Baltimore County (UMBC), in collaboration with the
public school districts of Baltimore County, Howard County and the City of
Baltimore, is recruiting and supporting undergraduate STEM majors to pursue
careers in secondary teaching of STEM disciplines (Math, Science, Technology).
The project targets undergraduate STEM majors at UMBC as well as transfers from
local area community colleges nearing the conclusion of their sophomore year who
may have not previously considered careers in teaching. The project includes a
five-year support network beginning during the initial experiences of pre-
service teacher education and sustaining support through the conclusion of three
years as a full time teacher. The UMBC Noyce Scholar Program provides
approximately $15,000 in scholarships and stipends to three cohorts each
consisting of 12 undergraduate STEM majors. Each Noyce scholar completes a
bachelor's degree in a STEM discipline by the conclusion of the first phase
(Initial Certification) of the program. During the completion of the second
phase (Induction Support), each scholar completes a Masters of Arts in Education
degree that includes an additional 18 credit hours of STEM disciplinary content.
The scholars engage in paid summer STEM research laboratory experiences as both
an undergraduate (summer of senior year) and during their early years as a full
time teacher (summer following their second year of teaching). These experiences
are supported through leveraging NSF sponsored REU and RET supplements garnered
by currently funded UMBC STEM faculty. Extensive interaction with a population
of high-needs students occurs during the initial summer experience, during the
following academic year and during the Scholars' culminating senior year
teaching internship. In addition to preparing 36 highly qualified secondary
teachers of STEM disciplines, the project provides an opportunity to investigate
and disseminate aspects of the model. Assessment of the key components of the
undergraduate teacher preparation model provides information associated with the
types of incentives, experiences, marketing strategies and collaborations that
can significantly increase the interest of STEM majors for considering a career
in teaching. Similar information can be learned from the components of the
induction support plan.