* 0833284
* Co-Sponsoring of the 8th International Conference on Frontiers of Design and Manufacturing; held September 23-26, 2008, Tianjin, China
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2009
* Albert Shih, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Shaochen Chen
* 07/31/2009
* USD 10,000.00

This project seeks the financial support from the NSF Division of Civil,
Mechanical, and Manufacturing Innovation for eight graduate students, post-docs,
and junior faculty to accompany their faculty advisor to attend the 8th
International Conference on Frontiers of Design and Manufacturing (ICFDM) in
Tianjin, China on September 23-26, 2008. ICFDM is held every two years as a
venue for exchange and cooperation among researchers in the field of design and
manufacturing science. It is also a platform for promotion of the development of
design and manufacturing technology. NSF has supported the past ICFDM
conferences. The intellectual merit is on the learning and exchanging of novel
ideas and new research results from top researchers around the world. This year,
the theme for the conference is Innovation and Development of Design and
Manufacturing Technology. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The conference has
traditionally provided an opportunity to bring together worldwide academic
researchers and industrial practitioners for the exchange of the latest
development and applications in advanced design and manufacturing science and
technologies and for promoting research collaborations. The broad impacts are
not only for US researchers and students participating in the conference but
also for participants from China and other countries in the world. The co-
sponsors of this conference include the National Natural Science Foundation of
China, National Science Foundation (USA), Shien-Ming Wu Foundation (USA),
American Society of Mechanical Engineering (ASME), Chinese Mechanical
Engineering Society (CMES), and Tianjin University. &lt;br/&gt;