* 0833379
* SGER:   Prototype Accessible Aquarium:   Exploration of Advanced Bio-Tracking and Adaptive Sonification Infrastructure
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2008,11/30/2009
* Bruce Walker, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 11/30/2009
* USD 87,561.00

Museums, science centers, zoos, and aquaria are in the business of educating and
entertaining the visiting public. However, as such institutions strive to become
more accessible to people with disabilities, they must find ways to accommodate
an increasingly diverse visitor population with varying physical and sensory
needs. Facilities that rely primarily on the visual experiences of their
exhibits to promote educational and entertainment goals, for example, often find
it challenging to enable meaningful participation by the millions of people who
are blind or visually impaired. When exhibits are dynamic the problems are
compounded, as movements and changes are often difficult to describe, and
interactions hard to afford, to individuals who lack normal vision. The behavior
of fish in an aquarium, the play of chimpanzees or lion cubs in a zoo habitat,
and the cosmic dance of the planets in a science center?s model of the solar
system are examples of dynamic exhibits that have until now been inaccessible to
visitors with vision impairments. The ultimate goal of the PI in the Accessible
Aquarium Project is to make such dynamic exhibits accessible and engaging for
visitors with vision impairments, by providing real-time interpretations through
the use of innovative tracking and audio technologies. The PI and his team hope
to eventually develop cutting edge bio-tracking and behavior analysis techniques
that can provide input for sophisticated, informative, and compelling multimedia
auditory displays and sonifications (sounds used for the purpose of conveying
information about some kind of data to a listener). Virtually every exhibit in
an aquarium is dynamic; furthermore, the aquatic nature of these exhibits
provides unique and interesting challenges to the use of typical sensing
technologies and techniques for tracking. As a result, considerable innovation
and new science will be required for the project to succeed. In this exploratory
project the PI will assemble an end-to-end proof-of-concept system that involves
a research aquarium with live fish, a camera-based bio-tracking system, an
algorithmic music generation system, and a method/interface for users to
interact with the resulting audio service. Tracking and sonification algorithms
will be developed and integrated, so that the movements of the fish can be used
to generate music and other audio annotations. The resulting audio output will
be presented to a range of sighted and visually impaired participants, and both
objective performance and subjective data will be collected. An iterative
design-evaluate-redesign process will allow the PI to rapidly and effectively
improve the basic system, and provide a solid proof of concept. This will lead
to a complete research platform that can later be used for more in-depth
research in all of the constituent fields. The project will draw on the talent
of efforts of, and derive inspiration from, a diverse group of researchers,
students, and expert members of the community, including a great number of
persons with visual impairments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This
project will advance knowledge in bio-tracking, behavior analysis, sonification,
auditory displays, and computer music. While these advances will each be
important in their respective fields, the synergy of the advancements in these
various areas will open up a whole new world to people with vision impairments:
the complex natural choreography of a dynamic aquatic environment. The findings
will be applicable beyond aquaria to other kinds of facilities such as zoos and
museums, and also beyond individuals with vision impairments to other groups of
people such as seniors or those for whom mobility, height, or other problems
make it hard to see traditional signage. Indeed, all visitors will benefit from
an audio enhancement that allows them to learn about an exhibit while keeping
their visual attention on the exhibit itself.