* 0833503
* Studies: Expanding Opportunities for Innovative and Technology-Rich STEM Experiences through Florida's High School Career Academies (ITEST/Workforce Development STUDIES Project)
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Becky Smerdon, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 09/30/2012
* USD 1,499,911.00

DRL - 0833503 &lt;br/&gt;Studies: Expanding Opportunities for Innovative and
Technology-Rich STEM Experiences through Florida?s High School Career Academies
&lt;br/&gt;Borman, Kathryn M. University of South Florida&lt;br/&gt;Becky
Smerdon, Academy for Educational
Development&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project would investigate the
determinants and consequences of student enrollment in a new Florida program of
high school "career academies" intended to integrate rigorous academic
curriculum with industry-driven careers. The researchers have created some
specific hypotheses about curriculum and school organization and their
relationship to choosing STEM careers that can be tested with the study they
have designed. The study will use statistical analysis models of existing
administrative statistics from the State of Florida to test the influence of
attending special "academies" at the high school level to encourage students
into STEM fields. They will test the idea that students attending a special
academy had already chosen a particular career before attending the school.
Students attending special schools are likely to have selected the school
because of their background. This study will measure the extent to which Florida
students chose their career fields based on the school they would attend or the
extent that the school changed their career choice. Through qualitative analysis
they will identify new factors of the schools that affect choices of students to
attend them. The trends study will indicate whether attending these special
schools increase STEM course taking among underrepresented students. The
researchers will analyze existing data using a multilevel model to account for
both teacher and student variances, will conduct surveys of students in some
schools, and will conduct qualitative analysis of course taking.