* 0833084
* SGER: Collaborative Research on Low-Cost Manufacturing of High Performance Thermoelectric Nanocomposites
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2008,04/30/2009
* Zhifeng Ren, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Shaochen Chen
* 04/30/2009
* USD 69,999.00

This project aims at developing synthesis methods to make thermoelectric
nanocomposites with enhanced thermoelectric properties. Efforts include
synthesis of nanostructured materials, structural and property
characterizations, and modeling. The material focus will be on nanostructured
Si-Ge and SixGe1-x ? SiyGe1-y materials. Bulk nanostructured materials will be
synthesized by first ball-milling elements of Si and Ge chunks into
nanoparticles, followed by consolidating them into dense bulk using dc-induced
hot-press sintering. Thermoelectric properties, including electrical and thermal
conductivity, and Seebeck coefficient, will be characterized as a function of
temperature. Structural characterization will be carried out on the materials by
transmission electron microscope to correlate their thermoelectric properties
with their structures and with the processing conditions that are needed to
produce these structures. The key intellectual merits of the proposed project
are in development of low-cost and mass-production nanomanufacturing routes for
nanostructured thermoelectric materials that benefit from nanoscale physics
usually observed in materials made from expensive processes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to the efficient and
environmentally friendly usage of energy since thermoelectric devices can be
used for waste heat recovery into electricity. The involvement of undergraduate
students, particularly under-represented groups, in multidisciplinary research
with real-world applications will stimulate students? interests and attract them
to address energy issues.&lt;br/&gt;