* 0833997
* Workshop: Future Directions of Smart Structures Technology & Experimental Benchmark: 5th International Workshop on Structural Control and Monitoring; Dalian, China; June 5-6, 2
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2008,11/30/2009
* Satish Nagarajaiah, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Mahendra P. Singh
* 11/30/2009
* USD 21,331.00

This project will support the travel of young and established researchers to
participate in an international workshop on Structural Control and Monitoring in
Dalian, China, June 5-6, 2008. The US researchers will interact with
international researchers who are working in the area of smart structures
technology to formulate future research directions in the area of structural
control and structural health monitoring. The workshop participants will develop
the engineering details of an international experimental benchmark problem that
can be used by the US and other international scientists at the National Center
for Research in Earthquake Engineering in Taiwan. When completed, this
experimental benchmark problem will be used to evaluate the applicability of
various control methods and structural health monitoring schemes that are being
studied by the research community for implementation on building structures.
This will provide a common platform and quantitative framework to test and
validate different control and monitoring concepts in a realistic practical
setting. This will immensely facilitate the transfer of research results to
practice, which is expected to improve the safety and performance of building
structures subjected to dynamic forces. The proposed participation by young
researchers in the workshop will also help in advancing their research and
professional careers, and promote international exchange and collaboration
activities.