* 0833689
* ARI-MA: Graphene based sensors for detecting special nuclear materials
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2010
* Yong Chen, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2010
* USD 380,000.00

ARI-MA: Graphene Based Sensors for Detecting Special Nuclear Materials The
research objective of this project is to develop novel radiation sensors and
detector architectures based on graphene, an electronic material with unique
properties. The approach is to utilize a sharp change in the electrical
conductivity of graphene produced by a transient electrostatic potential
resulting from the interaction of ionizing radiation with absorber materials.
Such graphene-based radiation sensors have the potential to significantly
outperform existing sensors for detecting special nuclear materials and help
establish a new paradigm in radiation detection. The intellectual merit of this
research is its innovativeness in several key areas. The unique properties of a
novel material, graphene, are harnessed to develop the next-generation high
performance radiation sensors. A previously unexplored approach, based on the
field effect (sensitivity of conductivity to local electrostatic potential), is
utilized to detect ionizing radiation. This relaxes many stringent material
requirements characteristic of conventional charge collection-based detectors,
and offers a unique opportunity to deploy narrow-bandgap absorber materials for
high energy resolution. Finally, the detector architecture is expected to be
scalable and low-cost. The broader impacts of this work could realized through
revolutionary advances in radiation detection by combining high sensitivity,
high spatial and energy resolution, high speed, and unparalleled flexibility,
with broad impact and benefits to the welfare and security of the nation and
society. Both investigators are committed to mentor students at all levels and
integrate this research into their educational and outreach programs. They will
also leverage the program support to actively promote the diversity and public
understanding of science and engineering.