* 0833010
* Understanding Gender Inequality in Household Labor
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Judith Treas, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2012
* USD 299,165.00

[This proposal is part of a funded CRP from the EuroCORES HumVIB
competition.]&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research advances understanding of
inequality in the division of household labor between husbands and wives. The
project is the U.S. component of a recommended international CRP collaboration,
"Gender Inequality in Comparative Perspective" (EQUALITY), that responds to the
European Science Foundation EUROCORES initiative on "Cross-National and Multi-
Level Analysis of Human Values, Institutions and Behaviour" (HumVIB). Addressing
the pressing challenge of sustaining broad participation of both men and women
in societies, EQUALITY aims to understand the persistent gender inequality at
different levels in Europe and the US. Projects on gender gaps in the labor
force, poverty, social networks, and domestic life are directed by scientists
from the Netherlands, Hungary, Germany and the U.S., respectively. Bringing a
shared theoretical framework on macro-level and micro-level gender inequality to
bear on various spheres of life in the U.S. and Europe, the collaboration offers
an integrated understanding of the gender gaps within and between
countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This individual project focuses on household
labor and domestic gender inequalities. Despite changes in gender roles, women,
even full-time workers, continue to bear a disproportionate burden for domestic
labor. Inequality in the division of household labor discourages childbearing,
fosters marital instability, and depresses women?s wages, Using multi-level
modeling and cross-national data from the International Social Survey Program
and the European Social Survey, this project pursues three
objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) To investigate cross-national patterns in
the total, female, and male volume of housework in married and cohabiting
unions, with particular emphasis on country-level conditions that are associated
with higher or lower absolute domestic workloads.&lt;br/&gt;2) To test multi-
level models of national economic, cultural, and policy influences on the
division of household labor that theorize the distinction between hours-based
and gender-typed task measures of male housework participation.&lt;br/&gt;3) To
extend the analysis of household labor to the allocation of household management
activities and their implications for the division of domestic responsibilities
in different country contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's intellectual
merit relates to its systematic cross-national analysis of determinants and
forms of gender inequality. Its broader impacts include fostering productive
international alliances between European and US researchers.