* 0833126
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: From Resource Degradation to Collective Action: Community Associations and Sustainability on the Ecuadorian Coast
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2011
* Christine Beitl, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 02/28/2011
* USD 15,000.00

University of Georgia graduate student Christine M. Beitl, supervised by Dr.
Robert E. Rhoades, will undertake research to assess the role of both formal and
informal institutions in social-ecological resilience and sustainability. Data
will be derived from an intensive investigation into the relationship between
collective action and resource sustainability in coastal mangrove wetlands in
Ecuador. The conversion of mangrove wetlands for urbanization and shrimp farming
has threatened social and ecological resilience in coastal communities
worldwide. On the Ecuadorian coast, grassroots movements in defense of
livelihoods and the environment have consolidated into new civil society
organizations after two decades of mangrove deforestation for the expansion of
shrimp farming. To varying degrees of success, they are engaged in mangrove
restoration, monitoring, and management. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus on the
fishery for the mangrove cockle will allow the researcher to examine two kinds
of collective action problems: subtraction (how much is harvested) and
contribution (how people differentially participate in and uphold local
management regimes). She will employ a mixed methods data collection strategy,
including: 1) observation 2) semi-structured interviews 3) mapping 4) oral case
histories 5) surveys and 6) catch-per-unit-effort (CPUE) of the mangrove cockle.
Through the unique triangulation of ethnographic, survey, and CPUE data, this
research will examine the explicit link between social and ecological systems at
two different levels, determining how collective action is reflected in broader
patterns of landscape change (mangrove reforestation) and differentially
reflected in the individual fishing effort. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
is important because by combining social-ecological resilience theory and
building on common property and collective action theories, the researcher will
be able address theoretical and methodological gaps in the study of collective
action and resilience, and potentially inform policies for the management and
conservation of coastal resources. The research also will contribute to the
education of a social scientist.