* 0833504
* AccessSTEM:  The Northwest Alliance for Students with Disabilities in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics-Phase II (AccessSTEM2)
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/2008,04/30/2017
* Matthew O'Donnell, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 04/30/2017
* USD 1,762,701.00

The "AccessSTEM: The Northwest Alliance for Students with Disabilities in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics - Phase II (AccessSTEM2)"
project will increase the associate, baccalaureate, and graduate science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) degree attainment of individuals
with disabilities in the Seattle, WA region. The primary institution, the
University of Washington (UW), is partnering with Bellevue Community College
(BCC), Seattle Central Community College (SCCC), and all high schools within the
Seattle Public Schools system to accomplish this goal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
AccessSTEM-Phase 2 Alliance will increase the associate, baccalaureate and
graduate STEM degree attainment of students with disabilities by attending to
the following four objectives:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Implement changes within
awardee and partner postsecondary institutions (UW, BCC, SCCC) to make STEM
programs more welcoming and accessible to students with disabilities (e.g., more
accessible websites and science labs, STEM publications that encourage the
participation of students with disabilities);&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Create and
expand engagement of stakeholders (precollege STEM educators, disability
services, veteran associations, projects that broaden participation in STEM, and
industry and career services) in fostering STEM education and careers that are
welcoming and accessible to people with disabilities;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3.
Implement evidence-based practices (e.g., mentoring, peer support, internships)
to increase numbers of individuals with disabilities moving through critical
junctures to STEM associate, baccalaureate, and graduate degrees and careers;
and &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4. Support and expand an online resource center that
shares research and promising practices worldwide.