* 0833101
* A Language Independent Framework for Compiling Data-Intensive Applications on Highly Parallel Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Gagan Agrawal, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2012
* USD 510,000.00

Recently, the term Data-Intensive SuperComputing (DISC) has been gaining
popularity and includes applications that perform large-scale computations over
massive datasets. Because of the increasing volume of data analyzed, the amount
of computation involved, and the need for rapid or even interactive response,
these applications have an ever increasing demand for computational power.
&lt;br/&gt;Starting within the last 2-3 years, it is no longer possible to
improve processor performance by simply increasing clock frequencies. As a
result, multi-core architectures and accelerators like Field Programmable Gate
Arrays (FPGAs) and Graphics Processing Units (GPUs) have become cost-effective
means for scaling performance. Such architectures are, however, creating a
programmability challenge for this class of applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project targets a language-independent compiler and
runtime framework for enabling data-intensive applications to be scaled on a
variety of modern and emerging highly parallel systems. Specifically, the target
&lt;br/&gt;will be cluster of multi-core machines, where each node could
additionally have an accelerator like a GPU. &lt;br/&gt;The system proposed here
will built on our prior work on an &lt;br/&gt;earlier system, FREERIDE
(FRamework for Rapid Implementation&lt;br/&gt;of Datamining Engines).
&lt;br/&gt;Building on the FREERIDE framework, this project has the potential
for an impact in the areas of high-end computing, data mining, &lt;br/&gt;and
scientific data processing. &lt;br/&gt;