* 0833323
* Spatial and Spatio-temporal Processes: Asymptotics, Misspecification and Multivariate Extension
* MPS,DMS
* 02/27/2008,05/31/2011
* Hao Zhang, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2011
* USD 152,108.00

The investigator develops appropriate infill or fixed domain asymptotic results
for the evaluation of approximation methods for spatial data. The infill
asymptotic framework is generally preferred for spatial data. However, infill
asymptotic results for estimation are in general difficult to derive, and there
exist only a few explicit infill asymptotic results pertaining to specific
models. In this proposal, a general approach to establishing the infill
asymptotic properties is outlined and followed to establish asymptotic
distributions of estimators that maximize some approximated likelihood functions
such as Vecchia's approximation and covariance tapering. These infill asymptotic
results assure that the approximation methods may yield asymptotically efficient
estimators. In addition, for spatio-temporal data, the investigator considers a
new asymptotic framework in which the temporal domain is increasing while the
spatial sampling domain is fixed. Under this asymptotic framework, the
investigator shows that an incorrect covariance function (such as covariance
tapering) generally results in biased estimators. The investigator establishes
asymptotic results that allow for the correction of biases. The adjusted
estimators are expected to be asymptotically normal and unbiased. These
asymptotic results allow one to employ incorrect but simpler spatio-temporal
covariance functions and then adjust for the bias. Finally, the investigator
extends the results from the univariate case to the multivariate case when
multiple spatial variables are observed across space and/or over time.

Data across space and time are routinely observed in many scientific studies
that are very important to the society such as those on global warming,
environmental monitoring, precision agriculture, epidemiology, hot spot
detection in homeland security, etc. The immense amount of data and the
correlation across space and time have raised new challenges to the modeling and
analysis of such space-time data. The primary goal of this project is tackle
these challenges by studying computationally feasible and efficient approaches
to the analysis of vast space-time data, which also bear no or little loss of
statistical efficiency. It is expected that this project will make more
accessible and feasible the analysis of huge spatial and spatial-temporal data
to scientists in broader disciplines, and thus enables scientists to retrieve
significant and reliable information from the vast amount of data.