* 0833326
* Texas Tech Noyce Scholars Programs
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* Jeffrey Lee, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 08/31/2014
* USD 888,386.00

The Texas Tech Noyce Scholars (TTNS) program, implemented by the Departments of
Mathematics &amp; Statistics and Chemistry &amp; Biochemistry at Texas Tech
University (TTU), is providing scholarships to 26 upper level undergraduate
students from Mathematics and Chemistry majors for a two-year long K-12 teacher
preparation experience. Students take courses related to K-12 education and
spend 10 hours per week in K-12 schools. Students are mentored by faculty and
teachers committed to their educational development and are provided with long
term support structures to ensure their continued success as teachers. The mix
of mathematics and science students creates a synergy that dovetails with
existing integrated programs at TTU. In addition, ten lower level undergraduates
participate each year in summer K-12 programs designed to facilitate their
induction into K-12 secondary teaching careers. This is particularly helpful to
members of underrepresented groups who may not otherwise have considered
teaching as a career. Scholarship recipients must teach for four years following
completion of their certification in high needs schools in Lubbock Independent
School District (LISD) in West Texas, a district with large populations of
underrepresented students. Intensive mentoring is provided. The project is
collaborating with the Center for the Integration of Science Education and
Research, a partner in the T-STEM initiative at TTU, which has an established
record of success in preparing and supporting teacher leaders, who are effective
teachers, mentors, and developers of curriculum. Education officials from LISD
supervise the placement and retention of the new teachers. Each year the
participants form a cohort, a model that is known to lead to more successful
retention in such programs. Effective mentoring practices are being studied and
disseminated for replication in other programs. Coordinating the coursework and
K-12 experiences with an intense environment focused on mentoring will give the
cohorts a real sense of the work of teachers, thus promoting higher retention
levels in teaching careers. The nation's schools also face a continuing problem
in retaining effective mathematics and chemistry teachers. This program is
developing a model support system, focused on mentoring and collaboration, which
is designed to enhance the first four years of teaching experiences of these
individuals.