* 0833032
* Collaborative Research:  Balanced Models--Theoretical Development, Solution and Application
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2008,04/30/2012
* Wayne Schubert, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 04/30/2012
* USD 280,000.00

Balanced atmospheric models are systems of equations based on an assumption of
approximate balance between the wind and mass fields. Existing balanced models
have played a key role in advancing our understanding of atmospheric dynamics.
Their usefulness, however, is limited by the accuracy of the underlying balance
assumption, and none is capable of representing asymmetric flows with large
curvature, such as are encountered in hurricanes. The goal of this project is to
remedy this situation, by extending the theory of balanced atmospheric models,
developing efficient and robust methods for their numerical solution, and using
the resulting models to study aspects of hurricane dynamics and midlatitude
weather phenomena.

The principal theoretical task is to develop two new balanced models in
continuous form: a three-dimensional f-plane model for limited-area midlatitude
dynamics and tropical cyclones and its generalization to spherical coordinates
for global flows. Both will be based on the nonlinear balance assumption. The
resulting models will be applied to explore basic dynamical principles,
including available potential energy and angular momentum principles, and
necessary conditions for combined instability, and wave-mean flow interactions;
to study aspects of hurricane dynamics, including potential vorticity rings,
secondary eyewalls, the role of asymmetries in the evolution of the mean vortex,
responses to lower- and upper-level potential vorticity anomalies, and the role
of small-scale fluctuations of temperature and moisture not controlled by the
invertibility principle; to investigate weather-scale phenomena, including
effects of horizontal shears on frontogenesis in three dimensions; and to high
Rossby number turbulence, focusing on the extent to which features of quasi-
geostrophic turbulence carry over to the new spherical model.

Broader impacts of the project are in developing user-friendly software for the
new balanced models, which will be made available to other researchers to
facilitate additional studies of atmospheric dynamics. The graduate students
involved in this work will receive training which will prepare them for careers
in research. Increased knowledge of hurricane dynamics may someday contribute to
an improved ability to predict hurricane intensity changes. Finally, this
collaborative project will foster increased interaction between the
computational mathematics and atmospheric dynamics communities.

