* 0833439
* Catalyzing institutional change in STEM education at the University of Florida
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2014
* Joseph Glover, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 12/31/2014
* USD 999,908.00

The project proposes to create a vision for transforming graduate education and
undergraduate research-based education at the University of Florida (UF) to
develop an integrative and interdisciplinary program that links all NSF funded
student-oriented programs to achieve synergies and avoid unnecessary duplication
of activities. The goals of the project are:&lt;br/&gt;1. To integrate best
practices of training grants (NSF and other) at the UF to improve the
professional preparation of graduate students in the STEM
disciplines;&lt;br/&gt;2. To develop integration and synergies where possible in
research training and educational programs; &lt;br/&gt;3. To include
undergraduate students where possible in these activities and to enhance their
preparation for graduate studies;&lt;br/&gt;4. To ensure that students from
underrepresented populations are fully involved in activities associated with
the newly developed Program Integration Institute; and &lt;br/&gt;5. To improve
interactions among existing programs by establishing the Program Integration
Institute.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The four NSF awards upon which the I3 project
will build include:&lt;br/&gt;1. IGERT Program in Adaptive Management: Wise Use
of Water, Wetlands, and Watersheds (DGE-0504422);&lt;br/&gt;2. Science Partners
in Inquiry-based Collaborative Education II (SPICE II)
(DGE-0538407);&lt;br/&gt;3. The South East Alliance for Graduate Education and
the Professoriate (HRD-0450279); and&lt;br/&gt;4. Graduate Research Fellowship
Program (DGE-0802270)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's objective is to launch
a small suite of professional development, educational, and training activities
with students in UF?s NSF-funded and other STEM training programs. Based on the
success of the components of the Program Integration Institute, the project will
expand offerings and also increase the base of students to whom services are
offered. It is the intent of the proposal to permanently establish the Program
Integration Institute at the UF and have the institute fully funded by the
university.