* 0833220
* SGER: Computational Prediction of Enantioselectivity in Metal-Catalyzed Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Olaf Wiest, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2011
* USD 180,000.00

This project will study the computationally driven rational design, virtual
screening, and experimental validation of chiral ligands and metal complexes as
catalysts for enantioselective reactions. Such reactions are of widespread
importance in the production of pharmaceutical agents, agricultural chemicals,
and other high-value compounds. This project has the potential of transforming
the field of enantioselective catalysis by providing a very fast and easy to use
virtual screening tool for the selection of chiral ligands. The initial phases
of the research will focus on development of methods for designing and
discovering new catalysts for enantioselective hydrogenations and
hydroaminations. This selection of reactions is based upon the importance of the
hydrogenation and nucleophilic addition products. In later stages of the
research, the methods will be extended to other types of enantioselective
reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Grants for Exploratory Research award
from the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program will support the
collaborative research of Professors Paul Helquist and Olaf Wiest in the
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University of Notre Dame. The
work of these two investigators and their co-workers will provide greater
understanding of and improved access to highly efficient methods for producing
enantiomerically pure compounds for the pharmaceutical and chemical industries.
This research will also provide valuable multi-disciplinary training of
undergraduate and graduate students in preparation for their careers as research
scientists in industry or academia, with emphasis on the connection between
computational and experimental methods.