* 0833330
* Recruitment, Preparation, and Retention of Math and Science Teachers:  Noyce Scholars Program at the College of William and Mary
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2009,09/30/2014
* R Macdonald, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 09/30/2014
* USD 875,673.00

Funding through the Noyce Scholars Program is enabling the College of William
and Mary to strengthen its program in several significant ways: (a) deepening
collaborative engagement among STEM departments and the School of Education; (b)
supporting more aggressive recruiting to attract strong and diverse students,
including students from community colleges, (c) providing generous student
stipends to cover tuition and fees; (d) expanding the current 4-year or 5-year
programs by articulating a third pathway, a new 5-year sequence for
undergraduates to earn a masters degree; (e) enhancing the program with special
course offerings in science and mathematics and with summer internship
opportunities for research, curriculum and professional development in concert
with William and Mary student/faculty research and other funded projects; (f)
providing innovative and extensive follow-up mentoring and support for
graduates, and (g) implementing a comprehensive evaluation to provide a rigorous
evidence base for the program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Noyce Scholars Program
is increasing the numbers of students from STEM disciplines entering the
teaching profession and the diversity of candidates, including more students
from under-represented racial, ethnic, gender, geographic, and socioeconomic
groups, and those with disabilities. The 33 Noyce Scholars supported by the
project are licensed in biology, chemistry, computer science, earth science,
mathematics or physics and are impacting the achievement of more than 6,000
middle and high school students. After the end of the funding period, the
College of William and Mary is committed to sustaining the program elements and
expanding collaboration, recruitment and follow-up activities to other critical
shortage areas.