* 0833075
* Workshop: Networking Across the Profession to Better Use Cyberspace Tools For Discovery-Based Learning (Seatlle, WA, June 14, 2008)
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2008,07/31/2008
* Karlene Hoo, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Suhada Jayasuriya
* 07/31/2008
* USD 27,270.00

The proposed project is to convene a workshop for NSF Cyber Enabled Discoveries
and Innovations(CDI) Initiative. The workshop will be held at The Westin Hotel,
located in downtown Seattle, WA, on June 14, 2008, from 8:00 am to 3:30 pm. The
objective of the workshop is two fold. First, the workshop is to introduce the
CDI initiative to the participants using a format of invited presentations,
breakout discussions, and a question and answer session. Through the interactive
workshop, potential principal investigators will have a
deeper&lt;br/&gt;understanding of the scope and purpose of the CDI initiative.
The second objective is to obtain feedback from workshop participants regarding
how researchers from diverse backgrounds can partner to better respond to the
CDI initiative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The seminar portion of the workshop will
consist of 3 invited presentations. The invited speakers are John White - USTAR
professor of neurophysiology at Univ. Utah, Bradford Hawkins, professor of
ecology and evolutionary biology at Univ. California Irvine, and Michael Glantz,
social scientist with expertise in climate - society interactions at the
National Center for Atmospheric Research. These three speakers are complementary
to the disciplines that attend the ACC. The number of participants is estimated
to be no more than 40. Professor Karlene A. Hoo of Texas Tech University will
chair the workshop and Professors Jay Farrell and John Chiasson will serve as
advisors to the Chair for the workshop and lead the breakout discussion
sessions. The breakout sessions will report back on questions such as "what
application problems will benefit the CDI initiative" and how does a topic fit
with the concept of computational thinking. Discussions resulting from the
breakout sessions will be reported at the workshop and in a report to NSF.
Finally, there will be an NSF question and answer
session.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit The workshop offers a premier
opportunity for the participants that attend ACC and others who choose to attend
the workshop to find out about new research developments in computational
thinking and transformative thinking in other disciplines. The workshop also
offers a forum for the participants to interact and conceive new research
directions and partnerships that create revolutionary science and engineering
that are value&lt;br/&gt;adding to the CDI
initiative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact The workshop provides the
participants with opportunities to interact with researchers of different
backgrounds to foster computational thinking and promote brainstorming of
research ideas that will be responsive to the CDI initiative. The workshop also
allows participants to cogitate on critical educational issues that will be
needed to complement&lt;br/&gt;the transformative research directions. The
workshop will make every effort to include participation of new researchers
(students and post doctoral associates) and underrepresented groups of
researchers to enhance diversity. Dissemination of the workshop results using
the internet will permit sharing the results with the public.