* 0833593
* Collaborative Research: ARI-MA: TENSIONED FLUID METASTABLE STATE SPECIAL NUCLEAR MATERIAL DETECTOR
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2009
* Leslie Braby, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 08/31/2009
* USD 142,000.00

Collaborative Research: ARI-MA: Tensioned Fluid Metastable State Special Nuclear
Material Detector&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to
develop novel, transformational impact, low-cost, effective, portable particle
detector systems to detect highly enriched uranium and other special nuclear
materials. Seed funding-sponsored research reveals that "tensioned" metastable
states in materials potentially offer unique, unsurpassed capabilities for
detection. The approach is to develop a theoretical foundation of interaction of
nuclear particles with fluids in metastable states. Prototype device designs
will be fabricated and assessed experimentally versus state-of-the-art systems
for sensitivity and selectivity for neutron vs. gamma vs. alpha vs. fission
product detection. Qualification of operation under American National Standards
Institute standard test environments will be performed.&lt;br/&gt;The main
intellectual merit of this project will be a transformation in highly enriched
uranium and other special nuclear materials detection methods by paving the way
to novel, low cost, compact to large, high efficiency, readily adaptable and
portable detectors. Scientific merit will be attained through the advancement of
the fundamental understanding of tensioned fluids and detection
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;Addressing the broader impact, the diverse research group
includes two major university systems, a Historically Black Colleges and
Universities institution and an inner city high school. The project will provide
training and educational experiences to students from high school to PhD.
Benefits to the society include progress in addressing the problem of nuclear
threat detection and strengthened partnerships for teaching and research. The
new knowledge and equipment will be employed in academic courses. As allowable,
research results will be disseminated through journal and conference papers and
student presentations .