* 0833644
* RDE-RAD: Collaborative Research: Ohio's STEM Ability Alliance (OSAA): STEM Degrees and Careers for Ohioans with Disabilities
* EDU,EES
* 12/01/2008,11/30/2017
* Michele Wheatly, Wright State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 11/30/2017
* USD 1,498,634.00

"RDE-RAD: Collaborative Research: Ohio's STEM Ability Alliance (OSAA): STEM
Degrees and Careers for Ohioans with Disabilities" will increase the quantity
and quality of students with disabilities receiving associate, baccalaureate and
graduate degrees in STEM disciplines and their entry into the STEM workforce.
This collaborative project includes the following partners: Wright State
University, the Ohio State University, Sinclair Community College, Columbus
State Community College and numerous high schools in the Dayton and Columbus
regions of Ohio.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of the project is to
increase the quality and quantity of students with disabilities receiving
associate, baccalaureate and graduate degrees in STEM and entering the STEM
workforce, with the following specific three numerical
goals:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Increase recruitment of high school students with
disabilities (from a pool of 2000) and transition to STEM majors in OSAA
community college and university partner institutions by 20% through student
learning communities and mentoring opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2.
Increase retention and graduation rates (associates, baccalaureate and graduate
degrees) for existing STEM students with disabilities in OSAA's community
college and university partner institutions from 10% to ~20% through student
learning communities, mentoring (electronic and internships), and individualized
STEM advisement.&lt;br/&gt;3. Increase successful entry rates of OSAA STEM
graduates (associates, baccalaureate and graduate) with disabilities into STEM
graduate programs or STEM employment by 5% per year (from 2007 baseline
measures) through focusing on employment issues in student learning communities,
industry internships and parallel employer education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
evaluation team for this collaborative project includes two independent
evaluators, Dr. Dianna Newman, the Director of the Evaluation Consortium and
Professor of Educational and Counseling Psychology at the State University of
New York, Albany, and Dr. Jeffrey White, an Assistant Professor of Education at
Ashland University. Dr. James Altschuld, Emeritus faculty at the Ohio State
University will serve as an on-site evaluation team
member.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dissemination of project deliverables and reports
will focus on institutions in Ohio region as well as sharing the model with a
national post-secondary audience via a web-based diffusion portal, presentations
at national conferences and publications in professional journals.