* 0833496
* Strategies: ACTIVATE: Advancing Computing and Technology Interest and innoVation through Teacher Education
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2013
* Thomas Cortina, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Reed
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,486,742.00

The Computer Science (CS) community believes that it has an important role to
play in educating the public about the excitement of Computer Science (CS) and
the lucrative and interesting career opportunities this field offers. In western
Pennsylvania, most high school students are not being provided an opportunity to
learn about the science of computing nor about the breadth of the field. The aim
is to approach this challenge in two ways: (a) provide workshops for teacher
development in computational thinking as well as innovative strategies and
techniques for engaging students at the high school and middle school level, and
(b) provide training and materials for participating teachers to allow them to
present information to other teachers and administrators about computer science
during in-service days and similar professional meetings. The project will
target STEM teachers in the Appalachian Region, including western Pennsylvania,
West Virginia and eastern Ohio, where many schools lack essential resources for
teacher development and have little support for special programs to interest
students in STEM careers. It is believe that the end result of the strategy will
be an increase in the number of students enrolling in computing and other STEM
disciplines in college and subsequent high-tech employment in the Appalachian
region in the coming decade.