* 0833750
* ARI-MA: Collaborative Research: An Experimental and Computational Study of Actinide Detection and Identification by Engineered Mesoporous Sensor Materials for Actinide Forensics
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2009
* Peidong Yang, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 08/31/2009
* USD 275,000.00

ARI-MA: Collaborative Research: An Experimental and Computational Study of
Actinide Detection and Identification by Engineered Mesoporous Sensor Materials
for Actinide Forensics

The objective is to develop new materials for detection and identification of
actinide isotopes and fission products from nuclear processing, reprocessing,
and high level nuclear wastes. An experimental and computational project
relevant to actinide forensic chemistry through study of actinide
identification, separation and detection by engineered mesoporous materials is
proposed. The focus is the interaction of actinides and fission products with
engineered mesoporous materials of its kind in bringing together recent advances
in bulk and interfacial sciences. The intellectual merit of the proposed study
is the novel approach to actinide and fission product detection, separation and
sequestration through computational nanoscience and interfacial science. The
proposal brings together the expertise of nano materials chemistry (P. Yang),
actinide chemistry (H. Nitsche) and relativistic quantum chemistry (K.
Balasubramanian) and will culminate in a better understanding of mesoscale
complexity at interfaces. The project goals include the design of: mesoporous
materials and functionalized mesoporous substrates to selectively separate and
identify actinides, selective chemical receptor sites on the surface of
mesoporous materials that are capable of selectively separating or detecting the
desired actinide element, and mesoporous materials with selectivity for the
desired oxidation states of the actinides. The proposed work promises to have
several broader impacts. It is interdisciplinary as it encompasses broad
collaborative experimental-theory efforts that combine interfacial chemistry and
the design of suitable functional receptors assisted by state-of-the-art
relativistic computations. The proposal promotes the training of graduate
students and postdoctoral students with interdisciplinary orientation in
nuclear, materials and computational chemistry as well as university-DOE
National lab interactions through educational and minority outreach efforts.