* 0833984
* Albert Einstein Distinguished Educator Fellowship Program
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Vance Ablott, Triangle Coalition for Science and Technology Education
* Standard Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 08/31/2010
* USD 998,675.00

Intellectual Merit: This proposal seeks funding to support the continuation of
the National Science Foundation?s participation in the Albert Einstein
Distinguished Educator Fellows Program. The 1994 Albert Einstein Distinguished
Educator Fellowship Act gave official responsibility for overall administration
of the program to the Department of Energy (DOE). The Triangle Coalition manages
the program on behalf of DOE. The fellowship program is designed to provide
opportunities for teachers to work on educational issues and/or programs in a
federal agency or congressional office. It is guided by the following
objectives:

? To provide outstanding elementary and secondary mathematics, science and
technology education teachers the opportunity to bring to Congress and
appropriate branches of the Federal government the insights, extensive
knowledge, and practical experience of classroom teachers; ? To increase the
understanding, communication, and cooperation between Congress and Federal
agencies; ? To increase the understanding, communication and cooperation between
the Federal government and the science, technology and mathematics education
community; and ? To gain insights and understanding of national educational
issues, which can then be transferred back to the classroom.

The program promotes professional growth in STEM areas; fosters the exchange of
ideas that are relevant to STEM education at the national and state levels
through conferences, meetings, workshops, and presentations; provides
opportunities for teachers to have input at levels were STEM policymaking
decisions are made; and awards outstanding teachers for their contributions to
STEM education.

Funding for this proposal is sought for a three-year period to support the
participation of up to eight Fellows for each year of the project duration.
These Fellows will be guests of the Foundation for eleven months beginning
September 2008 through July 2009. The following directorates/offices at NSF in
which Fellows will serve are determined by the individual Program Officers and
may vary from year to year. Beginning September 2008, the Division of Research
on Learning in Formal and Informal Settings; Division of Graduate Education;
Integrative Graduate Education and Research Traineeship; Polar Programs;
Directorate of Geosciences; Office of International Science and Engineering; and
the Office of Cyberinfrastructure will host Fellows in FY09.

Broader Impacts: The proposer outlined a wide range of activities for the
Fellows that involve other federal agencies, governmental officials, and
business partners. It is likely that the Foundation will benefit from classroom
experiences shared by these teachers during their tenure at NSF. The program
offers opportunities for teacher to make connections between the larger
policymaking body and educational research, thereby, resulting in a win-win
situation for both teachers and the Foundation. Additionally, the program
provides opportunities for teachers to learn from and build networks with other
teachers nationally and internationally.

