* 0833111
* Teaching Excellence At College for High Achievement in West Virginia (TEACH-WV)
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2015
* Michelle Withers, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 04/30/2015
* USD 783,728.00

This scholarship program is recruiting freshmen and sophomore science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) majors to become credentialed
secondary STEM teachers through a collaborative effort by the WV University
College of Human Resources and Education, Eberly College of Arts and Sciences,
the WV Center for Professional Development, and the WV Regional Education
Service Agencies (RESA) III, V, VII, and VIII. The project provides scholarships
for 20 students to complete the Benedum Collaborative Five-year teacher
education program. Scholarship recipients earn a STEM bachelor's degree, as well
as a master's degree in education upon completing the program. The program
objectives are to: 1) Increase retention of students who traditionally leave
STEM majors; 2) Attract freshmen and sophomore students to elementary and
secondary STEM teacher certification; 3) Provide a continuum of mentoring
services through collaborative advising from STEM content mentors and STEM
education mentors; 4) Increase the number of graduates with 5-12 STEM education
certification, and 5) provide a supportive environment for the new teachers. The
pedagogical strategies, specifically teaching science content in the context of
societal issues through Science, Technology and Society (STS) approaches, appeal
to underrepresented groups, thus expanding the pool of those who could
potentially become interested in STEM fields. A focus on the need for 5-12 STEM
teachers, along with assignments to encourage STEM students to "think like
teachers", are utilized to encourage these students' interest in teaching as a
career.