* 0833969
* The Signing Math Dictionary for Kids Project
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Judy Vesel, TERC Inc
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 08/31/2012
* USD 448,005.00

The Signing Math Dictionary for Kids Project builds upon two prior awards
(HRD-0095392 and HRD-0533057) to create the Signing Math Dictionary. The primary
institution, TERC Inc, is partnering with Vcom3D Inc to use the SigningAvatar
accessibility software to:&lt;br/&gt;1) Research and develop an illustrated
interactive 3D dictionary of mathematics terms and definitions for elementary
and middle-grade students who are deaf and hard of hearing and whose first
language is sign. &lt;br/&gt;2) Evaluate the extent to which use of the
dictionary furthers understanding of standards-based mathematics content,
command of the language of mathematics, and the ability to study mathematics
independently. &lt;br/&gt;3) Create a more robust sign/facial expression/body-
space lexicon of signed mathematics terms that other developers can use when
generating signed mathematics materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Signing Math
Dictionary will be developed, evaluated and promoted to serve elementary and
middle school students who are deaf or hard of hearing and who first language is
sign. The following schools and programs have already agreed to participate in
the project:&lt;br/&gt;- Bruce Street School for the Deaf, Newark, NJ
&lt;br/&gt;- Countrywide Program for Students Who Are Deaf/Hard of Hearing, Town
&amp; Country, MO &lt;br/&gt;- Eisenhower Elementary School, Davenport, IA
&lt;br/&gt;- Hinsdale South High School (grades 6-8), Darien, IL &lt;br/&gt;-
Kinzie School, Chicago, IL &lt;br/&gt;- Maine Mathematics and Science Alliance,
Augusta, ME &lt;br/&gt;- St. Francis de Sales School for the Deaf, Brooklyn, NY
&lt;br/&gt;- Texas School for the Deaf, Austin, Texas &lt;br/&gt;- The Learning
Center for Deaf Children, Framingham, MA &lt;br/&gt;- Washington School for the
Deaf, Vancouver, WA&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed dictionary will offer
students an indispensable learning tool and teachers a library of recognized
signs for studying mathematics ideas with their students. It will include at
least 1,000 key mathematics terms and will be the first tool of its kind to
bring mathematics learning to life using avatar characters that sign.