* 0833567
* RDE-RAD: EAST Alliance for Students with Disabilities in STEM- Phase 2
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2008,05/31/2014
* Samantha Langley-Turnbaugh, University of Southern Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 05/31/2014
* USD 2,759,536.00

The EAST Alliance for Students with Disabilities in STEM ? Phase 2 project
??seeks to build upon prior accomplishments [EAST award, HRD-0333316] and,
through a focused approach with regional partners, create a comprehensive
?Pipeline of supports,? which will serve as a model for institutes of higher
education nationally? that are advancing high school, undergraduate, and
graduate students with disabilities in STEM. The primary institution is the
University of Southern Maine, partnering with three associate degree granting
institutions (Southern Maine Community College, Central Maine Community College,
Landmark College), and four high schools (Portland?s Deering, Casco Bay and
Portland high schools, and Bonny Eagle high school which serves the communities
of Buxton, Hollis, Standish and Limington). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two
primary goals of the project are : Increasing the number of students with
disabilities that enroll in STEM majors, specifically natural, biological,
chemical, and physical sciences, technology, engineering and mathematics, at the
primary and partner institutions of post-secondary education, and Increasing the
number of undergraduate and graduate students who successfully complete
associate degrees, baccalaureate degrees and graduate degrees in STEM
disciplines and enter the STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The refined
?steps for success? include two primary foci: Targeted STEM learning experiences
for high school students with disabilities, and providing STEM academic support
and research experiences for undergraduate students with disabilities. High
school interventions will include field-based science research institutes for
high school juniors and seniors, college credit coursework in math for high
school seniors, and professional educational development for high school math,
science and special education teachers. &lt;br/&gt;College level interventions
will include a learning community for freshman and transfer students, a freshman
course in academic self-management, a research course for sophomores and
juniors, undergraduate research fellowships in labs, the use of a ?student
support team? integrating student support from project and university staff, and
a series of faculty educational trainings on how to implement ?universal design
for education? principles to facilitate student
success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be evaluated by a team from the
Education Development Center, led by Dr. Babette Moeller, using a mixed method
approach to conduct both formative and summative evaluations. Dissemination will
focus on institutions in the Southern Maine region as well as sharing the model
with a national post-secondary
audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;