* 0833158
* HBCU-RISE: Strengthening the Ph.D. Program in Materials Science and Engineering Program at Tuskegee University
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Shaik Jeelani, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Richard N. Smith
* 09/30/2011
* USD 1,000,000.00

Tuskegee University's Center for Advanced Materials (T-CAM), is requesting HBCU-
RISE support to further strengthened the Ph.D. Program by providing additional
depth and breadth to the curriculum; incorporating new areas of research;
supporting start-up funds for junior faculty; and providing professional
development activities for doctoral students that includes skills development in
several areas as well as internships in external laboratories. Intellectual
merit of this proposal lies in the fact that the involvement of students in the
cutting-edge research in advanced materials, particularly, nano-bio materials,
and the offering of a vide range of new courses, will lead to the production of
graduates who can successfully handle materials development challenges posed by
the future technological advancements. T-CAM contributes significantly to the
basic and applied research in Materials Science and Engineering (MSE). The T-CAM
faculty members, who support research and education of a large number of
minority undergraduate and graduate students, have developed state-of-the-art
facilities to conduct research in many aspects of advanced materials and
acquired expertise in chemical synthesis and analysis, processing/manufacturing,
performance evaluation, and modeling of advanced materials and structures.
Therefore the broader impacts of this project include production of a large
number of African American graduates at the Ph.D. level, in emerging areas of
materials science and engineering with excellent communication and interpersonal
skills developed through industrial experience and international exposure which
will result in a profound impact on the economic development of the state and
the region.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;