* 0833675
* Crossing Boundaries and Exploring Biodiversity Conservation Using Information Technologies
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2013
* James MaKinster, Hobart and William Smith Colleges
* Standard Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 07/31/2013
* USD 1,418,504.00

Crossing Boundaries will provide middle and high school students with the
knowledge, skills, motivation, and inspiration to use information and
communication technologies (ICT) in addressing biodiversity conservation issues
in regional and international contexts. The project will entail curriculum
development, sustained teacher professional development, and opportunities for
students to see scientific and environmental careers in action. Using geospatial
technology, secondary students will analyze biodiversity conservation issues in
their local or regional environment as well as in the Brazilian Amazon and in
Chiapas, Mexico. A range of ICT options will enable students to interact with
scientists, conservation professionals, undergraduate interns, and graduate
students who are working on biodiversity-related research in international
settings. Through production of web-mediated communications, students will use
highly engaging technologies to collaborate with peers. Students will learn the
analytic and technical skills necessary for analysis of environmental issues in
local and international contexts. Project evaluation will determine the
effectiveness of international computer-mediated communication and exploration
in providing transformative experiences intended to bolster student interest in
science, provide new perspectives on ICT-related career options, and deepen
students' awareness of their role as global citizens. This project will benefit
secondary students in central New York, especially those living in economically
depressed rural or urban settings traditionally underrepresented in ICT fields.
The relevant, project-based learning experiences will motivate students in
environmental science courses for underperforming students, helping them succeed
in school. Teachers will develop technological and pedagogical competence in
ICT, enabling them to engage students in technology-intensive projects that will
build global awareness and perspectives of career options.