* 0833940
* 2008 Tribology Gordon Research Conference
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2009
* Mark Robbins, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 04/30/2009
* USD 15,000.00

This award will provide partial support for attendees of the 2008 Gordon
Conference on Tribology: Advancing Interfacial Science &amp; Engineering to be
held 6-11 July 2008, Colby College, Maine, USA. Tribology is the study of
friction, wear &amp; lubrication. It is an extremely complex and multi-
disciplinary field that involves processes over a wide range of size and time
scales. The biennial Gordon Research Conference on Tribology is a unique forum
for gathering experts in disparate fields to advance our understanding of the
complex problems tribology presents. Leading scientists and engineers from
universities, national laboratories and industry meet with young scientists and
newcomers to tribology for one week of formal and informal discussions on state-
of-the art issues. This opportunity for a lively and open exchange of new ideas
shapes the future of the field. Some of the most difficult and compelling
challenges in tribology concern the nature of the buried interface where
surfaces slide past each other. The 2008 Gordon Conference will emphasize
fundamental new approaches for revealing the physics, mechanics and chemistry of
these interfaces.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Tribology has a critical impact on all
aspects of our quality of life, health, wealth and livelihood. Controlling
friction and wear can either inhibit or enable technological advances from non-
ferrous engines to body prostheses and from micromachines to nanotechnological
devices. The 2008 Gordon Conference will emphasize phenomena at buried
interfaces. New fundamental understanding of these interfaces will have a
profound impact on tribological applications in many industries. The Gordon
Conference is a key mechanism for linking the basic sciences with an engineering
discipline of significant importance to the U.S. and World economies. Tribology
advances require a constant flux of new ideas between these researchers and
disciplines. The conference also provides opportunities for young investigators,
students and those new to tribology to learn from those with a deep
understanding of tribological problems and cutting edge approaches. This
proposal focuses on providing support for conference fees and/or travel expenses
that will enable key participants to attend the Gordon Conference. We will
strive for gender balance and also favor under-represented ethnic minority or
disabled individuals that apply. Support from this grant will play a
particularly important role in allowing attendance of students, postdoctoral
fellows and junior faculty that would otherwise not have
funds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;