* 0833962
* Workshop:  Doctoral Consortium for ACM Conference on Computers and Accessibility
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/2008,04/30/2009
* John Black, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 04/30/2009
* USD 28,542.00

This is funding to support a consortium (workshop) of approximately 12 promising
doctoral students from the United States and abroad, along with about 5
distinguished research faculty. The event will take place on Sunday, October 12,
immediately preceding and in conjunction with the 2008 ACM ASSETS Conference, to
be held Monday through Wednesday on October 13-15, 2008, in Halifax, Nova
Scotia, Canada, and sponsored by the ACM Special Interest Group on Computers and
Accessibility (SIGACCESS). The ASSETS conference is the premier forum for
presenting research results and innovations in software and technology designed
to address the special needs of people with disabilities of all kinds.
Researchers and developers from both academia and industry around the world will
meet to exchange ideas and present reports on the latest work relating to
speech, motor, hearing, and vision impairments, cognitive limitations, emotional
and learning disabilities, and aging. A key component of building this community
is through its youth. The ASSETS 08 doctoral consortium will provide an
opportunity for graduate students from diverse backgrounds (computing,
engineering, psychology, architecture, etc.) to come together and explore their
research interests in an interdisciplinary workshop, under the guidance of a
panel of distinguished experts in the field, so that they can see the broader
spectrum of research and development approaches to assistive technologies and
universal usability, and also experience the community in which they can pursue
their endeavors. Student participants will make formal presentations of their
work during the consortium, and will receive constructive feedback from a
faculty panel. The feedback is designed to help students understand and
articulate how their work is positioned relative to related research, whether
their topics are adequately focused for thesis research projects, whether their
methods are correctly chosen and applied, and whether their results are
appropriately analyzed and presented. Thus, the consortium will help shape
ongoing and future research projects aimed at assistive technologies and
universal access, will promote scholarship and networking among new researchers
in this emerging interdisciplinary area, and will expose these promising young
researchers to a larger community. Evaluation of the consortium will be
conducted, and the results made available to the organizers of future such
events. A session has been set aside during the main conference to allow
doctoral consortium participants to present to the entire conference, and one
student from the doctoral consortium will be selected to deliver the closing
plenary presentation. More information is available online at
http://www.sigaccess.org/assets08.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
doctoral consortium will help expand the participation of young researchers
pursuing graduate studies in this field, by providing them an opportunity to
gain wider exposure in the community for their innovative work and to obtain
feedback and guidance from senior members of the research community. It will
further help foster a sense of community among these young researchers, by
allowing them to create a social network both among themselves and with senior
researchers at a critical stage in their professional development. Because the
students and faculty constitute a diverse group across a variety of dimensions,
including nationality/cultural and scientific discipline, the students? horizons
are broadened to the future benefit of the field.