* 0833508
* Student Paper Competition at the 2008 30th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Societ
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2008,05/31/2009
* Laura Wolf, Institute of Electrical & Electronics Engineers, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 05/31/2009
* USD 10,000.00

CBET 0827850&lt;br/&gt;Wolf&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support the
30th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and
Biology Society (EMBS) to be held August 20-24, 2008 at the Convention Center in
Vancouver, BC, Canada. The mission of the EMBS of the IEEE is to advance the
application of engineering sciences and technology to medicine and biology,
promote the profession, and provide global leadership for the benefit of its
members and humanity by disseminating knowledge, setting standards, fostering
professional development, and recognizing excellence. To support its mission,
EMBS of the IEEE has been organizing annual conferences of the engineering in
medicine and biology society for past 30 years. The general theme of the IEEE
EMBS 2008 Conference is "Personalized Healthcare through Technology" covering
the broad spectrum of biomedical and clinical engineering and physics, to
medical and clinical applications. Specific themes of the Conference will
include Biomedical Signal Processing, Neural Engineering; Neuromuscular Systems;
Rehabilitation Engineering, and Healthcare Information Systems; Telemedicine.
Aspects of transfer from research to industry will also be a focus of the
conference. It is expected that more than 2200 scientists, engineers and
students will be attending this conference from all over the world. About
100-150 papers are expected to be submitted to the Student Paper Competition.
This Competition promotes not only education within bioengineering disciplines
but fosters the next generation of bioengineers by providing a unique
opportunity to students to meet and network with the leading biomedical
professionals and scientists in the world. The Competition plays a crucial role
in recognizing the talents of women and minorities in the field of
bioengineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the Biomedical
Engineering Program and Office of International Science and Engineering.