* 0833953
* Determination of manufactured nanoparticle toxicity using novel rapid screening methods
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,11/30/2011
* Yiling Hong, University of Dayton
* Standard Grant
*  Ashok S. Sangani
* 11/30/2011
* USD 396,605.00

CBET-0833953&lt;br/&gt;Rowe&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Objectives: The use of
engineered nanoparticles (NPs) in commercially available products is rapidly
increasing. There is, however, a dearth of information regarding the potential
toxicity of these NPs to humans and the environment. In addition, because of
their unique properties, some NPs have toxicity characteristics that are
different from larger forms of the same material. This has prompted scientific
journals, independent governmental reviews, and the popular press to call for a
rapid and cost-effective method to determine NP toxicity. Current nanotoxicity
tests utilize vertebrate systems that are expensive to maintain, have long data
generation timescales, and do not address the potential of NPs to differentially
affect different organisms. Here we propose a rapid, cost effective approach to
determine the toxicity of manufactured NPs in a range of model
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Approach: We propose to determine the toxicity of
well-characterized NPs that are commercially available or produced at University
of Dayton. Using a three-pronged approach we will 1) determine the toxicity of
NPs to ecologically- and economically-important bacteria, 2) assess the acute
and multi-generational effects of NP exposure using Drosophila melanogaster, and
3) determine the cellular fate of NPs and tease apart the cytotoxic and
genotoxic effects of NP exposure to mammalian cell
lines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Expected results: The results of this project will
fill a much-publicized void in information pertaining to the potentially toxic
effects of manufactured NPs. These data will elucidate the cellular fate of NPs
upon exposure to living organisms and determine the organismal level response to
this exposure in different organisms. The increase in toxicity information
generated by this proposal will greatly enhance the assessment of risk
associated with products containing engineered NPs, and will improve consumer
confidence in a technology that is estimated to surpass the impact of the
industrial revolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Supplemental keywords: Bacteroides
thetaiotaomicron, Sinorhizobium meliloti, Bacillus subtilis, Escherichia coli,
K12, mouse embryonic fibroblasts, MEF, mouse embryonic stem cells, MES,