* 0833375
* Phylogeography of Capuchins, Squirrel Monkeys and Owl Monkeys: A Critical Comparative Framework for Studying Evolution, Behavioral Ecology, and Conservation in Neotropical Primates
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2008,03/31/2012
* Jessica Lynch, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 03/31/2012
* USD 249,897.00

Squirrel monkeys, owl monkeys and capuchin monkeys, collectively called the
Cebines, are of particular interest to anthropologists and behavioral ecologists
because of diverse social organization and activity patterns, a varied capacity
for social learning, and (in the case of capuchin monkeys) parallels to apes and
humans in tool use, large brain size, and strategic thinking. They are also the
most important model Neotropical primates used in biomedical research, and have
been key in our understanding of malarial infection, color vision, cocaine
addiction, and ovarian function. However, the utility of the Cebines as model
systems could be enhanced greatly if we understood the evolutionary
relationships among current populations. In fact, to date, there is no well-
supported molecular or morphological hypothesis of evolutionary relationships
among populations or species within these genera, and so present interpretations
of variation in their behavior, physiology, morphology and life history
characteristics lack an evolutionary framework. For example, we know some
capuchin populations use tools in the wild and others do not, but we do not know
enough about capuchin phylogenetics to estimate how many times or how long ago
tool use evolved, or what physical or life history characteristics have evolved
in tandem with the acquisition of tool use. One important contribution of this
project will be to provide an explicit evolutionary framework to orient the
increasing number of researchers in their biomedical, behavioral ecology, and
conservation biology studies of these taxa. To this end, using a comparative
approach, this research project will create the first detailed molecular
phylogenies and biogeographic analyses for the Cebines. These genera are
widespread and sympatric across much of Latin America. We will sequence DNA from
specimens across the entire geographic range, and then use statistical
phylogenetic methods to generate robust phylogenetic hypotheses for each genus.
We will examine the pattern and distribution of mitochondrial haplotypes to test
biogeography hypotheses using a historical and paleogeological framework. Our
protocol is 1) to extract, amplify and sequence three mitochondrial genes from
Cebine tissues across Latin America; 2) to reconstruct phylogenetic
relationships within and across each genus using parsimony, likelihood and
Bayesian approaches; 3) to use fossil calibrations to produce a time tree for
Cebines, and 4) to conduct biogeographic and comparative analyses within this
framework.

This research will resolve long-standing questions in physical anthropology
about the phylogenetic relationships of the Neotropical primates. This project
will also impact the field of biogeography in both theory and methodology
through our use of new laboratory methods for DNA extraction and amplification
from degraded tissues. Our optimization of protocols for DNA extraction and
amplification from museum tissues can serve the scientific community, by making
these types of specimen more accessible and economical for use in scientific
inquiry. At least three areas of data analysis in this study are cutting edge
and will be of significant influence to both anthropologists and biologists
working on phylogenetics and biogeography. These include our use of new Bayesian
modeling applications for estimating divergence time; our joint estimation of
alignment and phylogeny for sequences containing indels; and our comparison of
the efficacy of several new event-based and model-based techniques for inferring
biogeographic history. This research will provide international field and
laboratory experiences for both undergraduates and undergraduates. It will also
enhance molecular lab techniques and data analysis techniques in the
international primatology community through strong collaborative research among
U.S. and Latin American researchers. An important applied aspect of this
research is the development of a rigorous, quantitative assessment tool to
measure the distribution of biodiversity of the target taxa across populations,
to be used for conservation priority assessment of widely distributed taxa.