* 0833773
* COMPUGIRLS: A Culturally Relevant Technology Program for Girls
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2008,06/30/2013
* Kimberly Scott, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 06/30/2013
* USD 879,425.00

Arizona State University (ASU) in collaboration with Phoenix Union High School
District, Scottsdale Union High School District, Roosevelt District, Boys and
Girls Club of the East Valley-Sacaton, Intel, Applied Learning Technologies
Institute, Dynamic Educational Leadership for Teachers and Administrators
(D.E.L.T.A.), ASU's School of Computing &amp; Informatics, ASU's Video Game
Design Camp, and Arizona Council of Black Engineers and Scientists Computer Camp
(ACBES), are conducting a culturally relevant multimedia program strategy,
COMPUGIRLS. Drawing on three well-documented frameworks, Culturally Relevant
Pedagogical practices (CRP), Social Justice Youth Development Framework, and
Future Time Perspective, this after-school and summer program fosters in IT/STEM
related outcomes for 100 adolescent (grades 8-12) girls from several Phoenix
high needs districts and schools. COMPUGIRLS takes place at two sites, ASU and
the Boys and Girls Club of the East Valley-Sacaton. Already, 40 girls have
completed one-year of the program. This project expands the program to include
another 60 students, their parents, ASU graduate students and in-service
teachers, and peer mentors. COMPUGIRLS provides hands-on technology experiences
that include internships, Advanced Placement credit, conference and community
presentations, and parent workshops that will ultimately develop participants'
techno-social analytic skills for real world problems.&lt;br/&gt;As part of
their experience, students visit ASU. For many, this is the first time they have
been on a college campus. Students participate in 6 multimedia courses: 1)
social justice and the media, 2) SCRATCH, user-friendly computer programming, 3)
modding SIMS, designing, modifying, and troubleshooting simplified simulations,
4) choice of 3-D, programming, and character design, 5) advanced choice of 3-D,
programming, and character design, and 6) teamwork to create neighborhoods in
Sim City using all skills learned. Participants' projects will be disseminated
semi-annually through community ceremonies, web pages, and
presentations.&lt;br/&gt;The project builds upon a pilot program (Summer 2007 to
present) that accommodated 40 girls from under-resourced districts in the
Phoenix metro area. The COMPUGIRLS program is a two-year curriculum using
multimedia activities as a means of encouraging computational thinking. The
project advances understanding of how to encourage girls (including girls from
underrepresented groups) to pursue ICT fields. It builds upon established
research and includes evaluation of the impact on participants' computational
thinking, techno-social analytical skills, attitudes about and interest in
pursuing further education and careers in ICT/STEM fields. The goals
are:&lt;br/&gt;1) To use multimedia activities as a means of encouraging
computational thinking; &lt;br/&gt;2) To enhance girls' techno-social analytical
skills; and &lt;br/&gt;3) To provide the building blocks for Arizona girls from
underrepresented groups to successfully traverse an ICT and/or any work force
roadmap. &lt;br/&gt;The evaluation of the project consists of a mixed-methods
approach (qualitative and quantitative), incorporating the use of survey
instruments, student journals, focus groups, interviews, document review,
observation and an intensive case study. A comparison/control group is
incorporated into the pre- and post-test design to determine the extent the
participants' skills, knowledge, attitudes and behaviors changed relative to
where they would have been without participation in the project.