* 0833247
* RDE-DEI:  ACCESS TO ADVANCEMENT:  An Audio Exploration of the National Effort to Increase the Role of Women with Disabilities in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2010
* Glenn Busby, WAMC Northeast Public Radio
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 12/31/2010
* USD 283,900.00

The RDE-DEI: ACCESS TO ADVANCEMENT: An Audio Exploration of the National Effort
to Increase the Role of Women with Disabilities in Science, Technology,
Engineering and Mathematics is an Information Dissemination project builds upon
several of WAMC Northeast Public Radio's previous NSF-funded projects focusing
on dissemination about women in STEM (HRD-0114472, HRD-0225030, HRD-0332765,
HRD-0436130, and HRD-0631603). WAMC's long-term goal for this project is for its
nationally-distributed radio programs to play an important information
dissemination role in the national effort to broaden the participation and
achievement of women with disabilities in all fields of STEM education and
associated professional careers. In the shorter-term--over the two year period
of the project--WAMC's goals are: 1) to extend to significant national radio
audiences, and to target audiences of teachers, professors, researchers,
guidance counselors, institutional and organizational leaders, parents and young
women, awareness and information about products, pedagogical approaches,
teaching and learning practices, and research for broadening the participation
of women with disabilities in STEM education and careers; and, 2) to introduce
national radio and target audiences to fascinating and dedicated women and girls
with disabilities who have been involved with these products, approaches and
practices; relating their individual stories and personal
achievements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;WAMC anticipates the following broad impacts
associated with this project:&lt;br/&gt;1. Reaching millions of radio listeners
in the general public, who will hear the radio stories and thus obtain in-depth
information about projects and programs working to increase the participation of
women and girls with disabilities in STEM; and about the educational goals,
career paths or achievements of individual women with disabilities in
STEM;&lt;br/&gt;2. Reaching and educating a targeted audience of young women
with an emphasis on reaching and educating young women with disabilities through
the radio stories, who will have the opportunity to learn that STEM education
and careers are possible and within reach. The stories will also provide them
with in-depth information about programs that may be available to them, and
introduce them to women with disabilities who are successfully pursuing STEM
educational paths or working in STEM careers;&lt;br/&gt;3. Reaching and
educating a targeted audience of researchers, professors, teachers, guidance
counselors, institutional and organizational leaders and parents, providing them
with in-depth information about projects and programs working to increase the
participation of women and girls with disabilities in STEM, which they may use
to inform or change their own programs or practices; or pursue additional
research. They will also learn about the educational goals, career paths or
achievements of individual women with disabilities in STEM that they can share
with students, fellow educators and researchers; and&lt;br/&gt;4. Providing a
fully accessible, web-based "go-to" source (the WAMC Women in STEM website) for
the general public, all targeted audiences and members of the broadcast and
print media to access anytime for radio stories about the national effort to
increase the role of women and girls in STEM.