* 0833251
* Establishing a Supportive Environment for the Recruitment, Preparation, and Retention of the Urban Science Teacher
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2008,08/31/2015
* Mel Sabella, Chicago State University
* Standard Grant
* Nicole Bennett
* 08/31/2015
* USD 804,587.00

The Chicago State University (CSU) Robert Noyce Teacher Scholars Program is
facilitating 23 STEM undergraduates and 12 STEM professionals in becoming
effective high school science teachers in the Chicago Public School (CPS)
District through scholarships, mentoring, and induction year support. The
project seeks to: (i) encourage more science students to enter secondary
teaching and graduate through a recruitment process centered on highlighting the
professionalism of teaching and providing academic scholarships, (ii) increase
the number of highly qualified science teachers of color at CPS by conferring
more science teaching certifications through CSU's high quality science
education program, (iii) support new teachers throughout an extended induction
period to encourage retention and continued teaching improvement, (iv) use
evaluation to improve CSU's in-service and pre-service programs, and (v) involve
students in educational research to promote the professionalism of teaching and
disseminate programmatic findings to the science education research community.
Increasing student awareness of the professional nature of teaching is
accomplished through a journal club, involving students in education research
and curriculum development, and attendance at local and national conferences.
Since the science major curriculum at CSU emphasizes modern teaching techniques
and the use of inquiry in the classroom, teacher candidates leave the program
with an understanding and appreciation for how people learn. In addition, new
teachers are supported during the difficult induction years with professional
development programs, equipment and instructional support services, and outreach
efforts through the existing Science Van program, supported by the Illinois
Board of Higher Education (IBHE).