* 0833048
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Network Identification and Conceptualization of Business Groups
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2010
* Dalhia Mani, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2010
* USD 7,480.00

SES-0833048&lt;br/&gt;David Knoke&lt;br/&gt;Dalhia Mani&lt;br/&gt;University of
Minnesota-Twin Cities&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SES-0833048&lt;br/&gt;David
Knoke&lt;br/&gt;Dalhia Mani&lt;br/&gt;University of Minnesota-Twin
Cities&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A business group is a set of legally independent
firms that coordinates actions. Coordinated actions include intra-group
transfers of key personnel, knowledge, capital, and supplies. Business groups
are characteristic of most economies in the world, and control substantial
portions of most national economies. Prior research describes business groups as
murky, corrupt, and highly entrenched within networks of ties. However, the
mechanisms by which highly entrenched business groups' exercise their position
in a network of ties are unclear. In addition, the investigator's research on
the shareholding network of all publicly traded Indian firms' shows that
business groups occupy diverse network positions. While some business groups are
highly nested within the network, most are isolates or marginally nested within
the network.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Nestedness is defined as the number of actors
or ties that need to be removed to split an actor or a cluster of actors from
the rest of the network. For instance, in the Indian shareholding network,
initial research shows that to split a highly nested business group from the
rest of the network requires the removal of a minimum of 24 ties. In contrast,
marginal business groups split away from the rest of the network when one or two
actors or ties are removed. Nestedness reflects network position, and is the
result of multiple ties formed by multiple actors over time. For instance, in
the Indian shareholding network, isolate business groups can move to a highly
nested position only if they form a minimum of 24 ties with key actors in the
network. Hence nestedness is not susceptible to short term manipulations by
managers. Indeed, managers are unlikely to be aware of their group's position in
the network. Nestedness might instead manifest itself to participants in the
network as taken for granted sets of opportunities, constraints, and ways of
doing business that differ for different actors in the network. The dissertation
research addresses the following question: How do highly nested business groups
differ from isolated or marginal business groups in the opportunities and
constraints available to them? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will
address the research question through data collected from semi-structured in-
depth interviews with Indian business group managers and owners. Interviewees
will be asked to relate instances of how their group perceived and responded to
opportunities and threats in the environment. Interviews will be analyzed to
uncover thematic differences and similarities between the responses of actors at
different positions in the network. Theoretically this research is important
because it gives us insights into the mechanisms by which network position
influences behavior in the context of Indian firm ownership networks. Future
research can then compare how nestedness manifests itself in other large
networks. Also, sets of firms that operate in tandem are a powerful but
understudied phenomenon. The research helps uncover how these clusters of firms
operate and influence the economy. The practical importance is for policy
makers, investors, and activists concerned about the influence of highly
connected business groups on the economy. Research findings may enhance our
ability to provide lecture on and better understand the Indian economy. To
obtain interviews, the co-PI is also establishing affiliations with universities
and corporate governance bodies in India.