* 0833570
* Strategies : Collaborative Research: MarIneTech: STEM Preparation through Marine Engineering, Science and Technology Experiences
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Daniel Dickerson, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 12/31/2012
* USD 1,333,112.00

MarineTech will serve 60 students in grades eight through twelve, over a period
of three years, providing 144 hours of instruction and hands-on learning
experiences in the fields of marine engineering and physical sciences with a
shipbuilding focus. The program will run for eight Saturdays during academic
years, with an additional two-week academy during the summers. MarineTech's
progressive curriculum covers foundational skills and knowledge of basic
physical science as it relates to ship building, through the application of
these principles in a culminating ship design competition. The curriculum is
enriched with program activities such as field trips to shipbuilding and repair
companies, marine science museums and career day events. MarineTech concurrently
targets 60 math, science, and technology education teachers for grades eight
through twelve, each of whom will receive 40 hours of summer professional
development and 40 hours of follow-up training and support. Teachers will work
an additional 40 hours in working with their students to build underwater robots
and design and build a human powered container ship for competition.
Participating teachers will be fully trained in curriculum implementation and
will be given materials and resources necessary to replicate MarineTech
activities in their classrooms. MarineTech addresses the urgent need to enhance
under-represented students' interest and performance in STEM courses, while
fostering skills that are important prerequisites for STEM careers, particularly
in marine engineering, physical science and information technology. In the near
term, the project will incorporate activities designed to boost student scores
on academic achievement measures. However, the project also addresses the
critical shortage of qualified workers needed to sustain the ship building and
repair industry in the USA.