* 0833434
* Tech to Teaching
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2015
* Gary May, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 12/31/2015
* USD 1,000,001.00

The Tech to Teaching project is creating an infrastructure on the Georgia Tech
campus that encourages and enables undergraduate and graduate students to
effectively pursue careers in K-12 or college teaching, and is developing and
implementing programming that ensures these students succeed in their initial
years in these career paths. This effort includes steps towards the
institutional transformation of a research-extensive technical institute into an
organization that effectively promotes and supports entry to teaching careers.
The new infrastructure and programming align and adapt initiatives developed for
other Georgia Tech NSF educational programs, such as the Student and Teacher
Enhancement Partnership (STEP) GK-12 program, the Facilitating Academic Careers
in Engineering and Science (FACES) AGEP program, the numerous IGERT and RET
programs on campus, and a Robert Noyce program awarded to Georgia Tech in
partnership with Kennesaw State University. The Tech to Teaching infrastructure
also is a collaboration between many units on campus, including advising,
academic courses, mentoring, immersion experiences, and transition or induction
support. In addition, the project is increasing ties between Georgia Tech and
partner institutions of higher education in Georgia, such as Spelman College and
Georgia Perimeter College, through the use of Georgia Tech graduate students as
instructors in the partners' classrooms. Ultimately, Tech to Teaching will
encompass the systems and procedures, personnel and resources to ensure that the
pathways to teaching careers are clear and well-lit for both the students and
their advisors with the necessary courses, mentoring, and immersion experiences
in place to facilitate the students' successful transitions through the academic
pipeline to these teaching careers. As Tech to Teaching comes to fruition,
Georgia Tech will maintain the teaching infrastructure at the level needed to
meet the demands of its student population, hopefully improving the STEM
educational experiences of countless future students at colleges and
universities across the country as the Georgia Tech students enter the academic
world.