* 0833822
* Workshop: Benefit and Practicality of the Establishment of a Virtual Climate Institute on the West Coast; Los Angeles, California; Summer 2008
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2009
* Lowell Stott, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 05/31/2009
* USD 16,745.00

This award helps support a workshop to explore the potential benefits of
establishing a cyber-enabled virtual network for paleoclimatology. The group's
initial focus is on developing such an institute for researchers on the West
Coast of the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the lead
investigator will provide participant support for approximately twenty
scientists with expertise in paleoclimatology and related aspects of climate
research to participate in presentations and discussions that examine the
scientific strengths and weaknesses of establishing a virtual institute that
ties researchers together. The premise of the group's efforts is that "no single
institution possesses the ideal combination of expertise required to meet all of
the scientific challenges associated with the US Climate Change Research
Program" so, they are looking to "establish alternative ways for scientists to
collaborate and share information rapidly" as through a cyber-enabled virtual
institute. Some of the scientific themes that the group anticipates being of
importance in the next few years involve ice sheet dynamics, ocean/atmospheric
interactions, and regional hydrologic variability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
participants will include seasoned researchers, new investigators, and students.
In this manner, an open and lively exchange of views on the science and the
concept of a virtual institute will be enabled.