* 0833225
* Mississippi River Flood of 2008: Flood-Pulsed Experiments of Coastal Ecosystem Dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2008,03/31/2009
* Chunyan Li, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 03/31/2009
* USD 99,885.00

This SGER project will examine how river flood pulsing controls freshwater
residence time in coastal wetland basins of Louisiana, and how this control
regulates biogeochemical processing of nitrogen (N). The central hypothesis is
that the pulsed event of river floods will decrease N retention and removal by
wetlands (via denitrification) by drastically decreasing water residence times
in entire wetland basins. This, in turn, will lead to increased N loading to the
Gulf of Mexico, where anthropogenic N loading has long been implicated in
coastal hypoxia and the Northern Gulf Dead Zone. It will take advantage of The
Mississippi River flood of 2008, which will be one of the largest pulses of
freshwater for wetlands in coastal Louisiana in almost a century. This study
will use managed river diversions into the study basins to examine this
relationship between freshwater inputs and nitrogen
retention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide ecosystem managers,
who manage valuable, large wetland systems like the Mississippi River Delta and
the Florida Everglades, with critical water quality information. One management
goal is to prevent excess N from reaching the coastal ocean where many
economically important fisheries are located and where excess N causes toxic
algal blooms, low dissolved oxygen, and massive fish kills. This experiment will
also provide important data on how well coastal wetlands respond to very large
pulses of freshwater.