* 0833310
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Strategic Economic Interactions in Monkeys, Apes, and Humans
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Bart Wilson, Chapman University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 09/30/2011
* USD 169,066.00

Economic decision making has guided human behavior for thousands of years, but
little is known about the evolution and adaptiveness of such decision making in
humans. Monkeys and apes provide a good model for many human behaviors due to
their close evolutionary relatedness and similar cognitive abilities. This
project examines the hypothesis that nonhuman primates and humans share basic
economic decision making strategies that take into account partner identity and
potential rewards for cooperation and defection, as well as examining how
responses to computerized interactions differ from responses to face-to-face
interactions in potentially cooperative situations. &lt;br/&gt;A common
assumption is that economic decisions rely on verbal skills, and thus are
perhaps unique to verbal organisms. However, economic decision making may be
more phylogentically widespread than this assumption suggests in which case such
behavior may be better understood by comparing the behavior of humans with the
behavior of nonhuman primate species. This study uses a well known economic
decision making game called the Assurance, or Stag Hunt game. After being paired
with a partner, individuals must choose between a cooperative outcome which is
beneficial to both players and a non-cooperative outcome in which the partner
does not receive any reward and the player receives some reward. Both
individuals are better off if they cooperate; however, if a player is concerned
that the partner may not cooperate, then that player is better off 'defecting',
or choosing the non-cooperative option. In some situations, participants will
experience face-to-face interactions with the partner, whereas in other
situations the notion of ?social distance? will be introduced by having
participants play computerized versions of the game. Many cooperative
interactions do not pay all participants equally, and this may have a major
impact on subsequent cooperation and defection. Thus, some conditions in this
study will determine how responses to economic games are altered when one player
receives either more rewards for cooperating (leading to unequal payoff and
motivation for their partner to defect) or more rewards for defecting (leading
to motivation to defect). Human and nonhuman subjects will serve as subjects in
all treatments and their behavior will be compared. These data will clarify how
individuals make cooperative decisions, and how such decisions are affected by
face-to-face interaction and inequity. Understanding these interactions in both
nonhuman primate and humans will help to more properly place nonhuman behavior
in context with human behavior and to understand the roots from which human
economic decision making emerged.