* 0833115
* OMP-D:   Shared-Address-Space Model and Programming System for High-End Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2014
* Rudolf Eigenmann, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2014
* USD 721,602.00

This research develops shared-address-space (SAS) programming models for
distributed computer architectures. Almost all of today's high-end computers
(HEC) have a distributed system architecture. Programming such architectures is
tedious and contributes to very high software costs. SAS programming is easier
and leads to higher software productivity. Achieving the set goals of developing
translators that efficiently execute SAS programs on distributed computer
systems may have a large impact on the software industry and on the way software
engineering for HEC is taught.

The specific research is motivated by recent successes of a new SAS model and
compiler that has demonstrated to perform close to hand-coded message passing
programs by successful translation of the OpenMP SAS model to MPI. This project
brings together expertise in programming models, compilers for parallel
computing, compiler infrastructures, and languages for HEC, including HPF and
OpenMP. The new system will allow current OpenMP programs to run on large HEC
platforms, and will allow programmers to incrementally port and debug their
sequential programs to utilize the OpenMP SAS model while achieving the benefits
of larger-scale parallelism than is available on a single node. A number of
novel compiler techniques, such as dynamic affinity optimizations, scalability
enhancements, runtime array range detection, multicore integration, and parallel
data-flow semantics will be developed and implemented in a prototype OMP-D
(OpenMP for Distributed architectures) translator. The performance will be
evaluated on a large set of benchmarks from the NAS, SPEC OMP, and SPEC MPI
suites as well as several other HEC applications.