* 0833628
* Tri-Regional Information Technology (Tri-IT) Program
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* LaDonna Morris, Florida State College at Jacksonville
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Geary
* 09/30/2012
* USD 1,498,204.00

An ITEST strategies project, entitled Tri-Regional Information Technology (Tri-
IT), is a collaborative project building on the IT strengths at three diverse
colleges located in the state of Florida. Tri-IT includes Florida Community
College at Jacksonville (FCCJ) in Northeast Florida, Florida A&amp;M University
(FAMU) in Northwest Florida and Seminole Community College (SCC) in Central
Florida. These three project sites will be supported by the Florida Distance
Learning Consortium as well as the Center for Women and Information Technology
at the University of Maryland, Baltimore County (UMBC). Tri-IT will address
Florida's IT gender inequality in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (STEM) by serving a total of 180 high school girls. These girls will
be provided access to year-round IT learning opportunities designed to enhance
their STEM education. During the academic year each college will serve 60 girls,
using a set of research based curricular activities that align with national IT
skill standards. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each site will also offer IT-related
summer academies that will engage the participants in hands-on learning and
offer students an opportunity to experience and submerge themselves in
technology to stimulate their interest in STEM careers. FCCJ's summer academy
will focus on Global Positioning Systems and Geographic Information Systems;
FAMU's theme will involve Video Mobile Devices, and SCC will build activities
around IT web applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By using various distance
learning methods, including peer-to-peer videoconferencing, pod casting and web
blogging, to connect the three sites, the girls will gain quality educational
foundation in a variety of IT areas: GPS &amp; GIS, Video mobile devices and IT
web applications. Examples of summer activities include: students using GPS to
study safety hazards on the walking paths in surrounding urban high schools;
making games for cell phones and programming videogame consoles; and creating
podcasts about sciences/IT careers. All curricular activities are aligned with
the Information Technology Education Association (ITEA) Standards. IT
professional volunteers and service learning college students will help teachers
and facilitators lead after-school and summer activities. Each summer, a one-day
event will be held to bring girls from all of the sites together. In addition,
participants will be able to interact and learn from one another through the
project podcasts, website, and listserv. &lt;br/&gt;