* 0833315
* Workshop on Education in Underground Engineering and Science in the United States; San Francisco, California; June 27, 2008
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/2008,01/31/2010
* Peter Smeallie, American Rock Mechanics Association Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Richard J. Fragaszy
* 01/31/2010
* USD 39,952.00

The American Rock Mechanics Association (ARMA) Foundation will hold a Workshop
on Education in Underground Engineering and Science in the U.S. that will bring
together 25-35 faculty members from disciplines that use geo-mechanics to
discuss the state of underground engineering and science education in this
country in terms of curriculum and research. The workshop participants will
recommend rock mechanics educational opportunities at the Sanford Underground
Science and Engineering Laboratory (SUSEL) and, if constructed, the Deep
Underground Science and Engineering Laboratory (DUSEL) facilities, both at the
former Homestake Mine in Lead, South Dakota. The one-day workshop will be held
on June 27, 2008 preceding the 42nd U.S. Rock Mechanics Symposium in San
Francisco.

The purposes of the workshop and the work preceding it are to: 1. Survey U.S
education institutions that teach geo-mechanics (rock mechanics and rock
engineering) taking into account the various disciplines that make use of rock-
related information. 2. Assess the educational infrastructure in terms of its
ability to teach and the ability to attract students for underground engineering
and science at the undergraduate and graduate levels. 3. Recommend educational
opportunities at the SUSEL/DUSEL.

An organizing committee of 5 persons representing a variety of expertise and
geographic locations have been assembled chaired by Dr. Herbert Einstein of MIT.
The results of these deliberations will be summarized in a final report that
will be widely distributed in academic institutions. This project will advance
the disciplines of underground science and engineering by identifying for
improvement the challenges and opportunities in the U.S. educational
infrastructure. Broader impacts resulting from this workshop will take place as
students graduate and go on conduct research at the underground laboratories
and/or enter industrial/educational positions. Such research may improve our
understanding of how rock behaves resulting in enhancements to national
security, hazard mitigation, civil infrastructure systems, radioactive waste
storage and other areas that involve understanding the underground.