* 0833001
* Collaborative Research:  Understanding Climate Feedbacks and 3-D Global Warming Patterns in Global General Circulation Climate Models
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2008,04/30/2014
* Ming Cai, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 04/30/2014
* USD 503,788.00

The lead Principal Investigator (PI) has successfully developed a new analysis
framework to diagnose climate feedbacks for global warming studies. The new
framework, referred to as the climate feedback response analysis method (CFRAM),
differs from existing approaches in that it allows one to determine linearly the
partial temperature changes due to external forcing and due to individual
feedback processes or agents such as clouds, water vapor, and vertical and
horizontal energy transport. These partial temperature changes are addable and
their sum gives the total temperature change. The PIs will apply the CFRAM for
analyzing and understanding spatial warming patterns of the surface and the
atmospheric temperatures in response to anthropogenic greenhouse gases using
outputs from an idealized global climate model (GCM) and the fully coupled
National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) Community Climate System Model 3
(CCSM3) climate simulations, as well as the existing Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC)-Assessment Report 4 (AR4) GCM climate simulations. The PIs
will also compare the new feedback analysis with an existing technique. This
will help to shed light on the sources of the large inter-model spread of
climate sensitivity derived from IPCC-AR4 climate simulations. Coupled model
integrations using CCSM3 with an improved convective parameterization will also
be analyzed to explore the dependency of climate feedbacks and sensitivities to
model physical parameterizations. The main objectives of the research are:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) To explore the feasibility of applying the CFRAM to
isolating individual contributions to the total temperature change from the
external forcing and various physical feedback processes in the context of
coupled GCMs with full physical parameterizations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) To
shed light on the dynamical/thermodynamic origins of the warming pattern
asymmetries between (a) surface and atmospheric temperatures, (b) low and high
latitudes, and (c) land and ocean. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) To identify the
contributions to the inter-model spread of the global warming and its spatial
pattern due to the inter-model spreads of the 3-D structure of the external
forcing, water vapor feedback, cloud feedback, surface albedo feedback, and
surface turbulent sensible and latent heat flux feedbacks using the outputs from
IPCC-AR4 climate simulations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research aims to
understand fundamental issues in global climate warming due to increases in
anthropogenic greenhouse gases and feedback processes in the climate system.
Broader impacts of this research include better quantification of the role of
each feedback process in climate change and a more quantitative understanding of
global warming spatial patterns. Graduate students and postdoctoral researchers
will also be educated and trained in climate change science.