* 0833392
* MIND Alliance for Minority Students with Disabilities in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/2008,10/31/2015
* Elizabeth Cardoso, CUNY Hunter College
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 10/31/2015
* USD 3,137,276.00

The MIND Alliance for Minority Students with Disabilities in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics is designed to bring together the
expertise and resources of two minority-serving institutions of higher
education, Hunter College, City University of New York in New York City, NY and
Southern University in Baton Rouge, LA, to increase the quantity and quality of
students with disabilities receiving community college and baccalaureate degrees
in STEM disciplines and entering the STEM workforce or graduate education. The
MIND Alliance is addressing the following objectives:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1)
To successfully retain, graduate and transition secondary school students with
disabilities for entry into community college and baccalaureate STEM degree
programs. &lt;br/&gt;(2) To successfully retain, graduate and transition
students with disabilities from community college degree programs to STEM
baccalaureate programs or the workforce.&lt;br/&gt;(3) To successfully retain,
graduate and transition students with disabilities from STEM baccalaureate
degrees to STEM graduate degrees or the workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Student
interventions, which emphasize culturally sensitive student experiences and a
career assessment and counseling approach, are combined with traditional
promising practices: Summer Institute Programs; Tutoring, Mentoring and Role
Modeling; High School Counselor and Teacher Workshops; Research Opportunities
and Internship Programs; Student Scholarships and an Annual Science
Conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is being evaluated by a Dr. Allen
Lewis, an Associate Professor of Rehabilitation Counseling at Virginia
Commonwealth University. Dissemination will focus on the use of web-based
diffusion with an emphasis on sharing the partnering model and culturally
sensitive career planning approach with a national post-secondary audience.