* 0833266
* Phase I:University of Massachusetts Dartmouth Noyce Scholars Program
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2014
* Tesfay Meressi, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Nicole Bennett
* 09/30/2014
* USD 749,596.00

The University of Massachusetts Dartmouth recruits high-achieving and motivated
undergraduate Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) majors
into the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program in order to help overcome the
chronic shortage of highly qualified math and science teachers and greatly
increase the knowledge base and capability of students in these subject areas in
high-need urban districts of southeastern Massachusetts. The Noyce Scholars are
recruited in their sophomore year and provide math and science tutoring in high
needs schools in their junior year. In their senior year, they receive a $10,000
scholarship while gaining teaching experience in high needs schools by interning
with middle school and high school math and science teachers. Upon graduation,
the Noyce Scholars receive another $10,000 scholarship to complete an
accelerated teacher licensure and support program (TEACH!) leading to an MAT. A
total of 28 scholars in four cohorts of seven scholars are being supported by
Noyce Scholarships. The initial cohort of seven Noyce Scholars receives support
for one year of their MAT program and the three additional cohorts of seven
scholars (twenty-one additional scholars) will receive support for their senior
year and one year of their MAT program. The Noyce Scholars then receive 3 years
of mentoring and professional support when they become classroom teachers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new School of Education, Public Policy, and Civic
Engagement at the University of Massachusetts Dartmouth is committed to
strengthening the educational and social fabric of southeastern Massachusetts.
Within the new school, an interdisciplinary STEM Department comprised of STEM
content faculty and STEM education faculty works with K-12 educators to improve
teaching practices and student attainment. Arts and Sciences and Education
faculty members from this school serve as content coaches for the Noyce Scholars
and continue to offer enrichment seminars after the Noyce Scholars begin their
STEM teaching careers. As a result, each of the four cohorts of seven Noyce
Scholars is a cohort of teachers with an unusual degree of content strength,
instructional mentoring, and affiliation with the STEM professional and academic
community. &lt;br/&gt;