* 0833995
* Collaborative Research:  Investigations of Mesoscale and Microscale Processes in Extratropical Cyclones and Mesoscale Convective Systems
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2013
* Kevin Knupp, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 12/31/2013
* USD 509,533.00

The dynamic and microphysical processes that govern the spatial and temporal
variability of precipitation within extratropical cyclones remain poorly
understood. Variability in the location, type, and intensity of precipitation is
often determined by precipitation banding and/or embedded convection,
particularly in the northwest and warm frontal quadrant in cyclones where
frontal structures and associated frontal circulations are modified by
deformation flow. The Principal Investigators will execute a comprehensive field
campaign and numerical modeling study that will address outstanding scientific
questions targeted at improving understanding of precipitation substructures in
the northwest and warm frontal quadrants of continental extratropical cyclones.
In the course of this study the following questions will be addressed: 1) What
are the predominant spatial patterns of organized precipitation substructures,
such as bands and generating cells and how do they evolve? 2) How do frontal
scale systems above and within the boundary layer such as warm fronts, trowals,
cold fronts aloft, and occluded fronts relate to these precipitation
substructures? 3) What are the thermodynamic and kinematic structures of these
frontal systems including the distribution of moisture and vertical motion? 4)
What instabilities and types of mesoscale forcing control the generation and
evolution of precipitation substructures? 5) How do microphysical processes vary
between the different precipitation substructures and what are the consequences?
6) Is instability triggered in ice-saturated ascent critical in some of these
instances and is it through the release of the latent heat of deposition that
instabilities can persist? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Principal Investigators
will obtain and analyze detailed, high resolution observations of precipitation
substructures using three mobile ground-based observing systems, the University
of Alabama at Huntsville Mobile Integrated Profiling System, the Mobile Alabama
X-band dual polarization radar, and the NSF/National Center for Atmospheric
Research (NCAR) Mobile GPS Advanced Upper Air Sounding System, along with the
NSF/NCAR C-130 Aircraft equipped with microphysical probes and the Wyoming Cloud
Doppler Radar and Cloud Lidar. They will also simulate the precipitation
substructures using the Weather Research and Forecasting Model at high
horizontal and vertical resolution. The observations will provide the basis for
the development of testable hypotheses that can be addressed systematically in
the modeling studies. The field campaign (termed Profiling Of Winter Storms, or
PlOWS) will have an education component, involving students from 9 universities
with atmospheric science departments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit:
The combined dynamical/microphysical observational strategy in conjunction with
high resolution numerical modeling, will provide the basis for answering key
scientific questions in a more complete and definitive way than heretofore
possible. The new observational capabilities that will be applied in this
research will provide fundamentally new information about the structure, dynamic
and physical properties of these storms on scales never before observed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: Nationwide, nearly 7000 deaths, 600,000
injuries, and 1.4 million accidents per year are due to adverse road weather,
mostly during winter, and costs associated with a single blizzard can range from
$0.1M to $3.0B. The research will provide new insight concerning remote sensing
of winter weather systems that can translate directly into better operational
interpretation and observation strategies of winter weather mesoscale features.
The research will contribute to a fundamental understanding of the relationship
between the microphysical properties of clouds in winter cyclones and radar and
lidar sensing of those properties. The modeling studies will determine if
modeled precipitation substructures are consistent with observed features in
winter storm systems and provide a better understanding of processes responsible
for the occurrence of those substructures. Thus the findings will have direct
application to forecasting. The education component, involving students from
nine universities with atmospheric science departments, will contribute to
undergraduate and graduate education and recruitment of new scientists into
atmospheric field research.&lt;br/&gt;