* 0833093
* CREST: Center for Innovative Information Systems Engineering
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2008,12/31/2016
* Naphtali Rishe, Florida International University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Victor Santiago
* 12/31/2016
* USD 5,715,513.00

Florida International University?s (FIU?s) proposed second-phase NSF CREST
Center for Innovative Information Systems Engineering brings together a
multidisciplinary group of researchers, large-scale collaborative relationships,
and a broad ecosystem of partners to perform research that will lead to
information technologies that help to solve critical societal problems of
national priority. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Each of the
Center?s mutually-supportive subprojects builds on the strong research
foundation established by FIU?s first-phase CREST award and each sets ambitious
research goals that will result in the increased competitiveness of FIU?s CISE
researchers. By intertwining these multidisciplinary research goals with CREST?s
comprehensive education environment and by leveraging the synergistic academic
and industry partnerships introduced above, the Subprojects provide one another
with strong impetus for cohesiveness and potential for new research findings and
educational breakthroughs: Subproject 1: Effective Access to Complex Multimodal
Data with Applications in Disaster Mitigation will focus on developing effective
techniques for managing and providing access to data that varies in type,
source, location, time, and certainty by addressing storage optimization, data
management, indexing and search, query techniques, and data presentation. Among
its applications, it seeks to develop techniques to get the right information to
the right people at the right time, thereby helping to mitigate disasters and to
recover from them quickly. Subproject 2: Integrated Approach to Information
Processing in Neuroscience focuses on an integrated imaging/signal processing
approach that will result in comprehensive views of the human brain in greater
depth and detail through faster, affordable, more effective, and less invasive
methods. Subproject 3: Human Computer Interaction for Universal Access has a
long-term goal of enabling any prospective computer user to interact with
computer-based systems, regardless of their disability status and regardless of
the interaction challenges derived from the context in which the interaction is
taking place. Subproject 4: Complex System Modeling, Analysis, and Realization
will focus on essential methodologies for modeling complex systems, a unified
underlying semantic model, fundamental methods for compositional model analysis,
and model-driven engineering technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The Center will build upon the solid research foundation and
flourishing educational pipeline developed over the course of FIU's first-phase
CREST funding. Its research program will develop effective techniques for
managing information, for modeling information, natural, and man-made systems,
and for providing access to information while its educational program strives to
become the nation?s leader in training underrepresented Ph.D. students in
Computer Science and Computer Engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research areas cross the boundaries of computer science and engineering,
information processing, situational awareness, assistive technology, and
neuroscience; this integrative approach of research will significantly advance
the body of knowledge in these important fields and will make strides to solving
some of society?s critical problems.