* 0833073
* GSE/DIF:SciGirls en Espanol
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2008,09/30/2010
* Richard Hudson, Twin Cities Public Television
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 09/30/2010
* USD 349,988.00

Intellectual Merit: SciGirls is a national outreach program of DragonflyTV
supported by a grant from the National Science Foundation's Research on Gender
in Science and Engineering Program. SciGirls empowers PBS outreach professionals
and science museum educators, in partnership with local youth organizations,
educators and parents, to deliver hands-on science encouragement and career
guidance to girls in their communities. To meet the dramatic changes in U.S.
demographics and the need for more women scientists and engineers, this project
will expand SciGirls programming into Latino communities across the nation.
SciGirls en Español will provide Spanish-language print and video resources,
leader training, and grants to existing Latina-serving organizations to help
encourage a greater engagement in STEM. The project is a collaboration among
Twin Cities Public Television, The Self Reliance Foundation of Washington, D.C.,
and KLCS TV/DT, a PBS member station licensed to the Los Angeles Unified School
District.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;SciGirls stresses the most current research into
what strategies most effectively engage girls in STEM activities: extended
communication and collaboration; finding real-life contexts for science;
promoting open-ended investigations; and placing value on diverse ways of
knowing, viewing and describing the world. With a focus on inquiry, SciGirls
resources can easily be used by after-school educators, regardless of their
science backgrounds, to create successful STEM experiences for girls.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: SciGirls en Español materials will be
delivered to after-school programs across the country as well as to the Los
Angeles United School District's "Beyond the Bell" initiative, via the
district's station, KLCS TV/DT. Project PIs will also distribute copies of the
materials to other organizations (NSTA, ASTC, and PBS stations) and make the
entire set of resources (streaming videos and Activity Guides) available on
DragonflyTV's Web site at www.pbskids.org/dragonflytv. The results of the
evaluation will be shared with the informal science education research community
and reported at the National AfterSchool Association annual conference and the
NSF Joint Annual Meeting.