* 0833317
* Mathematics And Science Teacher Education Recruitment (MASTER) Program at Lehman College
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2008,09/30/2015
* Liesl Jones, Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 09/30/2015
* USD 861,082.00

Twenty four New York State Initially Certified Teachers in science and
mathematics teachers are being trained for employment in high needs inner city
middle schools (grades 5 - 9). Two cohorts, each consisting of 12 students,
selected from culturally and linguistically diverse undergraduate seniors
majoring in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) are
receiving scholarships. The MASTER Program provides one-year scholarships for
full-time undergraduate STEM seniors to complete their Bachelors Degrees and to
obtain a Transitional B Certificate as qualification to teach in New York State
public schools. For the next two years as in-service teachers, they continue to
receive a scholarship enabling them to complete their Master's Degrees in these
STEM shortage areas and earn their initial teaching credential for New York
State. Each Noyce scholar receives a total of $22,340 of financial support
during their three year program of study. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During their
first year, Noyce scholars join a teacher education program that requires them
to complete a degree in an undergraduate STEM discipline, helps them to
understand teaching and learning through rigorous and innovative coursework,
provides comprehensive pre-service internships in high-need elementary and
middle schools, and prepares them to receive a New York State Transitional B
Certificate to teach in New York State public schools. As new teachers, the
Noyce scholars receive in-depth mentoring during the two years of graduate
study. The comprehensive mentoring system consists of several components: (a)
continued mentoring and support from college mentors and expert teachers in
school, (b) participation in an education seminar, and (c) support from peers.