* 0833283
* UTPB Robert Noyce Scholars
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2015
* Doug Hale, University of Texas of the Permian Basin
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 12/31/2015
* USD 750,000.00

In response to the critical need for K-12 teachers of mathematics and science in
Southwest Texas, the University of Texas of the Permian Basin (UTPB) is
recruiting and preparing at least 40 highly qualified STEM majors and STEM
professionals over a four-year period to become effective teachers in high-need
school districts. UTPB serves a geographically remote area with a large Hispanic
population, and females and Hispanics comprise more than 60% of the university's
enrollment. By reducing the financial barriers and fostering a supportive
infrastructure, the project is facilitating the success and retention of
teachers of science and mathematics, especially those who are historically
underrepresented in STEM fields. Students admitted to the program have enhanced
academic support and mentoring from STEM faculty and experienced K-12 STEM
teachers and participate in a high quality, nationally recognized preparation
program.

UTPB Noyce Scholars are recruited from among currently enrolled STEM majors,
qualified students at local community colleges, and STEM professionals who may
not have considered a career in teaching. Scholars participate in high quality,
research-based teacher preparation activities and are mentored by a faculty
member and by an experienced K-12 teacher in their content area. Scholars attend
annual state professional conferences and participate in a virtual (online)
community and monthly seminars. The pre-service teachers are placed in math and
science classrooms with exemplary teachers to observe model teaching methods and
strategies during the academic year and work in a Science and Math Institute for
high school students as a strand of the summer bridge program. During their
first year of teaching, program graduates continue to be mentored by a UTPB
faculty member in the content area and an experienced teacher. During and after
the first year of teaching, they continue to connect with their peers through
the online networking system and monthly seminars hosted by the science and
mathematics education faculty at UTPB.

Through the proposed mentoring activities in which scholars will participate,
the project has the potential to have transformational results for UTPB and area
schools. In addition, the project provides a support system, including a virtual
community, which helps retain teachers in remote districts. The project is
examining factors that motivate STEM majors and professionals to pursue teaching
careers, barriers that interfere with the pursuit of a teaching career, and
factors that facilitate the success and retention of new mathematics and science
teachers.