* 0833298
* Purdue Robert Noyce Scholars: Excellence in Preparation of Rural High School STEM Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Christie Sahley, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* julio soto
* 09/30/2015
* USD 639,126.00

This project involves the Purdue University Colleges of Science, Education,
Engineering and Technology in a partnership with Crawfordsville, Logansport, and
Benton County schools, all small town and rural districts. Up to 35 science,
technology, engineering or mathematics (STEM) majors are being helped by this
Noyce project in their efforts to become high school science and mathematics
teachers. Support is provided through scholarships (some with one year of aid
and others with two years of aid, reflecting the years remaining to the
student's degree when the scholarships are first awarded) and through a program
designed for them in cooperation with other existing and emerging programs for
STEM teacher workforce development at Purdue. The Purdue Center for Research and
Engagement in Science and Mathematics Education (CRESME), a joint effort between
the Colleges of Science and Education, is taking the lead in this effort, aided
by other educational research units on the Purdue campus, including the Colleges
of Technology and Engineering, and the Discovery Learning Center. The program is
improving STEM education within small, rural school districts around Purdue and
is providing insights that may be extended to similar rural settings around the
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Educational research-oriented
centers and departments on campus are working with teacher preparation and new
teacher support programs and the Noyce project to recruit talented STEM
undergraduates to teaching careers. They are working with the students, helping
them explore the educational issues in their technical fields while at Purdue,
especially in rural communities, and supporting them programmatically during
their initial teaching years. The Noyce Scholars are being housed intellectually
within CRESME. which is responsible for project infrastructure, curricula and
course design, and for tracking of the scholars in order to determine project
outcomes. As part of their teacher preparation program Noyce Scholars are
participating in senior thesis projects (conducting research as assistants in
existing STEM education research efforts in their disciplines) and a special
Noyce seminar course. They are also being provided with a network of support and
mentoring both while they are at Purdue and after they begin their teaching
careers. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Through dissemination of
lessons learned from this project, Purdue is improving its ability to provide
STEM teachers with education services and is providing direct outreach
assistance to the increasingly diverse underserved rural and small town
communities of Indiana and educational models for use throughout Indiana and the
nation.