* 0833837
* SGER: Novel Organic-Inorganic Hybrid Fuel Cell Membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2008,10/31/2009
* Xiangwu Zhang, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 10/31/2009
* USD 66,946.00

CBET-0833837 Zhang

The objective of this research is to explore the use of surface-initiated atom
transfer radical polymerization (SI-ATRP) and electrospinning technologies to
create a novel type of hybrid fuel cell membrane. Fuel cells are promising
candidates for ?clean? power generation because they provide electricity without
combustion and pollutants associated with burning fossil fuels. Current PEMFC
technologies use Nafion® membranes to separate the fuel from the oxidant and
transport protons from the anode to the cathode. However, Nafion® suffers from
problems including low operating temperature, limited sulfonic acid content,
poor proton conductivity at low relative humidity, insufficient mechanical
stability, and high cost. The work proposes to synthesize a novel type of
organic-inorganic hybrid membrane by using SI-ATRP technology to generate extra-
high density, ultra-long functional polymers directly in the nonwoven pores of
electrospun SZrO2 nanofiber-based porous frameworks. These hybrid membranes will
also be integrated with novel catalyst layers to achieve high fuel cell
performance.

Intellectual merit: SI-ATRP is a recently developed technology of ?living? or
?controlled? radical polymerization that can realize well-defined, high-density
polymer chains with exceptionally large molecular weights and low
polydispersities on solid surfaces. Electrospun S-ZrO2 nanofibers have high
conductivities even at high temperatures (> 150oC) and low humidities, and can
form a porous nonwoven framework to provide excellent mechanical support for
attaching polymers with unprecedented sulfonic-acid content while still
maintaining good dimensional stability. In addition to the high conductivity of
the S-ZrO2 frameworks, the extra-high content of closely-associated acid groups
achieved by this method can provide a large amount of ?free? protons to further
enhance the membrane performance. The resultant hybrid membranes have advantages
of high proton conductivity, increased operating temperature limit, good
mechanical strength, long operational life, and low cost, and hence they can
significantly improve the performance of fuel cell systems.

Broader impacts: The results of this proposed research are expected to have
important scientific and economic impacts. Foundation for fabricating nanofiber-
based porous inorganic and organic-inorganic hybrid membranes with well-defined
structures and multi-functionalities will be established. Research of fuel cell
technologies, which will reduce our foreign oil dependence, improve air quality,
and reduce greenhouse gas emissions, will also be advanced. These research and
education activities in novel energy-related materials and systems will help the
U.S. stay in a lead position in these strategic fields.