* 0833882
* CSR:   DMSS, TM:   Quantifying the Impact of Latency on Network-Interactive Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Daniel Siewiorek, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2013
* USD 486,142.00

There is growing academic and commercial interest in models
of&lt;br/&gt;interactive computing where code segments that lie in the
critical&lt;br/&gt;path of user interaction are split across a network boundary.
We use&lt;br/&gt;the term "Network-Interactive Computing" to characterize such
models.&lt;br/&gt;Thin client computing and Ajax-based computing are
two&lt;br/&gt;examples. Unfortunately, introducing network delays into the
critical&lt;br/&gt;path of user interaction can degrade the crispness of system
response,&lt;br/&gt;and hurt usability. Today, we lack the scientific framework
to&lt;br/&gt;quantify the impact of latency on network-interactive
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will establish the scientific
underpinnings of&lt;br/&gt;network-interactive computing with respect to
performance and&lt;br/&gt;usability. Our work will span three areas: (a)
Development of metrics&lt;br/&gt;and benchmarks; (b) Calibration of metrics
against user experience;&lt;br/&gt;and (c) Classification of real-world
applications based on their user&lt;br/&gt;interaction characteristics. We will
develop the intellectual tools&lt;br/&gt;and evaluation techniques to help
answer questions such as the&lt;br/&gt;following: ``Will a legacy interactive
application that performs well&lt;br/&gt;on a local computer degrade
unacceptably in a specified&lt;br/&gt;network-interactive computing
environment?''; ``When designing a new&lt;br/&gt;environment for network-
interactive computing, can one predict which&lt;br/&gt;applications will perform
acceptably?''; and, ``Can one develop a&lt;br/&gt;taxonomy of applications that
allows us to easily understand and&lt;br/&gt;predict the impact of networking
changes on interactive performance?''&lt;br/&gt;Our goal is to establish
network-interactive computing on a sound,&lt;br/&gt;well-validated and
replicatable experimental foundation.&lt;br/&gt;