* 0833206
* CSU Dominguez Hills Noyce Math/Science Teacher Scholorship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2014
* Noel Sturm, California State University-Dominguez Hills Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 08/31/2014
* USD 900,000.00

Over five years, CSUDH is offering $10,000 scholarships to 35 unduplicated
juniors and seniors majoring in biology, chemistry, mathematics or physics who
are becoming math-science teachers in high-need secondary schools in the Los
Angeles or Lynwood school districts. A large percentage of the scholarship
recipients are underrepresented minorities, based on CSUDH's STEM undergraduate
pool: 39% Latino, 32% African American, 12% Asian/Pacific Islander, 6% white,
11% unknown. The Noyce program operates in cohorts, led by advisors from the two
participating CSUDH colleges. Scholars attend monthly cohort meetings for peer
and faculty support, advising, mentoring, information, exposure to math-science
secondary teaching and education experts. Through the cohorts, scholars are
linked to academic resources, financial aid or other programs that meet
individual needs. The Noyce program leverages 1) a state-funded undergraduate
recruiting program for mathscience majors, which offers academic support but not
financial support; and 2) a federally funded accelerated credential program,
Transition to Teaching (TTT). In combination, Noyce and TTT provide 3 years of
financial support during the last 2 years of undergraduate study and 1 year of
postbaccalaureate teacher training. Noyce scholars transition into TTT, which
enables them to earn their credential in one year while holding a full-time
teaching position as a university intern in the high-needs Los Angeles Unified
or Lynwood school districts and which provides financial assistance and
substantial support in a cohort structure, leading to high retention. Of the 113
total TTT participants in the past three years; 108 (95.5%) are teaching in the
challenging TTT service-area schools and another four are teaching elsewhere
(99% total teaching). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The evaluation
phase of this project is measuring the extent to which combining undergraduate
math-science training with scholarships, advising, academic support and
monitoring in a cohort structure enables students to focus on their studies,
maintain their grades, stay in school, complete their degree in a timely fashion
and become successful math-science teachers. The project also is providing an
opportunity to use scholarships to leverage an undergraduate recruiting program
for math-science majors and an accelerated credential program that includes
employment as an intern teacher. Results can help shape future strategies to
alleviate the math-science teacher shortage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: The success of this project in increasing the supply of well-qualified
math-science teachers in Los Angeles will have a positive impact on the lives
and aspirations of the scholars' students, as well as their schools. It will
positively affect the community and local economy when students trained by these
teachers bring their math-science skills into the workplace.