* 0833058
* Identification and Estimation in Structural Econometric Models
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2007,02/28/2011
* Rosa Matzkin, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 02/28/2011
* USD 181,245.00

Structural econometric models are essential tools for many empirical studies in
fields such as industrial organization, labor and public economics, and
development economics. The analysis of identification is a first necessary step
in any such studies. In many of these models, such as those involving
multidimensional optimization or equilibrium conditions, the variables of
interest are determined simultaneously. A recent result by Benkard and Berry
(2004) has shown that identification results that were used for a long time to
determine identification, in simultaneous equations models, are incorrect.
Hence, other than in the restrictive linear specification models with additive
unobservable random terms, studied decades ago, little is known at present about
the conditions for identification in structural simultaneous equation models. In
this project, the PI will develop correct conditions for identification of
systems of simultaneous equations, in parametric and nonparametric models, with
additive and nonadditive unobservable variables. Since a large body of previous
work in econometrics has relied on the previous incorrect conditions, the PI
will also analyze under what additional conditions in the structural models,
those previous results still hold. The identification conditions that will be
developed will be used to guide the discovery of new methods for estimation in
nonparametric simultaneous equations, which will be consistent, asymptotically
normal, and easy to compute. Since in many of the structural econometric models
encountered in applied fields in economics, one encounters situations where
observations on the actual values of endogenous variables, such as profits or
utility values, is limited, the identification and estimation results will be
extended to such situations, where the endogenous variables is simultaneous
equations models are latent. To guide the PI in the development of the new
methods, and to facilitate the adoption and understanding of the new methods,
she will consider applications to several leading models in applied economics,
such as models of consumer demand, discrete choice models, hedonic equilibrium
models, Nash equilibrium, and models of survey response errors.

Intellectual Merit of the Proposed Activity The results about identification of
simultaneous equations that the PI will develop will allow applied
econometricians to determine the elements that can be identified in an
econometric model, given their available data. The results will be applicable to
very general models, which do not specify parametric structures either for the
unknown functions or for the distributions of the unobservable random terms, as
well as to more restrictive, parametric models. The results about estimation of
nonparametric models will allow researchers to estimate such models without
imposing parametric restrictions. Since structural econometric models where the
values of the variables of interest are determined simultaneously is widespread
in most applied fields in economics, these results are predicted to have a very
wide impact. Moreover, by opening the road to new ways of analyzing
identification and estimation in nonparametric simultaneous equation models, it
is expected that a wave of new theoretical results will follow, as a result of
the research in this project.

Broader Impacts Models where several variables of interest are determined
simultaneously are widespread in, among others, engineering and the social
sciences. The methods that will be developed in this project will be suitable
for applications in these sciences, and through them, they will benefit society
at large. With this aim, the results of the project will be disseminated widely.
By involving a graduate student in this research, it is expected that he/she
will apply the new results in his/her dissertation and/or develop new related
results.