* 0833324
* ACT!: An alternative teacher preparation program for talented professionals seeking licensure in secondary science and mathematics teaching
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2014
* Michael Lizotte, University of Wisconsin-Oshkosh
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 08/31/2014
* USD 599,817.00

This project provides critical financial support for 50 career changer students
(over five years) who are preparing to teach in high need schools. ACT! is an
alternative teacher licensure program for secondary science and mathematics
(grades 6-12). In its second year of operation, ACT! has enrolled 56 students to
date. ACT! provides highly qualified individuals with the pedagogical skills
necessary to teach secondary students, and to provide leadership in science and
mathematics education in their future school districts. ACT! specifically
recruits post-baccalaureate mid-career professionals. The delivery and content
of the program are grounded in principles of adult learning (Brookfield, 1986;
Merriam &amp; Caffarella, 1999; Smith &amp; Pourchot, 1998). The ACT! program is
designed to recognize the unique backgrounds, learning and experiences that
individuals with real life experience in science or mathematics can bring to
secondary teaching, the very real need to maintain some level of income while in
a teacher preparation program, and time and geographic limitations related to
maintaining family and work obligations. Consideration is being given to
increasing the numbers of minorities, persons with disabilities and
underrepresented genders relative to science and mathematics teaching fields.
The ability to provide financial support greatly enhances the mission to support
mid-career professionals as they transition to careers as professional
educators. The University of Wisconsin Oshkosh Office of Field Experience (OFE)
works extensively with 22 different school districts in the six counties
surrounding Oshkosh. OFE also has standing agreements to place student teachers
in three urban centers (Milwaukee, Racine, and Beloit) and a tribal school in
Wisconsin (Menominee Indian School).