* 0833591
* CYBERINFRASTRUCTURE FOR COMBUSTION RESEARCH
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2011
* Michelle Schwalbe, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Arvind Atreya
* 06/30/2011
* USD 50,000.00

CBET-0833591 &lt;br/&gt;Scott T. Weidman, National Academy of
Sciences&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides partial funding for
a National Academies study of the research frontiers facing the combustion
community, successful cyberinfrastructure in other fields, and a plan for
cyberinfrastructure for combustion research which will be a more detailed and
tailored counterpart to generic cyberinfrastructure planning being carried out
by the NSF's Office of Cyberinfrastructure. The National Academies Board on
Mathematical Sciences and their Applications (BMSA), Board on Chemical Sciences
and Technology, and Computer Science and Telecommunications Board will identify
the best experts for the study committee, monitor progress of the study, and
identify reviewers for the draft report. Additional support for this activity is
being provided by the Air Force Office of Scientific Research, the Air Force
Research Laboratory, the DoD SERDP, Army Research Office, National Institute of
Standards and Technology, and the DOE's National Energy Technology
Laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field of combustion research has mature
capabilities in high-end simulations, but extra planning will be necessary to
make the leap to the next generation of high-end computing, which will likely
have paradigm-shifting architecture. In addition, the costs of high-end
simulations have reached the point where only a limited number of facilities
will likely be available to the combustion community, and so plans must be laid
for exploiting those scarce resources. The combustion field has also made some
steps to establish data interoperability, but careful planning is necessary in
order to build on those steps. This is a challenge that many fields are facing,
and this study will thus advance combustion and other fields of science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As important background, this study will
exploit and extend findings from three workshops related to this topic: Future
of Modeling and Simulation for Combustion Applications (Pittsburgh PA, February
21-23, 2006, sponsored by the Air Force Research Laboratory and DOE); NSF held a
workshop on Cyber-based Combustion Science (Arlington VA, April 19-20, 2006,
sponsored by NSF); and Next Steps in Using Combustion CI (San Diego CA, March
28-29, 2007, hosted by NSF, AFOSR, and ARO). It also builds on the NSF-sponsored
research project Process Informatics for Chemical Reaction Systems
(CHE-0739655).