* 0833955
* Fourth International Symposium on 3D Data Processing, Visualization and Transmission
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2008,05/31/2009
* Frank Dellaert, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 05/31/2009
* USD 10,000.00

Abstract

Fourth International Symposium on 3D Data Processing, Visualization and
Transmission (3DPVT '08)

The Fourth International Symposium on 3D Data Processing, Visualization and
Transmission (3DPVT) will be held in Atlanta, Georgia, between the 18 and 20 of
June. The goal of the symposium is to bring together leading researchers from
the different communities that work with 3D data, students and representatives
of the industry to present their research and discuss the state of the art in
the processing, visualization and transmission of 3D data. The scope includes
the fields of 3D sensor technology, computer vision, computer graphics,
augmented and virtual reality, medical imaging, video and geometry compression,
haptics, 3D television, games and entertainment. The organizing committee is
lead by the general chairs Frank Dellaert (the PI) and Jarek Rossignec, both at
the Georgia Institute of Technology, and the program co-chairs Stefan Gumhold
(University of Technology Dresden), Jana Kosecka (George Mason University), and
Oliver Staadt (Institute of Computer Science, University of Rostock). With the
recent advances in sensor technology and processing capabilities, 3D data in
various forms have begun playing a bigger role in numerous fields of science and
everyday life. 3DPVT is a venue for the presentation and publication of high-
quality research and application papers in both its refereed and invited
programs. While diverse, its topic areas present considerable opportunities for
productive collaborations. In addition, the organizing committee has confirmed
three distinguished researchers to participate as keynote speakers, who will
illustrate the progress and the challenges in each area and promote multi-
disciplinary research and collaboration. In summary, the goal for 3DPVT is to
contribute in the spreading of ideas and establish itself as a leading
conference in a multi-disciplinary context, leading to new research in hitherto
unexplored directions. An important broader aspect of the conference is the
increased student participation made possible through NSF funding. Attending
multidisciplinary conferences is a valuable educational experience for junior
researches, who have arguably more to gain by being exposed to work that is
directly related to their own but comes from potentially very different
disciplines. In order to achieve this, the organizing committee has strived to
keep student registration costs as low as possible and we will not burden
students with the cost of the invited program. In addition, two mechanisms are
intended to further increase student participation: (1) travel awards will be
given to US student authors of outstanding papers, chosen by the program chairs.
(2) US students will be able to apply for the registration fee waiver, in the
hope of drawing in US students that might otherwise not be able to attend.
Selection will be done by the general chairs and will be done with an eye
towards broadening participation from underrepresented groups as well as those
having to travel further to attend the symposium.

