* 0833265
* The SMART Scholarship Program at Georgia Southern University
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2014
* James LoBue, Georgia Southern University Research and Service Foundation, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 12/31/2014
* USD 730,643.00

The SMART Scholarship Program is a collaboration that includes the Colleges of
Science and Technology (COST) and Education (COE) at Georgia Southern University
(GSU) and school districts within a 60-mile radius of GSU. The project recruits
math and science majors who are interested in teaching and obtaining the Master
of Arts in Teaching degree (MAT)with the goal of preparing 30 additional STEM
teachers during the five-year project. An aggressive marketing presence in
public high schools, in community colleges, and on the GSU campus recruits high
quality applicants, a large fraction of which are African American, and raises
the level of awareness and respect for the teaching profession. SMART Scholars
receive deliberate, constructive, and compassionate interactions through an
intrusive advisement process that continue into the first years of teaching, a
best practice for teacher retention. All SMART Scholars complete, as a pre-
requisite, a rigorous 50-hour reflective field experience, designed by the COE;
participate in inquiry-based learning both as students and as peer leaders; and
engage in service leadership opportunities in science and mathematics education
all designed to prepare them for the classroom. Scholars receive in-service
support through the COE's Induction Program in which new teachers are mentored
by content specialists and by Nationally Board Certified Teachers
(NBCT).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SMART Scholars program builds on four elements:
the COE Pre-Professional Block field experience, the COE Master of Arts in
Teaching (MAT) Program, the COST Advisement Center, and the COE Induction
Program. These elements are all thoroughly researched and based on best
practices. Three principles organize the program: a focus on retention by self-
selection, inquiry learning, and elevation of the teaching profession. The
program includes an intense reflective observational component as prerequisite
and an Induction Program that supports and guides through the first years of
teaching. The freshman science and math courses have a supplemental instruction
program that focuses on inquiry that is guided by a peer leader. The SMART
Scholars engage in both experiences as student learners and later as peer
leaders. The teaching internship course in the MAT program models Professional
Learning Communities using the scholars' first teaching experiences as examples.
This is a highly effective way to show inquiry by engaging in classroom
stimulated problem solving. The teaching profession is elevated through
aggressive marketing, multiple and diverse opportunities for teaching practice,
attendance at professional meetings, and in the emphasis of Professional
Learning Communities.