* 0833180
* CREST: Center for Exploitation of Nanostructures in Sensors and Energy Systems
* EHR,HRD
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2015
* Swapan Gayen, CUNY City College
* Cooperative Agreement
* Victor Santiago
* 09/30/2015
* USD 5,120,400.00

CENSES seeks resources from CREST to enhance as well as develop research
expertise in areas associated with sensors and energy transduction systems in
order to serve as a national resource center in these critical areas, and to be
available for collaboration in research and development efforts with a variety
of potential partners. Three research subprojects are proposed. Subproject-1
focuses on nanomaterials and nanostructures for sensor applications, with 3
constituent projects dealing with mid-IR sensors based on wide bandgap II-VI
semiconductor devices; chemical and biological sensors from single-walled carbon
nanotubes; and liposome-based arrays with nanoparticle markers for toxin
detection. Subproject-2 exploits nanomaterials and nanostructures in energy
systems, and has 4 constituent projects concerned with battery electrode
nanomaterials; single-walled carbon nanotubes onto which electrocatalysts are
attached for fuel cell applications; hybrid II-VI and III-V multiple quantum
well/quantum dot high-performance solar cells; and hydrate-based gas storage
materials. Subproject-3 focuses on emerging technologies and novel
characterization techniques, and has 4 constituent projects dealing with
biologically inspired self-assembled nanostructures; cobalt-oxide-based
thermoelectric materials and devices; surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS)
applied to the study organicinorganic hybrid nanomaterials; and femtosecond
time-resolved scanning tunneling microscopy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results
of the above aforementioned research efforts will be invaluable in addressing
the major challenges facing our nation and the world today in the development of
sustainable energy technologies that focus on renewable resources, and the
monitoring of health, the environment and national security threats. The impact
of this CREST center project not only includes a diversity recruitment &amp;
retention plan to continue engaging graduate students from underrepresented
groups and a research experience for undergraduate students-style enrichment
program geared towards the largely minority population of transfer students, but
it also contains a professional development plan to increase the number of
underrepresented individuals with in-depth research knowledge and skills in the
nanotechnology fields who can join the faculty and postdoctoral ranks of City
College and elsewhere.