* 0833492
* ARI-MA: Transformational Scintillation Materials for Neutron and Gamma Detectors and Educational Integration
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2009
* Laurence Miller, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 08/31/2009
* USD 380,000.00

ARI-MA: Transformational Scintillation Materials for Neutron and Gamma Detectors
and Educational Integration

The objective of this research is to develop transformative scintillation
materials for use in neutron and gamma radiation detectors that will notably
advance the technology for detecting nuclear threats. The approach is to utilize
a diverse team with expertise in scintillation materials, chemistry, physics,
imaging, radiation metrology and transport, and nuclear engineering. The senior
investigators have unique access to neutron and reactor facilities at Oak Ridge
and around the world to facilitate the development of next generation
scintillation materials for advanced radiation detection. The intellectual merit
will include the development of polymeric nano-composites for neutron and photon
detection with high efficiency and energy resolution. In addition, new materials
and methods for the fabrication of crystalline based neutron and gamma ray
detectors will be developed. Neutron detectors with capabilities for rejection
of photon counts will be developed through the use of suitable geometric,
composition, and pulse shape characteristics. This type of research is essential
for developing the basic science and novel materials required for next
generation radiation detection. Broader impacts will include the development of
technology to manufacture large volumes of inexpensive neutron scintillation
materials using structural composite techniques. Trained students and personnel
from this project will contribute to advancing future nuclear threat detection
technology. New course materials and laboratory exercise modules will be
developed and incorporated into distance learning programs to impact large
numbers of students from nuclear engineering and related programs throughout the
United States.