* 0833243
* Open the Gate Robert Noyce Teacher Scholars Program
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2008,07/31/2014
* Ruth Cossey, Mills College
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 07/31/2014
* USD 747,545.00

The project reflects a partnership between the Departments of Mathematics,
Computer Science, Chemistry, Physics and Biology and the Mid-Career Math and
Science Program (MCMS) in the School of Education to: increase recruitment of
female undergraduate science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
majors and STEM professionals and recent college graduates into STEM teaching
professions in area middle and high schools; offer comprehensive mentoring and
support for STEM trained teachers; and, evaluate the factors influencing
recruitment, preparation and retention of Open the Gate Scholars while working
towards an institutionalization of the program at Mills. The project includes a
demonstration research project to study the Mills model of teacher education and
the factors within it that support their teacher graduates' very high retention
rates in urban high-needs schools. Over the course of the project, scholarships
are being offered to 12 female undergraduate senior STEM majors and to 36 male
and female graduate students in the MCMS program, each with an undergraduate
major in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: A key component of Open
the Gate is engaging the scholarship students in the construction of a
demonstration research project to study this teacher education model in order to
determine how the skills and knowledge of STEM pre-service students develop over
time, the experiences that lead to their progress in the pre- and in-service
years, and their relationship to the graduates' longevity as teachers in high
poverty schools. Thus, graduates from this project are advancing the scholarship
of teaching within the fields of mathematics and science education through their
skills as teacher-researchers who ask scholarly questions arising from complex
curricular and pedagogical problems that require sustained, careful and
systematic examination of their practice in an effort to improve it.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Half of the credential students graduating
from Mills come from racial, ethnic, and linguistic groups underrepresented in
math and science. Increasing these percentages by recruiting and supporting
students of color and first generation college students is an active goal of
this project. Located at a women's college, Open the Gate is also well
positioned to increase gender diversity in the pool of future math and science
teachers. Information learned will be disseminated at state, national and
international conferences and professional meetings with math and science,
multicultural, and teacher educators. The project enhances existing partnerships
between Mills College and ten surrounding high-needs urban school districts
including Alameda County Office of Education and the unified districts of
Alameda, Berkeley, Emery, Hayward, Oakland, San Francisco, San Leandro, San
Lorenzo, and West Contra Costa County.