* 0833561
* RDE-RAD: Collaborative Research: Increasing Achievement and Transition outcome in STEM Professions of Post-Secondary Students with Disabilities
* EDU,EES
* 12/01/2008,11/30/2014
* Christopher Andersen, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 11/30/2014
* USD 1,521,748.00

"RDE-RAD: Collaborative Research: Ohio's STEM Ability Alliance (OSAA): STEM
Degrees and Careers for Ohioans with Disabilities" will increase the quantity
and quality of students with disabilities receiving associate, baccalaureate and
graduate degrees in STEM disciplines and their entry into the STEM workforce.
This collaborative project includes the following partners: Wright State
University, the Ohio State University, Sinclair Community College, Columbus
State Community College and numerous high schools in the Dayton and Columbus
regions of Ohio. The overarching objective of the project is to increase the
number of students with disabilities entering and completing receiving
postsecondary and graduate degree programs in STEM and transitioning to the STEM
workforce. The program will pursue the following three specific quantitative
goals:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Goal 1: Recruitment to STEM College Majors. Recruit
225 students with disabilities to OSAA programming in STEM majors at combined
alliance university and community college partner institutions by the end of the
project award period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Goal 2: Retention in STEM Majors and
Graduation. Retain students participating in OSAA college level programming in
STEM majors at a year-to-year persistence rate of 70%, or better; and award STEM
degrees to a minimum of 70% of OSAA students who complete 4+ years of
postsecondary study (2+ years for associates degree
programs).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Goal 3: Transition to the STEM Workforce or STEM
Graduate Programs. Transition 50% or more OSAA STEM graduates to employment or
graduate degree training in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evaluation for
this collaborative project is provided by Dr. Thomas McKlin and associates of
SageFox Consulting Group. Dissemination of project deliverables and reports will
focus on institutions in the Ohio region and on sharing the intervention model
with a national post-secondary audience via a web-based diffusion portal,
presentations at national conferences and publications in professional journals.