* 0833338
* Transforming Engineering Through PEERS: Building a Better Experience for Underrepresented Students
* EDU,EES
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2014
* Ana Mari Cauce, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 03/31/2014
* USD 999,974.00

The project proposes to integrate NSF-funded efforts at the University of
Washington (UW) in an innovative way to improve the experiences of
underrepresented undergraduate minorities, women and students with disabilities
in the College of Engineering. A primary catalyst for this synergy is the use of
the UW's PEERs project (Promoting Equity in Engineering Relationships), which
seeks to positively impact the climate of engineering through a cadre of change
agents who create and encourage improved and more equitable relationships. The
four institutional partners for the proposed collaboration are the
institution's:&lt;br/&gt;1. ADVANCE Center for Institutional
Change;&lt;br/&gt;2. Center for Workforce Development;&lt;br/&gt;3. Center for
Engineering Learning and Teaching (CELT); and&lt;br/&gt;4. Disabilities,
Opportunities, Internetworking, and Technology (DO-
IT).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These institutional partners will use the PEERs model
to enhance the goals of three NSF-funded projects and to leverage lessons
learned from the existing awards to work toward improving the climate for and
the participation of underrepresented minority, female and disabled engineering
students; and provide a foundation for campus-wide replication. The three NSF
awards upon which the I3 project will build include:&lt;br/&gt;1. Collaborative
Research - Northwest Engineering Talent Expansion Partnership: A Coordinated
Regional Recruitment and Retention Effort (DUE-0431659);&lt;br/&gt;2. CCLI:
Developing Engineering Lifelong Learners Through Freshman Seminars and Faculty
Development Workshops (DUE-0737535); and &lt;br/&gt;3. Northwest Alliance for
Access to Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(HRD-0227995).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Four primary objectives will be achieved by
this project &lt;br/&gt;1. Raise awareness of unconscious and implicit biases
toward underrepresented minority, women and disabled students; &lt;br/&gt;2.
Promote actions both majority and underrepresented minority, women and disabled
students and faculty can take to counteract these biases to cultivate a more
welcoming and success-promoting climate; &lt;br/&gt;3. Cultivate change agents
among both student and faculty bodies; and &lt;br/&gt;4. Build a foundation, and
collaboration mechanisms, for future efforts to make STEM and other programs
campus-wide welcoming and accessible to underrepresented minority, women and
disabled students.