* 0833726
* Beyond Blackboards: Integrated Methods for STEM Education and Workforce Development
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Richard Crawford, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 07/31/2013
* USD 1,438,558.00

The University of Texas (UT) Cockrell School of Engineering is joining with
Skillpoint Alliance, a Central Texas education and workforce development agency,
and Round Rock ISD, a rapidly growing district serving a diverse population of
more than 40,000 students, to deploy an integrated approach to engaging middle
school students, teachers, counselors, administrators, parents and caregivers in
activities that improve awareness and understanding of a range of STEM career
and college pathways. The project builds on the successful DTEACh program that
provides teachers professional development in engineering education using design
and empowers educators and caregivers to engage students in STEM activities that
guide them toward considering careers in Information and Communication
Technology (ICT). The program comprises five essential steps: training teachers;
providing after-school programs for students; training counselors,
administrators and other educators; offering intensive summer camps for
students; and reaching out to caregivers. The project supports teachers with
multiple professional development opportunities and field experiences, coaching
sessions with master teachers, support from UT engineering students and industry
mentors, and numerous other resources. Evaluation of the program's impact on
students depends not only on student-reported interest in STEM subjects and
careers, but on assessment of student performance in STEM subjects and analysis
of their high school course selections. Evaluation of the program's impact on
teachers focuses on an assessment of participants' curricula and pedagogy and
impact on teacher networks. The project produces research tools and research
findings that build the knowledge base about approaches, models, and
interventions with middle school students from underrepresented and
economically-disadvantaged populations and their teachers - the population most
likely to increase United States capacity in the STEM workforce, including ICT
fields.