* 0833276
* Capitalizing on Talent: The Noyce Fellows Program at the University of Georgia
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2014
* Charles Kutal, University of Georgia
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 12/31/2014
* USD 893,506.00

This project is supporting 30 post-baccalaureate fellows as they pursue
certification to become secondary school mathematics or science teachers and as
they enter the teaching force. These individuals proceed through a carefully
structured post-baccalaureate program designed to help them develop content
knowledge for teaching and implement that knowledge in diverse school settings.
The project is advancing the field's knowledge of how to prepare and support
career change individuals, and it adds original and creative features such as
the use of video technology to mentor teachers in their first year of teaching
and to foster supportive and collegial conversations to improve teaching and
learning. The project is a collaboration between faculty in the Franklin College
of Arts and Sciences, the College of Agriculture and Environmental Sciences, and
the College of Education and builds on existing partnerships with area school
districts. The project is enhancing the infrastructure for preparing career
change individuals by institutionalizing induction year support processes for
these new teachers. Results of this program are being disseminated broadly to
other teacher preparation programs via conference presentations and published
papers. Benefits to society include increasing the number of highly qualified
teachers available to our nation's schools and providing induction year support
to encourage them to remain in teaching.