* 0833440
* Strategies:  The Student Enabled Network of Sensors for the Environment using Innovative Technology (SENSE IT)
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* James Bonner, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,399,091.00

The Student Enabled Network of Sensors for the Environment using Innovative
Technology (SENSE IT) project will integrate STEM skills into a robust
interdisciplinary curriculum and teacher development effort by teaching 3,000
high school students to design, build, test, deploy and interpret their own
environmental sensors. SENSE IT will span three distinct residential regions in
New York's Hudson and St. Lawrence River valleys, as well as a diverse
socioeconomic and racial spectrum. SENSE IT will reach at least 60 teachers in
the region, providing 120 hours of professional development, in-class support
and necessary equipment, while directly increasing awareness of STEM career
opportunities for students and teachers. SENSE IT will generate four project-
based educational modules: 1) Sensor development, 2) Sensor deployment and data
gathering, 3) Water quality investigation and 4) Sharing data across
observatories. Each module will require three to five typical 45-minute class
periods and include comprehensive lesson plans to accommodate insertion into any
standard high school STEM curriculum (mathematics, chemistry, general science,
physics, environmental science and computer science), while meeting state and
national education standards. The objectives of the SENSE IT project are to 1)
develop a sensor technologies curriculum for the high school classroom; 2) use
environmental sensors as an engaging context to teach technology, engineering,
mathematics, science, and critical workforce skills; 3) encourage learners to
look at a local problem and data within a global perspective; 4) promote
awareness of sensor network related careers and opportunities among high school
teachers, students, parents and guidance counselors; and 5) emphasize that
mathematics is key to all STEM disciplines and careers. &lt;br/&gt;