* 0833287
* Robert Noyce Scholarships Phase II: Preparing Teachers for a New Era
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2014
* Gail Richmond, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 07/31/2014
* USD 599,459.00

This Phase II project builds on the successes of the previous Phase I award
which recruited and prepared four cohorts of new science and mathematics
teachers, providing them with mentors and over 1,150 hours of field-based urban
and rural experiences in learning to teach for diversity, and with special
workshops and seminars geared towards developing the knowledge and skills they
need to teach science and math effectively in high needs schools and districts.
Mentoring is provided by Michigan State University (MSU) faculty with expertise
in urban/rural teacher education, Master teachers in urban/rural school
districts, and MSU Phase I Noyce Scholars. The project seeks to: (a) increase
the number of teacher candidates from underrepresented backgrounds, from among
those mathematics and science students not already in the education track, and
from students in high-need science areas (i.e., physical and geosciences), and
(b) provide a greater network of support across the teacher preparation years
and the first years of teaching. The Phase II project expands the Michigan State
University (MSU) Noyce Program through the following four objectives: (1) To
recruit and retain three cohorts of MSU Noyce Scholars who are committed to
teaching in high needs schools and districts; (2) To support MSU Noyce Scholars
in developing the knowledge, skills and dispositions they need to excel and
persist in teaching placements in high needs schools and districts; (3) To
collaborate with and leverage powerful programs in place at MSU in teacher
education induction programs in order to provide MSU Noyce Scholars with
institutional and peer support; and (4) To determine the effectiveness of the
MSU Noyce Scholars program in recruiting, retaining and supporting new teachers
in attaining high needs placements, and to investigate the impact of the project
on students supported under the first award in terms of their performance as
teachers, their completion of the teaching requirement, and their retention in
the teaching profession. The project is providing Noyce Scholarships to recruit
and prepare 17 STEM majors to teach in urban school districts including Detroit
and Chicago Public Schools.