* 0833030
* 19th Annual Workshop on Interconnections within High Speed Digital Systems. To be Held May 18-21, 2008 in Santa Fe, NM.
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2009
* Richard Linke, Institute of Electrical & Electronics Engineers, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 07/31/2009
* USD 5,000.00

Intellectual Merit: The purpose of the 19th Annual IEEE/LEOS Workshop on
Interconnections within High-Speed Digital Systems is to examine the
interconnection requirements of emerging and future computer and communications
systems; and to disseminate information about state-of-the art optical and
electrical interconnection&lt;br/&gt;technologies at the component, packaging,
and systems level. The workshop consists of 16 invited talks from industry
practioners and university researchers plus three plenary talks, and is attended
by experts in electrical and photonic interconnects. In addition, the attendees
break into smaller groups to collaborate on a common technology problem,
selected to elucidate system performance and cost tradeoffs. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The interdisciplinary and
interactive&lt;br/&gt;format of the Workshop offers a great educational benefit
to junior researcher participants, training them to provide the next generation
of high performance interconnection solutions and to learn to think creatively
in a team environment. During discussions of the workshop problem, junior
researchers and experts in the field collaborate very closely; and junior
researchers are encouraged to show their work through a (peer-reviewed) poster
session at the workshop. Encouraging participation from junior researchers also
helps to bring diversity, both geographic as well as technical, to the workshop.