* 0834054
* Experimentally Validated Numerical Models of Nanomaterials
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Clement Kleinstreuer, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
*  Ashok S. Sangani
* 08/31/2012
* USD 429,700.00

CBET-0834054 Kleinstreuer

Project Summary: (a) Objectives:

(i) Development and testing of a realistic and accurate computer simulation
model for the prediction of engineered nanomaterial transport and deposition in
representative respiratory systems of workers, children and seniors.

(ii) Construction of validated, easy-to-use correlations of nanomaterial
deposition, based on the validated computer modeling results.

(iii) Generation of nanomaterial absorption and transport results in tissue
needed for physiologically-based pharmacokinetics (PBPK) modeling efforts.

(b) Approach: A dual numerical multiphysics approach for obtaining useful
nanomaterial deposition results is proposed, considering respiratory system
replicas of workers, children and seniors. Transient 3-D computer simulations
of: (i) realistic configurations of the upper respiratory tract, and (ii)
nasal/oral airways with variable multi-triple bifurcation units, including
alveolated ducts, representing the entire respiratory system. Simulation results
from task (i) will be thoroughly validated with experimental data sets, while
results from approach for task (ii) will be compared to results from (i) and
employed to generate an easy-to-use algebraic "lung model" for inhaled
nanoparticle deposition. (c) Results: Novel fundamental and applied research
results are anticipated. As part of NSF's mission, they foster the understanding
of the fate of nanomaterial in human respiratory systems, while the applied
results aid in EPA's mission to protect human health and DOE's mission to
explore the potentially harmful impact of inhaled nanomaterials produced in the
energy sector. Specifically, submodel developments for: (a) three-phase flow of
solid nanomaterial, inhaled air, and liquid mucus layer; (b) rod-like
nanomaterial transport and deposition; (c) fluid-structure interactions of
airflow and bronchial/alveolar-walls; and (d) tissue-uptake of nanomaterial are
basic advancements never addressed before in the context of the proposed
project. The applied research results include realistic experimentally validated
tools for predicting inhaled nanomaterial depositions in three susceptible
population groups as well as easy-to-use deposition correlations. Supplemental
Keywords: mathematical modeling, ambient polluted air, ultrafine particulate
matter, susceptible population groups, risk assessment, health effects.