* 0834517
* Collaborative Research:   CSR-EHCS(CPS), TM: AutoMatrix:  Large-scale Test-bed and Real-Time Protocols for Vehicle-to-Vehicle Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Rahul Mangharam, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2012
* USD 279,319.00

Over 6.4 million automotive accidents occur in the US annually. Odds of someone
being in an accident this year are 1 chance in 16. Any information that warns of
problems along the road(s) ahead can therefore potentially save lives and reduce
the frequency and/or intensity of accidents. The vehicle of tomorrow is the
programmable-networked vehicle. In our view, the networked vehicle of the future
is one of the most complex Cyber Physical Systems (CPS) with active trajectory
control, active navigation and on-line maintenance. V2V wireless networks are a
special class of networked-CPS where the maximum relative speeds are in excess
of 80m/s, the node density can span over 9,000 vehicles/mi^2 and, most
importantly, the dynamics of the vehicle, the environment, driver reaction and
interaction with other vehicles need to be considered in every communication and
control decision. To meet these timeliness and coordinated communication
requirements, we are developing a new set of networking capabilities that can
lay the foundation for dynamic vehicular networks designed to make driving
safer, more efficient and more enjoyable. This project is aimed at the design,
analysis, implementation and evaluation of vehicular networks that will enable a
wide range of applications including V2V and V2I communication for: (a) Bounded-
latency broadcast protocols for active networked safety alerts (b) Protocols and
algorithms for Real-Time collision avoidance (c) Native protocols for secure V2V
and V2I communication. Real-time research in V2V networks will be the first step
toward developing a Spatio-Temporal Real-Time theory and network protocols with
wide-area time synchronization.