* 0834047
* U.S.-France Planning Visit:  Nanostructured Iron Oxides: Nature's Signatures of Environmental Change
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* R. Lee Penn, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 08/31/2009
* USD 19,054.00

OISE-0834047 U.S.-France Planning Visit: Nanostructured Iron Oxides: Nature?s
Signature of Environmental Change&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will fund a
six day visit to France for a team of U.S. researchers to develop a joint
research proposal with French colleagues dealing with natural iron oxide
nanoparticles that act as sensitive recorders of climate- and human-induced
environmental changes. The U.S. team includes Dr. Lee Penn, Dr. Subir Banerjee,
a junior research associate and two graduate students for the University of
Minnesota-Twin Cities, as well as two colleagues from the University of
California. The French team is led by Professor Philippe Sainctavit of the
University of Paris. The U.S. participants are experts in nanoparticle
chemistry, synthesis, magnetism, and crystallography. The French participants
are experts in X-ray magnetic circular dichroism and neutron scattering. These
latter techniques can provide powerful tests for unique magnetic spin
orientations in the outermost 'shells' of the iron oxide nanoparticles. The U.S.
team is developing a central hypothesis dealing with the idea of a core-shell
magnetic and chemical structure of the iron oxide nanoparticles, and elucidating
that structure and its impact on the chemical behavior (e.g., redox chemistry at
nanoparticle surfaces) of iron nanoparticles is critical to the development of
precise descriptions of magnetic and chemical changes brought about by
environmental changes. Thus, the collaboration should lead to the first complete
magnetic and chemical description enabling rigorous interpretations of current
magnetic observations in soils and sediments in terms of past major changes in
rainfall and temperature. Such quantitative interpretations are needed to act as
benchmarks for testing numerical regional climate change models now being
developed in the United States and elsewhere.&lt;br/&gt;