* 0834172
* F08QQ Synthesis and Processing of Organic and Polymeric Functional Materials for a Sustainable Energy Econony.  To Be Held at the 2008 MRS Fall Meeting in Boston, MA Dec. 1-6, 2008
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2009
* Jian Li, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* George Maracas
* 07/31/2009
* USD 5,000.00

The 2008 Materials Research Society Fall Meeting will be held December 1-5 in
Boston, Massachusetts. Forty-five (45) symposia will be the technical core of
the meeting, among them the F08QQ Synthesis and Processing of Organic and
Polymeric Functional Materials for a Sustainable Energy Economy Symposium.
Photovoltaics and solid-state lighting are examples of technologies that are
envisaged in a new sustainable energy economy since these technologies would
enable us to use a renewable energy source and to use present energy sources
more efficiently. This symposium will be the venue for discussing novel
synthesis and processing methods to fabricate organic and functional polymeric
materials. Session topics include synthesis of organic and functional polymers
for low-dimensional and three-dimensional materials, novel methods for directed
assembly and printing, synthesis of engineered polymers and materials for
optimal photon-electron energy transfer, synthesis of novel architectures to
optimize energy transfer across interfaces, new materials for optoelectronics
and photovoltaics, "Green" synthesis and processing methods, and innovations in
materials characterization &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests travel
support mainly for undergraduate/graduate students, post-docs and junior faculty
to attend Symposium F08QQ.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Materials Research Society has a longstanding
tradition to provide an international forum where senior researchers from
academia and industry and students can exchange and debate new ideas. The list
of invited speakers includes several international experts on organic-based
photovoltaics and solid state lighting. This symposium provides excellent
opportunity to accelerate the progress of energy and sustainability-related
scientific research, as well as a great educational opportunity for
participating students. The organizers comprise an interdisciplinary
international team that is well qualified to prepare and conduct the symposium.
All of them are internationally recognized experts with strong track publication
records. Funding for this symposium will be used to facilitate participation by
graduate students, postdoctoral researchers and young faculty through travel
support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;International symposiums are a highly effective
means to exchange knowledge and advance science and engineering in an area of
national importance. New materials for photovoltaics are expected to promote the
diversification of energy resources whereas solid-state lighting will contribute
to energy conservation, both goals of national
interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bringing together researchers with different
skills and backgrounds will facilitate knowledge leveraging and dissemination.
Senior researchers will serve as role models to junior faculty and students. The
2008 Materials Research Society Fall Meeting will provide excellent educational
opportunities for all participants in the form of several tutorials that are
free of charge.