* 0834862
* SGER: Synthesis and Properties of Edge-charged Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2010
* James White, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 02/28/2010
* USD 120,000.00

This project will test a hypothesis that planar molecules consisting of two or
more linearly fused gamma-pyrones or gamma-pyridones will exhibit charge
delocalization that results in a high degree of charge along opposite edges of
the molecule. Charge delocalization will result from increasing aromaticity
associated with these molecular structures as the number of fused pyrones and
pyridones increases. Two structural types can be envisioned; one has charges
along each edge of the molecule of the same sign, i.e. one edge is positively
charged and the opposite edge is negatively charged and the other array has
alternating charges along each edge. Linearly fused gamma-pyrones and gamma-
pyridones will be synthesized with up to four monomer units and the properties
of each system will be studied. The studies will include (a) dipole moment
measurements (one array type should have a very large dipole moment, the other
essentially zero), (b) X-ray crystallographic analysis to assess the degree to
which bond lengths change with increasing aromaticity of the system, (c) nuclear
magnetic resonance measurements to evaluate diamagnetic anisotropy associated
with this aromaticity, and (d) experiments designed to examine metal ion
coordination along the charged edges of these structures. Macroscopic
assemblages of these systems resulting from edge-to-edge electrostatic
attraction, pi-stacking and other intermolecular forces will be studied, and
solid state properties potentially useful for the development of new materials
will be investigated. With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry
Program is supporting the research of Professor James D. White of the Department
of Chemistry at Oregon State University. Professor White's research is directed
towards the discovery of new synthetic methods and their application to the
synthesis of novel structures including both natural and non-natural substances.
These effort will have an impact on the development of new organic materials for
use in a variety of settings such as the electronics and pharmaceutical
industries.