* 0834799
* CSR-PSCE,SM:  Trade-offs Between Static Power, Performance and Reliability in Future Chip Multiprocessors
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Michel Dubois, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Krishna Kant
* 08/31/2011
* USD 200,000.00

As the transistor growth outpaced the design and verification effort in chip
design, a large fraction of on-chip transistors are now allocated to storage
structures, such as caches. The static power consumed by these storage
structures worsen the critical problems of power and thermal issues faced by
current chip designs. To reduce the static power, drowsy techniques are used,
where inactive components of a storage structure can be placed in a low power
state. Unfortunately, drowsy power states increase the susceptibility of
transistors to transient errors. Motivated by these problems, this research
explores the tradeoffs between static power, performance and reliability in chip
multiprocessors. The fundamental contribution of this research is to develop a
novel hybrid analytical/simulation framework that allows designers to evaluate
the impact of reducing static power on processor reliability and performance.
Using this framework this research explores new cache management and cache
protocols in chip-multiprocessors and the impact of these new schemes on
reliability and performance of a computer system. The framework can also be
extended to analyze the power, performance and reliability tradeoffs of other
storage structures inside each core such as the reorder buffer, the branch
prediction tables, and various instruction and scheduling queues.