* 0834807
* CSR-PSCE, SM:   Collaborative Research:   VOLPEX:  A Framework for Parallel Execution on Volatile Nodes
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* David Anderson, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Mohamed G. Gouda
* 08/31/2011
* USD 50,000.00

Ordinary PCs are widely employed for large scale scientific computing today.
Released in 2004, BOINC middleware is managing over 500,000 volunteered PC nodes
and providing computation power to around 30 scientific research projects
including Rosetta@home, Climateprediction.net, and IBM World Community Grid. The
main attraction of such "virtual clusters" is that computing is "free" as
minimal additional hardware and personnel resources are needed. The potential
for exploiting such idle cycles is immense since well under 1% of the world's 1
billion PCs are currently participating. Currently idle PCs are exploited for
sequential and independent parallel tasks, but not communicating parallel tasks,
a common HPC paradigm. The central goal of this project is to achieve robust
execution of communicating parallel applications on networked ordinary PCs. The
challenge is that ordinary desktops are "volatile", i.e., their availability
changes suddenly and frequently based on desktop owner's actions. Checkpointing
of parallel applications, the state of the art in fault tolerant scientific
computing, is not sufficient for high failure rate environments. This project is
developing the VolPEx framework (Parallel Execution on Volatile nodes) that
employs managed redundancy as the core mechanism to achieve seamless forward
application progress in the presence of routine failures. The canonical
execution model consists of two or more concurrent replicas of each process with
failed process replicas regenerated on-demand from healthy ones. The following
communication APIs are provided for application development. 1. Virtual
Dataspace: An abstract API for asynchronous anonymous Put/Get communication
among tasks. The BOINC programming model of independent tasks is being extended
with the dataspace API to allow inter-task communication 2. Volpex MPI: A subset
implementation of MPI with a communication layer customized for execution on
volatile nodes. The validation of this research will include execution of
selected parallel applications on 100s of nodes across campus LANs and 1000s of
nodes across the globe under Volpex/BOINC. The ability to transform ordinary PCs
into a virtual cluster to run parallel codes will have wide ranging impact.
Virtually all scientists will get access to HPC while the need for clusters and
the cost of purchasing, operating, and maintaining clusters will diminish.