* 0834566
* Collaborative Research:   CSR-PSCE, SM:   Adaptive Memory Management in Shared Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Chen Ding, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Krishna Kant
* 08/31/2012
* USD 266,637.00

Program performance is highly dependent on the amount of memory available to the
program. In traditional computing systems, the memory working set of an
application has a bounded size - providing more memory to an application
improves performance until its working set is met. Once the working set is met,
additional memory yields little or no benefit. However, in the presence of
garbage collection (a technique for memory management where space that is
unlikely to be reused by an application is automatically reclaimed), the
relationship between program performance and memory allocation is more complex.
Data is managed at three levels: the compiler manages data objects at the
program level, the garbage collector manages the heap at the virtual machine
level, and the virtual memory manager manages virtual memory at the operating
system level. The middle layer plays a critical role. Increasing an
application's heap size can reduce the frequency of garbage collections and
improve performance, but too large a heap may trigger paging and degrade
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Software developers take advantage of garbage
collection (GC) for the many benefits it provides by using either garbage-
collecting languages, such as Java and C#, or conventional languages (e.g., C
and C++) augmented with conservative garbage collectors. While a conventional
program uses exactly as much memory as it needs, the memory use of a garbage-
collected program can be adjusted by changing the size of the heap used by the
garbage collector. This difference can allow an advanced execution system to
control applications' memory demands in response to the changing amount of
available memory in a shared environment. This concept is increasingly important
for today's multicore, multiprocessor machines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on
previous work, this project develops the technology required to model the memory
demand of garbage-collected programs and enable adaptive management in existing
virtual machines and operating systems. Specifically, the project extends the
PIs' work on whole-program locality and phase models and adaptive memory
management, combining program analysis, garbage collection control, and on-line
system monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work develops program-level
adaptive memory management (PAMM) for garbage-collected programs running
concurrently with other garbage-collected programs and with conventional
applications. The goal is to adjust all applications' demands to fully use
available memory and avoid contention from periods of over demand.