* 0834243
* Design and Prototyping Risk Reduction
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2008,12/31/2015
* Brig 'Chip' Elliott, Raytheon BBN Technologies Corp.
* Continuing Grant
* John Brassil
* 12/31/2015
* USD 13,641,301.00

This project will fund the development of components and their integration for
Spiral 1 of an end-to-end prototype of a suite of network infrastructure that
would enable researchers to carry out novel network science and engineering
experiments, i.e., to do science that currently can not be done. Spiral 1 will
attempt a first, trial integration and operation of components on multiple
national backbones. Spiral 1 will be developed as quickly as possible to
identify and reduce programmatic and technical risk and to help the research
community achieve a shared vision by providing a working prototype. It will
stimulate broad community participation and build a strong academic and
industrial base. Twenty-nine projects, working in five teams will compete in the
design and implementation of the network infrastructure control framework.
System engineers will perform top-down integration planning and project
guidance. While a well-integrated, orderly system may not be possible until
Spiral 2 or 3, Spiral 1 will take the critical first step towards creating this
radically new kind of experimental infrastructure with end-to-end,
virtualizable, and sliceable capabilities, which are entirely novel. Once this
first spiral exists, it will co-evolve with the community?s emerging research
and education agenda. The larger impacts are potentially huge, allowing for
transformative research in network science and engineering that has never been
done before.

