* 0834393
* Collaborative Research:   CSR-PSCE, TM:   Effective Resource Sharing and Coordination inside Multicore Processors for High Throughput Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Xiaodong Zhang, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Krishna Kant
* 08/31/2012
* USD 330,000.00

One of the main challenges in multi-core processor resource management is that
existing operating systems (either conventional OS for single core or OS for
SMP) are not able to effectively handle the new complexities in multi-core
processors.

In order to address this challenge, the collaborators will conduct three closely
related projects. (1) A hybrid system design and implementation for OS-based
cache partitioning will provide efficient software management of shared caches
with minimum hardware complexity, and will well define hardware/software
interface of shared cache management. (2) The collaborators will design and
implement scheduling algorithms in OS kernels to effectively allocate CPU,
caches and memory bandwidth resources to multiprogramming jobs in multi-core
processors. (3) A data object locality-aware cache partitioning design and
implementation will distinguish the locality strengths of objects and make
effective cache allocation decisions.

The intellectual challenges of this project are threefold: (1) Hybrid system
design involves complex interactions between hardware and the underlined
operating system, and demands insightful understanding of existing system
structures and innovation to enhance both architecture and the OS kernels. (2)
OS-based scheduling in multi-core processors is a fundamental and complex
problem in system research. (3) System implementation of proposed algorithms for
scheduling and object coordination demands a lot of creative ideas for their
seamless integration in the kernels. The broader impact of this project is
expected to be significant. Solutions to address critical issues for significant
performance improvement in multi-core processors are timely demanded in many
application areas. The research training to both undergraduate and graduate
students will address the concerns of lacking strong system professionals in IT
and computer industries.

