* 0834480
* CSR-DMSS, SM:  View Control Management in Geographically Distributed Tele-Immersive Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Klara Nahrstedt, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2012
* USD 420,000.00

Revised Budget/Statement&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract for our
project (about 250 words) &lt;br/&gt;Emerging 3D Geographically Distributed
Tele-immersive Environments (3DTI) are becoming viable collaborative
environments over the Internet to allow for joint physical activities such as
tai-chi training and many other usages. These environments fuse multi-
dimensional streams from multiple 3D cameras and other sensors across multiple
sites to render a shared multi-view visual cyberspace at each site that immerses
all participants. In the cyberspace, each participant manipulates herself (e.g.,
positions, size), and interacts with remote participants or graphical objects
?virtually?. &lt;br/&gt;A fundamental challenge in these environments is the
need for effective real-time interaction among multi-site geographically
distributed 3DTI environments and the PI observes that maintaining a consistent,
information-rich shared visual context is the key to effective real-time
interaction. If the views of different participants become out of sync, their
collaboration is severely disrupted. &lt;br/&gt;In this project, the PI presents
a novel view control management, called VIEWCALL. VIEWCALL presents (1) a
holistic approach to view dissemination where the PI investigates forest
construction and load balancing for view-centric stream dissemination among
individual 3DTI environments; (2) a novel approach to visual context/feedback
distribution due to dynamics in view or resource demands, and (3) new
distributed algorithms for capturing, updating, coordinating and synchronizing
view-based visual context metadata. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The VIEWCALL system
has an impact on the 3DTI environments where research community investigates new
forms of dance choreography, students learning tai-chi, in-home care of ageing
population, computer gaming, and wheelchair-basketball coaches training players
with movement disabilities. VIEWCALL is regularly shown at the annual UIUC?s
Engineering Open House as well as to ChicTech all-schoolgirl summer camp.
&lt;br/&gt;