* 0834664
* CSR-PSCE, SM:   Exploring Helper Computing Parallelism in Multicore Architectures
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Yan Solihin, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Krishna Kant
* 08/31/2012
* USD 370,000.00

Current trends in computing architectures and programming support the rationales
for the proposed project. One trend is the increasing complexity of software
both in terms of the number of lines of source code, and number of layers
(hypervisor, guest OS, libraries, virtual machines, applications, etc.). This
increase in complexity could make software even more vulnerable to bugs and
security attacks in the future. Another trend is the increasing support for
thread-level parallelism in mainstream microprocessors through chip multi-
processor (CMP) architectures. Four and eight processor cores per chip have
either been realized or are in the future roadmap of major chipmakers.
Currently, mostly applications with natural thread-level parallelism (server and
scientific computing workloads) can benefit from them. Increasing reliability
and security requirements support parallelism opportunities for common
applications, and such parallelism may effectively be exploited through helper
computing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address these issues by
engaging in the following: exploring helper-computing's potentials for speeding
up software reliability and security meta-functions with scenario-guided
studies; a systematic, cross-layered study of efficient Meta-function Design,
Extraction, Optimization, and Dynamic Adaptation to achieve low overhead
execution in the main application; exploration of a prototype system which
includes compiler, libraries, run-time system, OS support, and possibly hardware
support. The exploration for such support will be holistic, i.e. by considering
implementation layers that produce the best trade-offs in the feasibility of the
solution in current systems, generality, and performance requirements. This
prototype system will be made available to the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
team also proposes to create an advanced course that focuses on helper
computing, and integrate its basic elements into existing hardware and software
courses. Such courses would integrate programming language, compiler, OS,
runtime system, and hardware in a synergistic way, helping to train future
workforce with unique and integrated expertise in these areas.