* 0834270
* CSR-EHCS (EHS), SM:   Formal Foundations of Real-time Systems Analysis:  Principles and Potential Pitfalls
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* James Anderson, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2011
* USD 270,000.00

As safety-critical systems become increasingly more complex, statutory
certification organizations are increasingly mandating that formal techniques be
used to prove that such systems meet their specifications. Techniques from real-
time scheduling theory are commonly applied during this proof process to
demonstrate compliance with temporal specifications. This project focuses on the
emerging field of meta-real-time scheduling theory. Meta-scheduling theory
attempts to understand those properties that cause certain scheduling-theoretic
techniques to be more successful than others in designing and implementing real-
time systems, and seeks general principles that are common to such successful
techniques. The objective is to identify several such principles and establish
that scheduling techniques complying with these principles are more likely to
yield error-free real-time systems. We will seek methods of deriving scheduling
techniques that are compliant with these principles. Using these techniques, the
project seeks to provide theoretical foundations for the analysis of timing
constraints in such systems, and obtain new methodologies for obtaining system
designs that are provably correct by construction (thereby concurrently
obtaining both correct designs and their formal proofs of correctness). Broader
impacts include joint research with industry colleagues, building on strong
expressions of interest from system designers in the topics and possible
outcomes of this research. All tools and development platforms implemented as
part of this project are being made public, and can be used by other
institutions for research and teaching purposes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;