* 0834973
* SGER: Molecular probing and identification of active RDX-utilizing microorganisms
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2008,12/31/2009
* Kung-Hui Chu, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Paul L. Bishop
* 12/31/2009
* USD 49,945.00

CBET- 0834973&lt;br/&gt;Chu, Kung-Hui&lt;br/&gt;Texas Engineering Experiment
Station&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hexahydro-1,3,5-trinitro-1,3,5-triazine
(RDX) is a cyclic nitramine explosive, which has been widely used in military
and civilian applications since World War II. The widespread use of RDX caused
soil/groundwater contamination in the United States and other countries. Since
RDX is toxic and a possible human carcinogen, remediation of RDX-contaminated
sites is one of the major environmental engineering problems. Although
anoxic/anaerobic biodegradation of RDX were observed, field application of RDX
bioremediation remains a great challenge because of limited understanding of the
microbial ecology of RDX-degraders, particular the interrelationships among
active degraders, non-degraders, and their associated microbial community under
different environmental conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research,
carbon flow from 13C-labeled RDX to genetic makeup of active RDX-degraders will
be traced by applying the methods of real-time-t-RFLP and Q-FAST, which were
developed earlier by the PI. The principal objective of this research is to
identify the diversity of RDX-utilizing bacteria under different environmental
conditions. The research hypothesis is that RDX-utilizers, particularly those
using RDX as a sole carbon source, are present in both clean and explosive-
contaminated environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will lead to the
development of a range of key biomarkers relating to degradative activities of
RDX to support remediation design and monitoring. Also, results of this project
will make a significant scientific contribution to the fields of microbial
ecology, applied microbiology, and environmental science and engineering. The
knowledge derived by this research would guide the isolation efforts for new
microorganisms that can be used for further physiological and biochemical
studies as well as for bioaugmentation.