* 0834336
* CAREER: A Genetic Method to Study Interactions Among Extracellular Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 10/08/2007,08/31/2012
* Jennifer Kohler, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
* Continuing Grant
* Michele McGuirl
* 08/31/2012
* USD 720,521.00

Extracellular glycoproteins mediate essential cellular recognition and binding
events. This large and vital part of the proteome remains poorly understood due
to challenges associated with studying glycosylated proteins. The objective of
this CAREER project is to develop a method inspired by the yeast two-hybrid
system, but optimized for use with post-translationally modified extracellular
proteins. The new method is dubbed the ''Golgi two-hybrid assay.'' This strategy
takes advantage of the fact that Golgi-resident glycosyltransferases can be
subdivided into modular domains. In this new technique, protein-protein
interactions will reconstitute the activity of a reporter glycosyltransferase.
Technique implementation will begin with the demonstration that the reporter
glycosyltransferase''s activity can be reconstituted by a known protein-protein
interaction. These initial experiments will be followed by a calibration of the
sensitivity and selectivity of the method. Finally, the method will be applied
to the rapid identification of interaction partners for glycoproteins of
interest. This new two-hybrid method is a key foundational tool to facilitate
the study of glycosylation and glycoproteins. In addition, it will be adaptable
for future needs such as secretome-wide interaction mapping, dissecting the
contribution of specific glycan structures to known protein-protein
interactions, directed molecular evolution to produce novel or improved
interaction partners, and the discovery of small molecule inhibitors of adhesive
interactions.

Broader Impacts In addition to undergraduate student training and educational
activities, the project will involve outreach to a local high school. By
building a partnership with a local high school, minority high school students
will be mentored and trained. Through summer laboratory employment, high school
students will gain research experience and scientific confidence while they play
integral roles in the development of modern technologies. Additionally, each
summer, one local high school teacher will participate in laboratory research
and have the opportunity to translate these technologies into classroom
curriculum materials. These two types of outreach activities complement one
another and are aimed at striking a balance between (1) making substantial
commitments to individual students and (2) leveraging resources to reach as many
students as possible. High school students, high school teachers, and
undergraduate students will participate in all aims of this project, advancing
the twin goals of (1) preparing students for future scientific careers and (2)
ensuring the usability of the new two-hybrid method.