* 0834709
* CSR-EHCS(CPS),TM:   Architecture for the Safe Composition of Complex Medical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Jose Meseguer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2013
* USD 962,000.00

Each year thousands of patient injuries and near-misses are caused by improper
or unsafe medical device interactions, because the consequences of device-device
and device-human interactions are sometimes poorly understood, leading to
hazardous situations.

To provide a framework for addressing these challenges, a consortium of medical,
industrial, academic, and government bodies have been collaborating through the
?MD PnP? (Medical Device Plug-and-Play) program to identify the broad
requirements for the integration of medical devices in high-acuity settings. A
subset of these requirements formed the framework for a proposed ASTM Committee
F29 standard for the functional requirements of a safe Integrated Clinical
Environment (ICE). The committee for this proposed standard is chaired by Co-PI
Dr. Julian Goldman.

However, there are many open research questions in extending the current
standard to achieve the safe and dynamic composition of medical devices. The
purpose of this project is to develop formal and medical procedure context
sensitive system composition architecture for safe medical device plug-and-play.
This project will do more than just ensure interoperability; it will provide
decision support and make sure that the composition of medical devices and
information systems with different safety levels will result in a verifiably
safe MD PnP technologies. We expected the new technologies will be embedded into
future standards, leading to a greatly improved medical device system.