* 0834200
* Collaborative Research: Did the Altyn Tagh Fault Continue Beyond the Northern Margin of Tibet? Implications for Strain Accommodation During Continent-Continent Collision
* GEO,EAR
* 12/19/2007,06/30/2011
* Bradley Ritts, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 06/30/2011
* USD 101,723.00

End-member models of the Cenozoic collision of India with Asia (continuum
crustal thickening vs. extrusion of crustal blocks) make specific predictions
about the rates, kinematics, and spatial extent of structures in and around the
Tibetan Plateau. The Altyn Tagh fault, an active greater than 1600 kilometer
long left-lateral structure that marks the northern margin of the Tibetan
Plateau, plays key, yet different roles in these models. Continuum thickening
models predict slow rates of slip on the ATF and require that all displacement
on the ATF (approximately 375 kilometers), is accommodated by crustal shortening
in the Qilian Shan and Qaidam basin. Extrusion models predict high rates of slip
on the ATF and require it to continue beyond the plateau or transfer its slip to
other structures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent studies of Cenozoic sedimentary
basins along the central-eastern ATF have demonstrated two phases of motion:
first, Late Oligocene-Early Miocene large magnitude (approximately 310
kilometers) and high rates of slip on the central-eastern segment of the fault
and second, limited mid-Miocene-Recent slip ( approximately 65 kilometers) and
lower rates . These results suggest that the Altyn Tagh fault accommodated
plate-like lateral extrusion in the Oligocene-Early Miocene, and that the mode
of deformation changed to distributed shortening and thickening in the mid-
Miocene. However, the inferred earlier phase of Oligocene-Early Miocene lateral
extrusion requires that slip be transferred from the ATF beyond the NE Tibetan
Plateau, but studies of known candidate structures have failed to identify any
with the appropriate slip magnitude or timing. The hypothesis being tested is
that Oligocene-Early Miocene eastward lateral extrusion of Tibet along the ATF
was accommodated by left-lateral faults in the Alxa region, northeast of Tibet,
which subsequently became inactive in the mid-Miocene.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Candidate structures have been mapped in the Alxa region
and are left-lateral faults that cut Cretaceous strata. Fieldwork in the Alxa
region includes geological mapping, kinematic analysis of these major faults,
and basin analysis to determining the distribution and structural geometry of
the fault systems. Combining the techniques above with provenance analysis,
documentation of cross-cutting and overlapping relationships with Cretaceous-
Cenozoic sedimentary deposits, and paleomagnetic determinations of declination
anomalies in Cretaceous-Cenozoic rocks provides detailed slip histories and
differential vertical axis rotations for each of these structures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The final results of this research will advance
understanding of how the Himalayan-Tibetan mountain belt evolved and how
collision between India and Eurasia was accommodated. As a prominent natural
laboratory, this region is critical for studying the first order processes that
control how continents deform, and thus how mountain belts evolve through time.
These processes of continental deformation and mountain uplift are in turn
important, because they influence regional and global climate, distribution of
natural resources, and influence a wide range of other Earth System processes.
In addition to the scientific objectives of this research, the project is
supporting graduate and undergraduate student training at Louisiana State
University, the University of Indiana, and the University of California, Santa
Cruz and will provide international research experiences for these students. The
research also involves collaboration between U.S. researchers and their
counterparts in China. Funding for the Indiana University part of the
collaboration is provided by the NSF Tectonics Progran and the NSF Office of
International Science and Engineering.