* 0834476
* Collaborative Research:   CSR-PSCE, TM:   Effective Resource Sharing and Coordination inside Multicore Processors for High Throughput Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Zhao Zhang, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Krishna Kant
* 08/31/2012
* USD 191,999.00

&lt;br/&gt;One of the main challenges in multi-core processor resource
management is that&lt;br/&gt;existing operating systems (either conventional OS
for single core or OS for SMP) are&lt;br/&gt;not able to effectively handle the
new complexities in multi-core processors.&lt;br/&gt;In order to address this
challenge, the collaborators will conduct three closely
related&lt;br/&gt;projects. (1) A hybrid system design and implementation for
OS-based cache&lt;br/&gt;partitioning will provide efficient software management
of shared caches with minimum&lt;br/&gt;hardware complexity, and will well
define hardware/software interface of shared cache&lt;br/&gt;management. (2) The
collaborators will design and implement scheduling algorithms in&lt;br/&gt;OS
kernels to effectively allocate CPU, caches and memory bandwidth resources
to&lt;br/&gt;multiprogramming jobs in multi-core processors. (3) A data object
locality-aware cache&lt;br/&gt;partitioning design and implementation will
distinguish the locality strengths of objects&lt;br/&gt;and make effective cache
allocation decisions.&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual challenges of this project are
threefold: (1) Hybrid system design&lt;br/&gt;involves complex interactions
between hardware and the underlined operating system,&lt;br/&gt;and demands
insightful understanding of existing system structures and innovation
to&lt;br/&gt;enhance both architecture and the OS kernels. (2) OS-based
scheduling in multi-core&lt;br/&gt;processors is a fundamental and complex
problem in system research. (3) System&lt;br/&gt;implementation of proposed
algorithms for scheduling and object coordination demands&lt;br/&gt;a lot of
creative ideas for their seamless integration in the kernels. The broader
impact&lt;br/&gt;of this project is expected to be significant. Solutions to
address critical issues for&lt;br/&gt;significant performance improvement in
multi-core processors are timely demanded in&lt;br/&gt;many application areas.
The research training to both undergraduate and graduate&lt;br/&gt;students will
address the concerns of lacking strong system professionals in IT
and&lt;br/&gt;computer industries.