* 0834490
* CSR-EHCS(EHS), SM:   Investigating a Novel Embedded Processor Architecture for Electonic Textiles in Wearable and Pervasive Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Mark Jones, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2012
* USD 252,000.00

The purpose of this project is to explore novel embedded processor architectures
for electronic textiles (e-textiles). E-textiles are intelligent fabrics where
sensors and computation are intrinsic to the cloth, with applications in
medicine, entertainment, and sports. E-textiles occupy an extremely constrained
point in the embedded system design space, having a large number of networked
sensors and processors distributed throughout the fabric and tight requirements
on performance, energy consumption, and
reliability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research at the Virginia Tech E-textiles Lab
has shown that a Model-Driven Engineering (MDE) approach allows designers to
effectively manage the complexity of the e-textile design space, which includes
issues such as fiber selection, the weave pattern, the physical topology of the
electrical/communication network in the fabric, the number/type/location of
sensor/actuator nodes, the number and type of computational nodes, the system
software organization, and the application
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;However, an MDE approach does not yield an
implementation that is easily portable while being power- and performance-
efficient, due to a fundamental mismatch between the MDE design specification
and the target microprocessors. The approach in this project is to develop an
event-driven computer architecture family that presents an abstraction that is
well-matched to the MDE design specification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential
benefits of this project include using the architecture family to improve the
reliability, design cost, and energy efficiency of embedded systems besides
e-textiles. The broader impacts of the project include e-textile applications in
medical monitoring, wearable computing, and pervasive computing. Educational
benefits include providing undergraduate and graduate students with
multidisciplinary research experience.&lt;br/&gt;