* 0834545
* CSR-DMSS, SM:   Web on Demand - Bridging the Gap Between Social Networks and Ad Hoc Networking
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,12/31/2012
* Umakishore Ramachandran, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Krishna Kant
* 12/31/2012
* USD 413,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From the western world to the third world, the use
of handheld devices (cellphones, PDAs) has proliferated. The world of users is
becoming both wireless and mobile. Web 2.0 has ushered in an age wherein the web
is viewed as a provider of services and not just a repository of documents
and/or information. Despite this advance, the web remains just that, a single
web with an inherent assumption that a powerful computing and communication
infrastructure supports it. Couldn't mobile wireless devices in close proximity
form a web of their own? This is the vision behind this project, the Web on
Demand (WoD). WoD aims at bridging the gap between social networks and ad hoc
networking. In other words, it aims to rethink the system software stack all the
way from application to networking that would allow the creation and management
of social networks without any assumption of infrastructure support. The core of
the research is to develop software technologies for mobile devices that would
allow the dynamic creation of thematic ad hoc overlay networks empowering (a)
mobile people with similar interests (e.g., weather forecast), (b) friends and
family (e.g., in a theme park), and (c) participants in mission critical
applications (e.g., search and rescue), stay connected. WoD complements the
World Wide Web (WWW) and leverages it when it is available, such as exploiting
the ambient computing infrastructure to enhance user experience, and managing
the dynamic creation of User Generated Content (UGC) by mobile users. The vision
behind this project is to democratize access to services that are currently
offered through WWW. In this sense, the results from this research can have far-
reaching technological and societal consequences. Most importantly, the research
will help breed a new class of computer scientists who are connected with
societal causes in addition to advancing technology.&lt;br/&gt;