* 0834125
* Diffusing Probe Measurements of Specific Interactions between Surface Immobilized Biomacromolecules
* NONE,NONE
* 04/03/2008,05/31/2011
* Michael Bevan, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 05/31/2011
* USD 284,526.00

CBET-0755878 Bevan

This project is concerned with the application of a conceptually new method,
Diffusing Colloidal Probe Microscopy (DCPM), to directly and nonintrusively
measure kT and nanometer scale interactions of surface immobilized proteins and
carbohydrates. Ensembles of freely diffusing colloids will be employed as ultra-
sensitive probes to measure energy vs. separation dependent potentials of mean
force (PMF) between proteins/carbohydrates attached to colloids and planar
surfaces. By combining evanescent wave and video microscopy, DCPM will monitor
three dimensional Brownian excursions of protein decorated colloids near
homogeneous, heterogeneous, and patterned substrates also with covalently
attached and oriented proteins/carbohydrates. Because diffusing probes sample
spatial positions according to their relative energies, statistical mechanical
analyses of diffusing probes can be interpreted as net PMFs including
superimposable non-specific (colloidal, macromolecular) and specific (residues,
geometry) contributions. Consistent with the nanotechnology paradigm, DCPM will
interrogate protein and carbohydrate interactions by exploiting natural gauges
for time (a2/D), energy (kT), force (fN), and length (nm) associated with
diffusing colloidal probes.

The intellectual merit of the research is broadly related to the fundamental
insights that will be gained into immobilized protein-protein and protein-
carbohydrate interactions (i.e. PMFs) with practical relevance to
nanobiotechnologies (e.g. chemical sensors, protein arrays). Several
biomolecular interactions will be investigated including: (1) maltose binding
protein (MBP) with transmembrane aspartate receptor (Tar), (2) MBP with amylose,
and (3) ConA with amylose. The first two interactions mediate E. coli maltose
chemotaxis, which is one of the most thoroughly studied experimental models for
chemical recognition/response by organisms with broad relevance to problems
ranging from drug interactions to chemical detection. The last interaction will
be studied partly because it is an inexpensive, commercially available, and well
characterized model system that can be used to optimize initial DCPM
experiments, but also because of its practical relevance to glucose sensing
(i.e. diabetes control) and its complementarity to the second interaction. The
first task of the proposed work is to covalently attach/orient proteins and
carbohydrates onto gold (Au) colloids and either Au or silica surfaces (purified
and characterized proteins provided by the collaborator). Building on
preliminary DCPM measurements of non-specific macromolecular interactions, the
second task is to measure interactions of covalently attached/oriented
carbohydrates and proteins with various mutations and conformations to allow for
deconvolution of non-specific and specific contributions to net potentials. The
last task is to measure non-specific and specific interactions on a model array
consisting of patterned regions of carbohydrates or covalently attached/oriented
proteins. Successful completion of proposed objectives will demonstrate a new
technology (DCPM) to directly and sensitively quantify weak non-specific and
specific interactions that control non-covalent, equilibrium binding of proteins
and carbohydrates immobilized on particles and surfaces.

The broader impacts of the proposed research are related to the use of visual
research content to provide intuitive educational experiences for students at
all levels and to allow for authentic and guided inquiry experiences in the
classroom. Educational tasks will involve integrating visual content (e.g.
images, videos, renderings) generated in the proposed research in courses and
outreach activities. In terms of classroom teaching, research images and videos
will be incorporated into undergraduate and graduate colloid/polymer elective
courses and an undergraduate thermodynamics core course. In terms of outreach,
content involving optical microscopy of colloids will be adapted for use in
programs for 7-12 grade teachers and students and for integration into web based
modules used in core chemical engineering courses.