* 0834796
* SGER:   Exploratory Research on an Internet Framework to Improve a Social Network Structure
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2009
* Tatsuya Suda, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2009
* USD 79,926.00

This research considers a class of social problems represented by cyber bullying
and creates a sociology-based network framework to consider two new questions,in
an initial study: does the network framework (where network and applications are
both included) allow identification of cyber bullying within networked social
groups? And if it does, can the framework lead to ways of mitigating cyber
bullying? What are the representations of information in the network that
preserve privacy? What are the tradeoffs between the goals of the research and
ensuring that eventual users have protected privacy and have enough transparency
into a framework that affects them? In the mitigation area, the project will
explores the insight that network interventions such as lessening the frequency
of deliveries from an aggressive poster can affect social peers positively. The
project will research will develop an approach called deriving structures, so
the mitigations / interventions could be in the applications or could be in
deeper structures or both together. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the one-year
exploratory research of this project, the PI is working with a number of unpaid
collaborators in Japan: 1) with several sociologists in order to develop
definitions and tests for cyber bullying; 2) with educators to develop a case-
based classroom social net study, including approaches to mitigation that seem
realistic to them; 3) with researchers from the Japanese telecommunications
company, KDDI, who are sharing the research exploration and also providing
experimental infrastructure in Japan. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has
broader impacts on society: social experiences on the net loom large in young
peoples' development in many countries now. Cyber bullying of various forms is a
risk for many people, young and old. Innovations in understanding this
phenomenon are very important to society; the sooner the better. This angle, the
sociometric use of the network and the careful analysis of network based
mitigations by not only the computer scientist PI, but also by sociologist,
educator and network operator collaborators, will open new doors.