* 0834475
* Collaborative Research:   CSR-PSCE, SM:   Memory Thermal Management for Multi-Core Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Zhao Zhang, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2012
* USD 172,000.00

With the increasing demand on memory performance by multi-core processors, the
memory subsystem has become a new thermal concern along with the processor and
the hard disk drive. To address this emerging issue, this project addresses
several new, system-level Dynamic Thermal Management (DTM) schemes that
coordinate the DRAM thermal management with the processor performance
throttling, such as dynamically adjusting the number of active processor cores
or scaling the processor's frequency and voltage level based on the memory
thermal status. The project also studies coordinated thermal management schemes
that consider the thermal requirements from both the processor and the memory
subsystem. Thermal-aware OS job scheduling is further considered to smooth
memory traffic and DRAM heat generation over time by mixing jobs with different
memory demands appropriately. In addition, thermal-aware page allocation is
proposed to avoid unbalanced overheating from some memory chips by considering
the location of each chip and the memory access demand of each application.
These schemes will first be evaluated using simulation and then implemented in
OS kernels and evaluated on real systems. To support the memory thermal studies,
a simple and accurate thermal model is proposed to estimate the dynamic
temperature changes of DRAM memory subsystems. A two-level simulator will be
developed to emulate the thermal behavior of memory subsystems. Successfully
addressing the thermal concern of memory subsystems will not only ensure safe
system operations but also improve the overall system performance, reduce the
system manufacturing cost, and improve the system power efficiency.