* 0834260
* CSR-EHCS(EHS), SM:   A formal approach to control of hybrid systems with applications to mobile robotics
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2013
* Calin Belta, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* M. Mimi McClure
* 08/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

In formal verification, finite models of computer programs or digital circuits
are checked against temporal logic properties such as safety (something bad
never happens) and liveness (something good eventually happens). While formal
verification received a lot of attention, the dual problem of formal synthesis,
where the focus is to construct a provably correct system (e.g., safe by design)
is still in its infancy. In addition, most systems, such as models of unmanned
vehicles, are hybrid, combining continuous models of vehicle dynamics with
finite state automata that model embedded controllers and communication
protocols. This project develops theoretical frameworks and computational tools
for synthesis of provably-correct control and communication strategies for
hybrid systems and distributed hybrid systems from specifications given in rich,
human-like language. Central to the approach in this project is the notion of
abstraction, which is used to construct finite descriptions of control systems.
Such abstractions allow for the use of (adapted) temporal logics as
specification languages, tools from formal verification and temporal logic games
for analysis and control, and techniques inspired from synchronization in
concurrency theory for synthesis of communication strategies. The computational
tools developed in this project are implemented as user-friendly software
packages and tested in a miniature mobile robotics experimental platform. This
research is closely integrated with a comprehensive educational and outreach
plan, which includes undergraduate and graduate classes, involvement of
undergraduate and high school students in research, and the participation of the
PI as a judge and organizer in high school robotics competitions.