* 0834010
* Conference: Visual System Development 2008 Gordon Research Conference, August 10-15, 2008, Salve Regina, Rhode Island
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2008,06/30/2009
* Ross Cagan, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 06/30/2009
* USD 10,000.00

Ross L. Cagan, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine&lt;br/&gt;IOS-0834010&lt;br/&gt;Visual System Development 2008 Gordon
Research Conference&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Of all the major senses, vision is
probably the most tangible: humans and most other animals are vision-dominant
organisms that use sight as the major means to navigate through the environment.
This meeting, Visual System Development, is one of the elite Gordon Conferences
that occurs every other year. The meeting brings together the very best
scientists as well as young promising scientists for four days to share data on
the mechanisms by which eyes and vision develop, how these remarkable structures
connect and bring visual information to the brain, and how sense is perceived of
the visual world. This meeting is considered by many to be the preeminent
meeting for sharing information and ideas on vision and visual system
development. In addition to bringing together researchers from premier
institutions of higher learning from the United States, many of whom have been
funded by NSF, this meeting also attracts a distinctly international audience.
In terms of Broader Impacts, an important goal of this meeting is to share ideas
and to create new ones by assembling top researchers from many different
disciplines in an environment that encourages open dialog as well as scientific
excellence.