* 0834738
* CSR-PSCE, SM:   Recording and Deterministically Replaying Shared-memory Multiprocessor Execution Efficiently
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Samuel King, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2013
* USD 420,000.00

Recording and deterministically replaying execution gives system designers the
ability to travel backward in time. Time travel in computer systems means the
ability to recreate arbitrary past states and events on the computer system. In
general, recreating past states and events is achieved by logging key events
when the software runs, then restoring to a previous checkpoint and replaying
the recorded log to force the software down the same execution path
deterministically. This alluring mechanism has enabled a wide range of
applications in modern systems including debugging programs, performing post-hoc
security analysis, and improving fault tolerance. To maximize effectiveness,
replay systems should (i) record at production-run speeds, (ii) keep logging
requirements minute, (iii) replay at a speed similar to that of the initial
execution. Software-only systems for deterministic replay achieve these goals
for uni-processor systems, but suffer from poor performance on multiprocessor
systems. Hardware-only systems record and replay efficiently on multiprocessor
systems, but current proposals for hardware-only systems are largely impractical
since they place too much functionality within the hardware and because they do
not mix recording, replaying, and traditional execution on the same system
concurrently. This research will focus on the design and implementation of Capo,
a hybrid hardware/software replay system that will record and replay execution
on multiprocessor systems efficiently. The key contribution of this research
will be designing and implementing the first hardware/software interface for
combining hardware and software level replay systems. This interface will serve
as the foundation for a new generation of replay systems that will achieve both
the flexibility of software-level replay systems and the efficiency of hardware-
level replay systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research will
have substantial impact on industry, by enabling the effective use of
deterministic replay of parallel codes. The team will release all software
artifacts as open source, which will help researchers and educators in many
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to their research contributions,
this team will enhance a series of courses and expand their course offerings in
parallel systems - especially at the undergraduate level. The PIs have a long-
standing commitment to undergraduate education, routinely involving
undergraduates in their research and exposing them to parallel software and
hardware. The PIs will continue to involve undergraduate and graduate students
in their research groups. This project is compelling to undergraduates because
it involves the interaction of two different system layers.