* 0834466
* CSR-DMSS, SM:   Energy-Efficient and Reliability-Aware Data Management in Mobile Storage Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Tao Xie, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing grant
* Krishna Kant
* 08/31/2012
* USD 160,000.00

Abstract

Dr. Tao Xie

Highly reliable, high performance and energy-efficient storage systems are
essential for mobile data-intensive applications such as remote surgery and
mobile data center. Existing mobile storage systems generally consist of an
array of independent small form factor hard disks connected to a host by a
storage interface in a mobile computing environment. Although hard disks are
cost-effective and can provide huge capacity and high-throughput, they have some
intrinsic limitations such as long access latencies, high annual disk
replacement rates, fragile physical characteristics, and energy-inefficiency.
Compared with hard disk drives, flash disks are much more robust and energy-
efficient, and can offer much faster access times. A major concern on current
flash disk is its relatively higher price. This project develops a hybrid disk
array system, which integrates small capacity flash disks with high capacity
hard disk drives to form a robust and energy-efficient storage system for mobile
data-intensive applications. In particular, an array of new data management
techniques including energy-efficient data placement, self-adaptive and
reliability-aware data redistribution, and self-triggered data replication for
data-intensive mobile applications built on the hybrid disk array framework will
be developed. In addition, this project implements a simulation toolkit, which
will be designed specifically to study a variety of data management techniques
on top of the hybrid disk array architecture. This project will also promote
teaching, learning, and training by exposing students to technological and
scientific underpinnings in the field of energy-efficient storage systems. To
enhance education outreach to local underrepresented groups of undergraduate
students, this project organizes a summer workshop on energy-efficient computing
at San Diego State University.

