* 0834701
* CSR-EHCS(CPS),TM:    Architectures, Abstractions and Algorithms for Cyber-Physical Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Bruno Sinopoli, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Mohamed G. Gouda
* 08/31/2011
* USD 318,000.00

Cyber-physical networks (CPNs) are tight integrations of computational and
physical components with interactions and interdependencies that are much more
varied and complex than what occurs in traditional monitoring and control
systems. Building on research in software architectures, this project will
develop a proof of concept for a novel architecture description language with
annotations and views that will provide a unified framework for the design of
CPNs. Initial algorithms that leverage the structural features of component-
based architectural descriptions of CPNs will also be developed and
demonstrated. Using environmental monitoring and control of buildings as the
target application domain, existing formalisms and methods will be extended to
incorporate a wider set of cyber-physical features aimed at supporting
compositional analysis and verification. Prototype design algorithms will be
developed in the context of new performance metrics that capture critical
features and design tradeoffs among the objectives and constraints for
computation, communication and control in CPNs. The concept of networks of
verification and design problems derived from multiple views of CPN
architectures will also be developed, making it possible to assess and leverage
tradeoffs that cut across current cyber-physical boundaries created by disparate
mathematical formalisms and dissimilar methodologies in engineering and computer
science. As a proof of concept, methods will be developed to compose and iterate
verification and design results over a restricted class of networks of
interdependent abstractions and problems. These preliminary results will be
applied and evaluated in the context of the design of energy efficient
buildings. This research will lay the foundations for developing a general set
of architectural tools and algorithms for the compositional analysis, design,
and verification of CPNs.