* 0834149
* Ethics Education and Scientific and Engineering Research:  What's Been Learned?  What Should Be Done?
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2008,12/31/2010
* Richard Bissell, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Kelly A. Joyce
* 12/31/2010
* USD 91,387.00

As research environments grow ever more complex, institutions and investigators
struggle to assure responsible professional development for students and
postdoctoral researchers. Interdisciplinary and international research
activities add to the challenges, as does the increasing involvement of
commercial interests. The complicated interactions of new developments in
science, engineering, and technology in society add another layer of difficulty.
For several decades, NSF and other research agencies have supported projects to
develop responsible conduct of research and mentoring activities and to
investigate and assess ethically problematic behaviors and the efficacy of
ethics education. Continuing attention to the need for these programs from the
public and Congress indicates that this is an opportune time to review progress
that has been made and consider how to improve these efforts. The National
Academies will host a day and a half workshop in late summer 2008, that brings
together the constituencies interested in and responsible for these goals, to
examine how best to insure that they are met. The workshop planning committee
includes representation from the concerned communities: scientists, engineers,
academic administrators, professional associations and publications, experts in
fields of science and engineering ethics, and junior researchers. In order to
provide for intensive discussion and drafting sessions, participation will be
limited to 25 persons. The workshop will include brief presentations and
extended discussion about the issues, resources, constituencies, needs, and
potential options for next steps from representatives of each of the
constituencies. It will identify adoptable materials and promising practices in
mentoring and ethics education, examining more and less effective pedagogical
methods to address mentoring and ethics education in both research and
educational activities, and providing examples of successful approaches and
outcomes. The discussion will attend to elements of the responsible development
of professionals more broadly conceived than traditional responsible conduct of
research topics such as falsification and plagiarism, emphasizing attention to
disciplinary breadth and non-medical settings. How to build bridges between
research investigators and scholars and researchers with expertise in relevant
domains of science and engineering ethics will be discussed and positive
examples may be helpfully delineated. Research findings and effective training
methods, educational materials, and practices will be identified, along with
suggestions for dissemination of ethics training tools to users, and for future
research, educational innovations, and outreach activities. Finally, the
workshop attendees will identify gaps in the knowledge base about what works in
ethics education and mentoring in ethics and related areas for all of the
relevant constituencies, providing a basis for planning future research and
educational assessments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Attendees will draft summaries of
the workshop discussions; workshop rapporteurs and Academies' staff will use
these submissions to author an overall workshop summary that will be published
on the Academies' website as well as in a printed version, and a promotional
brochure about the workshop summary will be broadly disseminated. The Academies
will publicize the availability of the workshop summary and associated
Academies' programs and publications widely. Attendees will talk about the
workshop at varied professional society and academic association meetings, and
describe it in their newsletters and journals. Dissemination of the workshop
summary will be of broad practical and intellectual use to investigators and
institutions attempting to respond to the requirements concerning ethics
training and mentoring in the new America COMPETES Act HR 2272, Section 7009.