* 0834356
* CSR-PSCE, SM:  MPI-PPA:   Improving Efficiency of Large-Scale Clusters Through Statistical Performance Prediction
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,07/31/2009
* David Lowenthal, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 07/31/2009
* USD 80,000.00

This project develops a system that improves parallel efficiency on large
numbers of processors - up to tens or hundreds of thousands - without running a
program at scale. This system is called MPI-PPA: MPI Performance Prediction and
Advisement. MPI-PPA takes as input a scientific computing application along with
the input variables, including the desired number of processors, p. With
executions on fewer than p processors only - so that these executions will occur
quickly - MPI-PPA will produce a list of program phases that are predicted to
achieve poor scalability, allowing the programmer to quickly address and
possibly re-implement these phases - as well as a prediction for the entire
program run.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MPI-PPA makes these predictions using
statistical regression to develop a prediction function that can be used with
any number of processors. MPI-PPA will not require significant program
comprehension, an important aspect when considering that computational
scientists are typically experts in their scientific domain and not in computer
science. The approach of MPI-PPA involves heavy reliance on statistical
techniques, so the work in this project will be interdisciplinary between
computer science (the PI) and statistics (the co-PI). MPI-PPA will be validated
by using benchmark suites such as NAS and ASCI codes, along with large-scale
applications - such as Paradis and Raptor - that are of interest to national
labs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this work is multifold. First,
MPI-PPA will be beneficial for computational scientists as well as cluster
administrators. Among the benefits will be a simple and fast performance tuning
system, an increase in overall cluster efficiency, and a reduction in response
times for individual applications. The technology developed in this project will
be transferred, in the form of performance tuning and prediction software, and
made available to the public through cooperation with Lawrence Livermore
National Laboratory. Second, more interdisciplinary interaction between
statistics and computer science will be fostered through the supervised
statistical consulting center at the University of Georgia. Third, efforts will
continue recruiting students from strong historically black colleges and
universities in the area, such as Morehouse University.