* 0834080
* Collaborative Research:  CSR-EHCS, SM:   DPOP - A Dynamic Profiling and Optimization Platform for Sensor-Based Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2011
* Ann Ramirez, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 07/31/2011
* USD 86,100.00

Sensor-based platforms are enabling the vision of ubiquitous computing
environments to be realized. However, as these platforms continue to evolve,
they are becoming increasingly complex to design and implement for a given
application. Much of the complexity associated with sensor-based platforms is
due to the plethora of parameters that must be considered. To further complicate
matters, application developers oftentimes are not trained engineers, but rather
biologists, teachers, or agriculturists who wish to utilize the sensor-based
systems within their given domain. Faced with an overwhelming number of choices,
application design may be a daunting task for non-experts. This project seeks to
alleviate some of the complexities associated with sensor-based system design
through the use of automated optimization methods that abstract many of the
underlying design and platform details, dynamic profiling methods capable of
observing application-level behavior, and dynamic optimization to tune the
underlying platform accordingly. Dynamic profiling enables an accurate view of
the application behavior and allows the system to monitor how the application
responds to changing environmental conditions or changes in the platform itself.
If the developer specified performance metrics are not currently being met,
dynamic optimization and network reconfiguration can adapt the deployed network
to its current surroundings and application requirements. This dynamic profiling
and optimization environment reduces developer effort and increases the
accessibility of sensor-based systems to a wider audience, where we believe such
systems can enhance everyday lives, and further the emergence of innovative
applications.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;