* 0834849
* SGER:  Defining the Center: Exploratory Research at the Efranes-1 site, Western Iceland
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2009
* Kevin Smith, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2009
* USD 27,531.00

With National Science Foundation support, Kevin Smith will lead an international
team in one field season of archaeological research to explore a newly
discovered monumental site in western Iceland. The site, Efranes-1, discovered
on satellite imagery and briefly visited in 2007, incorporates ca. 7500 m2 of
contiguous architecture. It appears to be the largest-known turf-built structure
in the North Atlantic and is potentially a unique example of "monumental"
construction in that region, analogous to political centers erected during the
process of state formation in other regions of the world.

The origin of the state has been a subject of debate for centuries, yet Iceland
is the only region in the world where the process of pre-industrial state
formation was described in contemporary texts by the very chieftains who built
their state. These texts provide unique information on what chieftains said
about why they consolidated power and how the Icelandic state arose, but
Icelands archaeological record for the period of state formation - the 12th-13th
centuries - remains under-explored. This period's administrative centers - its
assembly sites - where state-founders demonstrated their power and integrated
their regions into a new kind of political system, have not been explored
archaeologically.

Historical references, place-names, and archaeological clues suggest that
Efranes-1 was such a site: the Thverárthing - the assembly site for Icelands
largest pre-state polity, a governing node in the indigenous Icelandic state,
and one of the places where Icelanders relinquished their independence to King
Hákon IV of Norway in 1262. Fieldwork at Efranes-1 in 2008 will use standard
archaeological site assessment techniques to (1) document the extent and sub-
surface complexity of the site, (2) confirm its age, and (3) obtain sufficient
information to allow Smith's team to assess whether it is the Thverárthing and
if larger-scale investigations are warranted there.

If Efranes-1 is the site of this assembly, it has unique potential to provide
information on the practice and organization of state and pre-state governance
in medieval Iceland that could balance indigenous texts' emphasis on
personalities and events. Together, this combination of textual and
archaeological data has the potential to allow global models of state formation
to be tested and refined at levels currently unavailable anywhere else in the
world. The broader impacts of this project will also include academic and
community benefits ranging from site management/preservation efforts, public
education, outreach components to benefit local and international communities,
and opportunities for training students from Brown University and elsewhere in
field archaeology. The National Science Foundation's SGER funding in 2008
supports the pilot project that will test this exciting site's potential to
realize these broader goals.