* 0834722
* CSR-PSCE, TM:   A Declarative Approach to Managing the Complexity of Massively Parallel Programs
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Arun Chauhan, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2013
* USD 865,125.00

Parallel programs are typically written using a style in which independent
processes are expressed sequentially and use locally-expressed message passing
as a means of data exchange as well as a means of inter-process synchronization.
From the network relationships that are implied by messaging among processes
arise implicit data structures and implicit algorithms - that is, global
parallel data structures and global parallel algorithms for which there is no
explicit global representation. Limited only to a local approach for creating
parallel programs, achieving correctness and performance of large-scale parallel
algorithms is rapidly moving beyond our reasoning abilities. To address this
shortcoming, this project develops a declarative language approach for
describing new high-level communication operations, a means for composing these
operations with computations, and a means for expressing transformations for
optimizing the resulting compositions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's
implementation plan is based on aggressive evolution of the technology that is
currently most effective in large-scale parallel computing - namely, explicitly
managed shared data. In the distributed-memory case this is achieved with
message passing, but the same discipline can be applied in the shared memory
case as well. This project's approach may enable higher levels of expressiveness
and abstraction for data management, communication, and coordination. Moreover,
the separation of concerns that is naturally imposed between communication and
computation greatly simplifies the mental model and implementation effort for
programmers. In order not to sacrifice performance because of this division,
this scheme's composition and transformation mechanisms will allow communication
and computation to be (automatically) combined in an optimized fashion so that
high performance and high scalability are achieved. To facilitate adoption by
practicing programmers of the paradigms and tools that are developed,
integration with education is essential. Accordingly, this project will directly
train undergraduate, graduate, and post-doctoral researchers and will develop
supporting curricula and materials to train both students and practicing
programmers. Close collaboration with large-scale real-world scientific
applications will further increase the practical relevance of this work.