* 0834134
* CBMS Regional Conference in the Mathematical Sciences - "Families of Riemann surfaces and Weil-Petersson Geometry'' - Summer 2009; New Britain, CT
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Eran Makover, Central Connecticut State University
* Standard Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 06/30/2010
* USD 38,525.00

Project Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Families of Riemann surfaces and Weil-Petersson
Geometry&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigation of the geometry and
deformation theory of Riemann surfaces is long recognized for involving a wide
range of concepts and a wide range of techniques. The Weil-Petersson geometry is
recognized for providing important information on the geometry of both the
Teichmuller space and the moduli space of Riemann surfaces. In less than a
decade there have been a collection of breakthrough works on Weil-Petersson
geometry. The works are based on a range of approaches and so involve matters of
interest and further study for a broad audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
conference will expose new students and beginning researchers to a variety of
standardized techniques in the field. A number of very recent breakthroughs will
be introduced, and open research questions will be discussed. This will drive
further research over the next decade and beyond. In addition, by having this
conference at Central Connecticut State University, a very diverse group of
undergraduate and MasterÕs level students will be exposed to research level
mathematics, which will encourage them to continue their studies. Many of our
students are the first generation in their families to get this far in their
studies, and are members of underrepresented groups, who are unfortunately
rarely exposed to opportunities such as this.