* 0834743
* CSR-DMSS, SM:   Design and Evaluation of a Scalable Meta-Event Dissemination System
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Arun Somani, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2013
* USD 432,000.00

CSR-DMSS, SM: Design and Evaluation of a Scalable Meta-
Event&lt;br/&gt;Dissemination System&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Event dissemination systems offer a powerful
middleware for&lt;br/&gt;distributed applications such as electronic trading
platforms, news&lt;br/&gt;aggregators, and network intrusion detection systems.
Such systems are&lt;br/&gt;usually based on the publish-subscribe paradigm:
published events are&lt;br/&gt;delivered to clients who have a supplied a
matching&lt;br/&gt;subscription. While most current publish-subscribe systems
support&lt;br/&gt;subscriptions that evaluate to true/false on a per-event
basis,&lt;br/&gt;emerging applications need support for subscriptions to higher
level&lt;br/&gt;"meta-events", which correspond to combinations of basic events.
The&lt;br/&gt;challenge in tracking such subscriptions is that there is no
single&lt;br/&gt;event, when processed in isolation, permits the evaluation of
a&lt;br/&gt;subscription to true or false.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
designs, implements and evaluates an event dissemination&lt;br/&gt;system that
supports tracking of meta-events. The system converts&lt;br/&gt;user-defined
subscriptions into "triggers", and efficiently maintains&lt;br/&gt;the state of
the triggers using algorithms inspired by the literature&lt;br/&gt;on data
stream processing. The system scales with increasing numbers&lt;br/&gt;of
subscriptions through merging triggers by identifying
commonalities&lt;br/&gt;between them, and through indexing triggers for fast
detection of&lt;br/&gt;matching subscriptions for events. The system is
evaluated using an&lt;br/&gt;internet-scale testbed, such as Planetlab. Such a
meta-event&lt;br/&gt;dissemination system will provide a more expressive
interface to the&lt;br/&gt;designer of distributed and web applications, thus
transforming the&lt;br/&gt;way in which distributed applications are authored.
This is expected&lt;br/&gt;to impact the application of information technology
in various fields&lt;br/&gt;such as healthcare, finance, and security. The
project enhances&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate and graduate education through
strengthening the&lt;br/&gt;freshmen engineering course in Electrical and
Computer Engineering and&lt;br/&gt;through developing a strong algorithmic
foundation for research&lt;br/&gt;students in networking and distributed
computing.&lt;br/&gt;