* 0834483
* CSR-DMSS, PSCE:   Collaborative Research:   Scalable Resilience in Large-Scale Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Continuing Grant
* Krishna Kant
* 08/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

The objective of this project is to systematically design means of obtaining,
tandardizing, and manipulating quantified Reliability, Availability and
Serviceability (RAS) information from extreme-scale High Performance Computing
(HPC) distributions, and to develop a novel, scalable framework for the real-
time RAS monitoring and modeling of these systems via the research and creation
of an optimal feedback control loop encompassing the entire computational
environment. This work is necessitated by the continual and substantial increase
in the size and scope of HPC systems, which is causing rapid inflation in the
number of faults, errors, and other performance interruptions encountered by
these machines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As HPC systems move towards the petaflop
era, a greater focus must be placed on the performance interruptions encountered
by these machines, and the development of means by which they may continue
uninterrupted computation. In this extreme-scale environment, efforts aimed
towards maintaining high reliability and uptime are futile ? with their enormous
processor and computational unit counts, these systems will inevitably encounter
performance issues, and failure must be expected. This project aims to 1)
research and develop advanced, standardized methodologies for gathering
application- and system-level data and generating quantifiable RAS metrics, 2)
provide a novel, scalable solution for improving accuracy in reliably predicting
imminent node-wise and system failures in large-scale systems, and 3) devise
defensive and proactive techniques for reducing the computational costs required
to timely and accurately handle resilience issues and model system health. In
summary, this work attempts to alleviate the time and cost limitations of
contemporary, reactive fault tolerance schemes, and will advance the development
of scalable, proactive, and intelligent resilience provision in large-scale
computing deployments. In addition, the Resilience Consortium will be
established to synergistically research and develop, share data and findings,
and disseminate knowledge to the public.&lt;br/&gt;