* 0834847
* Inducing, Tracking, and Regulating Confusion and Cognitive Disequilibrium during Complex Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Arthur Graesser, University of Memphis
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2013
* USD 420,000.00

This research will explore interactions between cognition and emotion during the
learning of scientific methods in the context of a computer tutoring
environment. The primary focus will be on the relations between impasses,
cognitive disequilibrium, and the affective-cognitive state of confusion.
Confusion correlates with learning gains because it is diagnostic of cognitive
disequilibrium, a state that occurs when learners face obstacles to goals,
contradictions, incongruities, anomalies, conflicts, and system breakdowns.
Cognitive equilibrium is normally restored after thought, reflection, problem
solving and other effortful cognitive activities. Therefore, pedagogical tactics
that challenge, perplex, and productively confuse learners are stimulating
alternatives to the typical information delivery systems in education that
promote shallow knowledge in the comfort zone of the learner, but rarely deep
comprehension. This research will develop tutorial interventions that induce,
track, and regulate confusion and cognitive disequilibrium in the minds of
learners, as well as the cognitive and emotional mechanisms that restore
cognitive equilibrium. The research has three specific objectives: (1) To
promote deep learning by developing tutorial interventions that experimentally
induce impasses, cognitive disequilibrium, and the resulting confusion; (2) to
integrate sensing devices and signal processing algorithms that detect and track
the associated confusion; and (3) to develop affect-sensitive pedagogical
strategies to help learners regulate their confusion. The three objectives will
be accomplished by augmenting an existing Intelligent Tutoring System (ARIES,
Acquiring Research Investigative and Evaluative Skills) with technologies that
automate assessment of emotion and cognition, as well as an intelligent handling
of emotions. State-of-the-art sensing devices detect relevant emotions during
learning (confusion, frustration, boredom, flow/engagement, delight, surprise)
on the basis of the dialogue history, facial expressions, and body posture. The
ARIES system promotes scientific inquiry skills by presenting case studies that
exhibit flawed scientific methods and that require learners to offer thoughtful
critiques on the scientific merits of the studies. The critiques encourage (a)
the general cognitive processes of drawing inferences, constructing causal
models, identifying problems, and asking diagnostic questions and (b) skills
that directly target scientific reasoning, such as stating hypotheses,
identifying dependent and independent variables, isolating potential confounds
in designs, interpreting trends in data, and determining whether data support
predictions. Students interact with ARIES through conversational trialogues in
natural language with two animated agents: a tutor agent and a peer agent.
Cognitive disequilibrium is created when the agents produce messages with
contradictions, conflicts, and clashes with what the student knows. Correct
information eventually emerges in the trialogue, which restores cognitive
equilibrium. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broader significance and importance of
the project is to advance science education, intelligent learning environments,
and human-computer interfaces. It is widely acknowledged that the level of
science understanding among students and adults in the United States needs
improvement and does not compare favorably with several other nations. The
proposed research will help fill this gap by developing technological
interventions to fortify citizens and aspiring scientists with the skills needed
for critical thinking, complex reasoning, and problem solving in science. The
project will develop intelligent learning environments targeted for deeper
learning, which is needed for a technologically sophisticated workforce, and for
a motivating learning experience, which is expected in recent generations of
students. The project will develop advanced sensing devices for detecting
emotions and cognition, a contribution that should impact the fields of human-
computer interaction, cognitive science, and the learning sciences.