* 0834250
* US- Africa Workshop:   Building Research Collaborations on Nitrogen Cycling in African Agro-Ecosystems Associated with the Millennium Villages Project; Segou, Mali, June 2008
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2008,11/30/2009
* Jerry Melillo, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* DeAndra Beck
* 11/30/2009
* USD 49,995.00

This award funds a workshop in Mali that will bring together 15 U.S. scientists
and students with over 20 African scientists from national universities and
research institutions, as well as from international research institutions based
in Africa. The workshop will focus on the fate and impacts of nitrogen in a wide
range of agro-ecosystems spanned by the 12 Millennium Villages Projects (MVP) in
10 African countries (Ethiopia, Ghana, Kenya, Malawi, Mali, Nigeria, Rwanda,
Senegal, Tanzania, and Uganda.) The workshop aims to identify topics and
methodologies (e.g., ecological field, laboratory and modeling techniques) that
can serve as a framework for developing collaborative research projects between
U.S. and African scientists. It can also help delineate a research agenda for
African agro-ecosystems, with an initial focus on N dynamics within the soil,
landscape, and soil-water interface and the relative importance of N or P
limitation on primary productivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Millennium Villages
Project sites represent a unique comparative opportunity to advance basic
understanding of biogeochemical cycling in agricultural Africa. Each of the 12
clusters of villages is located in a distinct agro-ecological zone (arid or
humid, highland or lowland) and represents an important agricultural production
system. A Science Coordinator, who is an African national with a Ph. D., leads
the science efforts at each MVP site, and there are projects already established
to study hydrology, education and human health. The MVP sites share standardized
research protocols, allowing for comparisons among sites and within sites
through time. Environmental conditions of soils, vegetation type and biomass,
water quality, and land use/land cover are established through a nested design
of remotely sensed and ground level data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many of the U.S.
participants in the workshop have research experience in Africa and/or have been
involved in NSF-funded Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER) projects. The
Science Coordinators provide scientific expertise on soils, nutrient cycling and
agro-ecosystem management, and can also serve as focal points for long-term
research at the MVP sites. Thus a secondary objective of the workshop is to
explore the possibility of establishing an African Long-Term Research Network
(ALTRN) associated with the Millennium Villages Project in sub-Saharan Africa.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop has the potential for significant broader
impacts. Although crop yields and per capita food consumption have increased
dramatically in Asia and Latin America over the past 40 years, such a Green
Revolution has not occurred in Africa, leaving thousands in a state of chronic
undernourishment. An African Green Revolution has been launched, with nitrogen
fertilizer at the core of increasing crop yields. In order for these efforts to
be successful and to avoid some of the negative environmental consequences of
the Asian Green Revolution, it is essential that the long-term fate and
environmental impacts of added N be understood. The workshop will serve to
strengthen collaborations between U.S. and African scientists on an issue of
global social and environmental consequences. &lt;br/&gt;