* 0834415
* CSR-PSCE, SM:    An Operating System for Multi-core Processors
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Robert Morris, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Krishna Kant
* 08/31/2012
* USD 450,000.00

This project is developing a new operating system, called Corey, intended to
help systems software and applications achieve high performance on multicore
systems. Current multiprocessor operating system kernels typically provide
abstractions whose semantics implicitly require sharing data among processors,
and which are implemented with shared data structures protected by locks. This
approach may cause the kernel to be a bottleneck due to contention for data and
locks, even for applications that do not require sharing
semantics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Corey is based on the principle that
applications should control all sharing: all kernel data structures should be
local to a processor core unless directed otherwise by the application. Corey
exposes a new set of low-level abstractions (shares, address trees, and kernel
cores) that allow applications to control all inter-core sharing. Corey takes
advantage of the likely abundance of cores by allowing applications and kernel
sub-systems to dedicate cores to handling specific functions and data. The
intended result is that applications can tailor their use of processors and
shared memory to achieve maximum performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These ideas
are being evaluated by implementing applications such Web services and MapReduce
processing, and comparing both ease of implementation and performance to
implementations built for more traditional operating systems such as Linux.
Corey will be released as open source, and specific successful techniques will
be ported to Linux when possible. The ideas and software will be used in MIT's
undergraduate operating systems course, to give students experience with
multicore programming. At a higher level, the work is intended to help shrink
the gap between available compute power and software's ability to harness it,
potentially helping many users of computers.