* 0834682
* CSR-EHCS(EHS), SM:   Development of SYMBIOTE, A Reconfigurable Logic Assisted Data Stream Management System for Multimedia Sensor Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* John Lee, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2011
* USD 210,000.00

This research is developing a novel class of Data Stream Management Systems
(DSMSs) called Reconfigurable Logic Assisted DSMS (RLADSMS). The project is
developing a prototype called SYMBIOTE to demonstrate real-time processing of
high bandwidth multimedia data streams in a computer vision based traffic
monitoring system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using hardware-assisted designs and
decomposition strategies to achieve its stream storage model, this project
introduces new query operators such as the split-choose and merge operators, and
a macro-operator called split-merge. It is building a library of such DSMS
operators, realizable in reconfigurable logic hardware, that are reusable,
parameterizable, and exhibit reduced run-time and reduced spatial complexity
Example hardware-accelerated operators include Filter, Map, Union, Bsort,
Aggregate and Join. The project also investigates hardware implementations of
strategies such as approximate query answering for sliding windows; landmark
windows; and sketches, random sampling, and wavelets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project extends the Borealis query language of ?boxes and arrows? with the
additional intent to address deployment characteristics in SYMBIOTE. The
objective is to perform static query optimization using a heuristic best-effort
static query planning and diagram placement algorithm that together can minimize
the dynamic configuration effort of RLADSMS. This optimization strategy uses a
novel cost model for RLADSMS based on the spatial complexity of hardware DSMS
operators, run-time complexity of hardware/software operators, and many SYMBIOTE
sensor node properties. Sensor node properties can include camera
characteristics, frame-rate, number of look-up tables (LUTs)/logic cells, and
embedded block RAMs. The optimization can also consider communication properties
such as interconnect latencies and bandwidth. The research outcomes of this
project are expected to be widely applicable to multimedia sensor network based
DSMSs, such as border patrol and building security applications, and possibly to
the financial data processing domain. Moreover, this research spurs the academic
exploration of novel ideas and creation of new courses in the area of
hardware/software codesign of DSMSs.&lt;br/&gt;