* 0834453
* DUSEL R&amp;D: BetaCage: A Screener of Ultra-Low-Level Radioactive Surface Contamination
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2007,05/31/2012
* Richard Schnee, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 05/31/2012
* USD 200,841.00

One of the great promises of the proposed Deep Underground Science and
Engineering Laboratory (DUSEL) is to provide space shielded from cosmic-ray
background particles for experiments that require extremely low backgrounds.
These experiments seek to study the fundamental laws of physics, such as our
understanding of how the sun shines, whether the neutrino is its own
antiparticle, and what is the dark matter pervading the universe. However, to
take full advantage of the shielding from cosmic rays, these experiments must be
built from components with such low levels of radioactivity that even the best
screening facilities available in shielded sites at the Earth's surface are
insufficiently sensitive. New screening facilities must be built underground to
allow these low-background experiments to succeed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal seeks resources to build a detector that would be the world's most
sensitive screener of radioactive surface contamination such as low-energy-
electron emitting radioisotopes. This detector, dubbed the "BetaCage," will
consist of an ultra-low-background multi-wire proportional chamber using neon
gas at atmospheric pressure. This screener would have applications for rare-
interaction physics experiments and trace radioactive counting applications. The
BetaCage would detect electron rates low enough for the 150 kg stage of
SuperCDMS to reach its design sensitivity for WIMP dark matter without being
limited by misidentified low-energy electrons. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
BetaCage would also be ideal for screening alphas, with important applications
for dark matter searches, solar neutrino experiments, and neutrinoless double
beta decay experiments, as well as for the Si-chip industry and for other
scientific fields, many of general societal interest. Additional broader impacts
will include the training of scientists in radiation-detection technologies and
low-background techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;