* 0834033
* SGER: Bio-Electrochemical Energy Conversion Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2008,11/30/2009
* John Regan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 11/30/2009
* USD 89,999.00

CBET-0834033&lt;br/&gt;Regan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Exoelectrogenic
microbes, which can respire and conserve energy using extracellular electron
acceptors, are important biocatalysts in natural environments whose metabolism
can be also employed in a number of beneficial applications, including the
direct conversion of chemical energy into electrical energy in microbial fuel
cells (MFCs). Until recently, power generated by MFCs was limited by high
internal resistance caused by physical and chemical constraints. Improvements in
system architecture have recently begun to expose microbial kinetic constraints
on performance. Recent work by our group provides conclusive evidence of a
limiting role of the anode biofilm. A thorough understanding of the charge
transport in these structures is the key to achieving future performance
breakthroughs. Fundamental understanding is needed on the kinetics of
electrochemical and biochemical reactions for different mechanisms of electron
transport by the bacteria, factors influencing biofilm growth, and the impact of
biofilm properties on bio-electrochemical transport processes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to converge microbial,
electrochemical, and transport characterizations to reveal and mechanistically
describe the relationship between biofilm ecology and MFC performance. To
achieve this, we propose to test the following three hypotheses: (1) the
catalyst density in an anode biofilm affects system performance in a time-
varying manner that can be described in a more fundamental way, (2) the catalyst
density in an anode biofilm is a predictable function of the applied external
resistance, and (3) the microbial mechanism of extracellular electron transfer
to the anode affects the maximum power capabilities of a microbial culture.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Successful completion of the proposed
research will enable dramatic advancements in MFC technology, as the
biocatalytic activity has emerged as the limiting feature of MFCs but has
received little attention. This project will offer important contributions to
multiple fields, including energy production from renewable sources,
environmental and agricultural engineering through bioremediation of organic
wastes, oceanography by serving as energy sources for undersea sensors, and
biogeochemistry in the area of mineral reduction and the associated implications
in the carbon cycle and nutrient availability. Broader Impacts: Advancements in
MFC technology can revolutionize renewable energy production and waste
treatment. Understanding MFC microbial ecology and engineering this ecology to
increase power generation are necessary for the realization of this potential.
The research plan will foster the interdisciplinary training of engineers in
microbiological, molecular, and electrochemical techniques, allowing a broader
preparation for careers in the inherently and increasingly interdisciplinary
field of energy production.