* 0834775
* DMSS:   Network Coding Techniques for Scalable Distributed  Media Storage and Streaming
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Thinh Nguyen, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2012
* USD 215,460.00

While the server-client model has been a successful architecture for many
Internet applications such as web and e-mail services, it does not scale with
the number of clients. The scalability problem arises from either the
computational capability or the bandwidth of a server which limits the number of
clients that can be served at any given time. The research will investigate
novel network coding techniques that facilitate the development of highly
scalable and reliable distributed systems for media storage and streaming over
the Internet using the peer-to-peer platform. The research will 1) explore the
Hierarchical Network Coding, a novel coding technique for distributed storage
and streaming of multimedia data, 2) characterize the necessary data redundancy
level for supporting high quality media streaming applications over the
Internet, 3) investigate the efficient data regeneration technique for
maintaining the high level of data availability in the presence of peer
departures, and 4) study the practical network coding based protocols for
efficient media delivery via multiple routes. Beyond the technical
contributions, the research has several broader impacts. In particular, the
research will move toward making network coding a practical approach for
increasing performance and efficiency in decentralized networks. This will
include the development of publicly available source codes for network coding
techniques and protocols. The technologies developed in this research will be
used to start new ventures in multimedia delivery via content distribution and
P2P networks. The generality of research will enable to other researchers to
explore and apply its results to other types of distributed systems. The project
will produce several Masters and PhD students with expertise in networking and
coding. Also, the project will contribute to fostering the collaboration between
networked systems and coding theory researchers.