* 0834771
* CSR-EHCS(EHS), SM:   Collaborative Research:   An Anytime Approach to Real-Time Embedded Control
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Paulo Tabuada, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2012
* USD 205,000.00

Cyber-physical systems will soon become ubiquitous. One of the major challenges
that such systems pose is that the control algorithms that modulate the
interaction with the physical world have traditionally assumed availability of
unlimited computational resources. However, in cyber-physical systems, control
tasks are executed on shared processors that can only provide time-varying and
uncertain computational resources. Moreover, the real-time scheduling of control
tasks provides new difficulties in this context given the sensitivity of control
performance to jitter and latency caused by the time varying availability of
computational resources. These are new problems that reside at the interface
between control algorithms and real-time scheduling policies. This research
provides a new joint control and task scheduling approach that maintaining a
guaranteed control performance under time-varying processor availability while
optimally utilizing the available computational resources. More specifically,
this project aims at the design of novel anytime receding horizon control
algorithms that provide progressively better performance as more computational
time is provided and redistribute the available computational resources online
based on the control performance and on the quality of service of other real-
time tasks. By addressing a fundamental bottleneck in the design of cyber-
physical systems, this project directly impacts the society in profound ways.
New classes of applications of receding horizon control in real-time
environments, such as networked vision-based control and complex SCADA systems
will become possible with economic and societal benefits. This project also
focuses attention at the challenges at the intersection of control and real-time
computation, and thus fosters collaboration between researchers in these two
communities, also leading to new educational material.