* 0834264
* Individual Nomination
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Nancy Elwess, SUNY College at Plattsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Daphne Y. Rainey
* 08/31/2011
* USD 10,000.00

NANCY L. ELWESS SUNY College at Plattsburgh

Dr. Nancy Elwess has served at the State University of New York at Plattsburgh
(SUNY Plattsburgh) in the Department of Biological Sciences for the past ten
years. Dr. Elwess' research is conducted with her undergraduates and her recent
areas of study include the isolation and analysis of ancient DNA extracted from
ancient Maya skeletons (from Tipu, Belize). Her laboratory is studying their
migration routes; mitochondrial DNA sequences; and the presence of certain
diseases within this population of ancient Maya skeletons. Dr. Elwess is a
recipient of the 2008-2009 Outstanding Undergraduate Science Teacher Award
sponsored by the Society for College Science Teachers (SCST) and co-recipient of
the 2007 National Association of Biology Teachers National Biotechnology
Teaching Award

SUNY Plattsburgh is an undergraduate teaching institution serving 6000 students
and is located in upstate New York between Lake Champlain and the Adirondack
Mountains. There are four main science departments: the Department of Biological
Sciences, Chemistry Department, Center for Earth and Environmental Sciences and
the Department of Physics. Upon her arrival at SUNY Plattsburgh, Dr. Elwess
noted, as a member of an underrepresented group, how few female and minority
faculty there were in the sciences. The total percentage of women faculty
(tenure-track positions) for the combined departments is 14%, which includes six
female faculty members, and three faculty members of minority descent (7%). The
university faculty at large is composed of 38% female and 7% minorities. Her
experiences as a woman and minority in the sciences have significantly
influenced the path she has chosen as mentor. She remains the only woman in the
chemistry department.

In order to help underrepresented groups in the sciences she implemented a "plan
of attack" that would not only increase the number of underrepresented students
majoring in Biology, Biology Education, Cytotechnology and/or Biochemistry but
also increase the number of underrepresented students that were going on to
graduate programs, medical schools, dental schools, and veterinary schools. Dr.
Elwess accomplished this through organizing her students to return to the high
schools from which they graduated and discuss the benefits of attending college
and thrill of working in science. Dr. Elwess began mentoring teachers from local
high schools and working with high school administrators. Her efforts have
significantly increased the number of applications from local schools to SUNY
Plattsburgh and changed the student demographics of the Chemistry Department.