* 0834535
* CSR - EHCS(EHS), TM:   Abstract Interpretation-Based Analysis and Verification for Critical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Benjamin Goldberg, New York University
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2010
* USD 200,000.00

Modern embedded critical systems are generally interactive and reactive, i.e.
they are programs that interact with mechanical or electronic devices such as
sensors and actuators. Errors in safety-critical and mission-critical programs
(such as in the aviation arena) can be catastrophic. This research proposal
identifies several areas in which the static analysis of critical systems using
abstract interpretation can ensure the correctness of various aspects of
critical systems. There are important issues in the analysis of critical systems
for which abstract interpretation provides a promising approach. This research
pursues analysis of liveness and responsiveness properties of critical systems.
Most present-day static analyzers analyze safety properties, stating that no
unwanted error can ever appear during any program execution. Recent work on
termination has shown that abstract interpretation can also be useful in proving
liveness properties like termination. Such liveness properties state that
something good must eventually happen when the program is executed. In the
context of reactive critical systems, an important liveness property is
responsiveness: the program should react to an external event in a timely
fashion. Abstract interpretation has proven to be a powerful method for
verifying the safety properties of programs. On the other hand, temporal logic
and its related methods provide ways for dealing with liveness properties of
programs. An important aspect of the work proposed here is the integration of
the two approaches in order to reason formally about a wide class of properties
incorporating both safety and liveness. Furthermore, existing verification
methods using abstraction are often restricted to finitary abstractions, i.e.
abstractions into a finite domain. As another aspect of the proposed work, these
verification methods will be extended to infinite domains. The research results
are expected to have impact in a number of diverse areas. First, the new
methodologies developed in the area of abstract interpretation as part of this
research will provide the theoretical basis for future uses of static analysis
to ensure the correctness of critical and embedded systems. Second, we
anticipate the construction of software will be performed to extend the
capability of current analyzers used in industry, such as the ASTRÃ‰E system, to
check increasingly important properties ? such as liveness and responsiveness of
critical systems. Additionally, the proposed research will involve students at
both the graduate and senior undergraduate level. Finally, the techniques
developed will become part of the topics covered graduate courses in abstraction
interpretation and verification.

