* 0834592
* CSR-DMSS, SM, Harmony:   Efficient Integrated Resource/Trust Management in Large-Scale Distributed Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,05/31/2010
* Haiying (Helen) Shen, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Krishna Kant
* 05/31/2010
* USD 176,000.00

Advancements in technology over the past decade are leading to a promising
future for large-scale distributed systems (LSDS), where globally-scattered
distributed resources will be collectively pooled and used in a cooperative
manner to achieve unprecedented petascale supercomputing capabilities.
Ubiquitous users without preexisting trust relationships have posed a challenge
of cooperative resource sharing. These facts necessitate that the issues of
resource management (resMgt) and trust management (trustMgt) be addressed in
order to ensure the successful deployment of LSDS. However, these two issues are
typically addressed separately, despite the significant interdependencies
between them: resMgt needs trustMgt to provide a cooperative environment for
resource sharing, and in turn facilitates trustMgt to evaluate node multi-
faceted trustworthiness in providing various resources. This proposal is aimed
at integrating resMgt and trustMgt through the development of a distributed
software architecture. The proposed project is built on two key innovations. (1)
Lightweight multi-resource management. Unlike most previous multi-resource
management approaches that depend on multiple infrastructures and incurring high
overhead, or one infrastructure but causing bottlenecks, the project involves a
single hierarchically integrated infrastructure without bottlenecks. (2)
Integrated multi-faceted trust management. Unlike most previous trustMgt
approaches that may not provide correct guidance for resource selection by
assigning a node a single trust value for providing all resources, the project
offers multi-faceted trust evaluation across multiple resources. Furthermore, it
facilitates interaction between trustMgt and resMgt.