* 0834691
* CSR-EHCS(CPS), SM:   Nature-inspired Control of Networked Cyber-physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,02/29/2012
* Wei Ren, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Krishna Kant
* 02/29/2012
* USD 271,327.00

This project focuses on deriving novel control strategies, inspired by
properties exhibited in nature, for networked cyber-physical systems, with
specific application to networked autonomous vehicles. Many phenomena in nature
cannot be explained in the framework of integer-order dynamics. Similarly,
networked cyber-physical systems operating in complex environments often
demonstrate non-integer-order (i.e., fractional-order) dynamics. Flocks of birds
often exhibit distributed coordinated tracking behavior. Similarly, distributed
discrete-time coordinated tracking strategies that are candidates for
implementation on networked embedded computers are important in many
applications involving networked autonomous vehicles. The thrusts of this
project are (i) analysis and design of distributed strategies for coordination
of networked fractional-order systems, (ii) analysis and design of distributed
discrete-time coordinated tracking strategies, and (iii) experimental validation
of new distributed strategies on teams of networked ground robots and unmanned
aerial vehicles (UAVs). Specifically, the PI will analyze and design distributed
coordination strategies for networked fractional differential equations and
derive an optimal coordination strategy with varying fractional orders. The PI
will also address the theoretical challenges of distributed discrete-time
coordinated tracking in the presence of dynamic network topology, time delay,
asynchronous interaction, and information feedback. The research is expected to
lead to new thinking about networked cyber-physical systems operating in complex
environments, provide coordination schemes accounting for real-world
constraints, and help bridge the gap between theory and applications in
distributed coordination of networked autonomous vehicles. The research has
impact on numerous civilian, homeland security, and military applications
involving networked cyber-physical systems. Examples include precision
agriculture, automated mining, environmental monitoring, border patrol,
surveillance, and reconnaissance. On the education side, the PI will mentor and
educate undergraduate and graduate students through his research, a yearly Sumo
Robot competition, and the Utah State University Robotics Club. The project will
also provide research experience for K-12 teachers and students.