* 0834220
* 2008 Gordon Conference on Biomineralization; New London, NH; August 10-15, 2008
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* James De Yoreo, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* David A. Brant
* 06/30/2009
* USD 5,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0834220 PI: DeYoreo, James ORG: Gordon Research
Conferences&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: 2008 Gordon Conference on
Biomineralization&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The purpose of this
conference is to address the fundamental mechanisms of mineralized tissue
formation, the relationship between biomineral structure and function, and
biomimetic approaches to materials synthesis. It strives to relate basic
research in topical areas of vertebrate, invertebrate, plant, and biomimetic
systems to the broader challenges of bio-inspired materials synthesis, skeletal
development, pathological mineralization, and tissue engineering. These topical
areas and challenges collectively define the field of biomineral research. This
field has undergone tremendous growth in the past decade because it lies at the
nexus of a convergence between the dual scientific revolutions of the 21st
century: nanotechnology and molecular biology. Thus, in addition to continuing
themes that dominated the program in the recent past, in 2008 the conference
will also include a focus on two interrelated topics: 1) taking inspiration from
biomineralization by utilizing macromolecular scaffolds to make nanomaterials,
and 2) developing routes towards tissue engineering by interfacing nanomaterials
with living systems. These themes will reinforce one of the major strengths of
this conference: the interaction between the materials science, biology and
biomedical communities. In doing so, it will help to define new research
directions at the interfaces between these disciplines that are vital to
providing a firm scientific foundation for three major technological challenges
for decades to come: carbon management, environmentally benign materials
synthesis, and improving quality of life for an aging population.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: Beyond the societal impacts
associated with advancing solutions to the technological challenges cited above,
this conference advances broader impacts in three ways. First, like all Gordon
Research Conferences, the Biomineralization meeting is designed to bring
together a diverse group of researchers in terms of nationality, demographics,
and seniority. It includes 33 speakers and discussion leaders from 11 countries
as well as 8 speakers to be chosen from young researchers who have submitted
poster abstracts. This meeting, in particular, is organized to maximize the
interaction between young researchers ? i.e., graduate students, post docs and
new faculty ? and more established members of the biomineralization community.
Moreover, a concerted effort has been made to include speakers and attendees
from many nations and ethnic groups and funding has been earmarked to support
attendance by underrepresented groups. Second, because biomineralization is an
important area of research in biology, geochemistry and materials science, the
program has been purposefully designed to maximize interdisciplinary
interactions by including distinguished speakers from all of these fields and by
advertising the conference to all three communities. Finally, the beautiful
forms that natural biominerals exhibit naturally attract the non-scientific
public, both young and old. And its significance for societal issues of human
health, environmental protection and new materials are easily grasped.
Consequently, it is an excellent subject for public outreach. The Chair of the
conference, who is also the Chair of the Materials Research Society (MRS)
Nanoscale Informal Science Education (NISE) Subcommittee will use discussions
with young researchers during the poster sessions at this meeting to recruit
science advisors for the national network of research professionals maintained
by MRS in support of the NISE network, an NSF funded project led by the nation?s
major science museums. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;