* 0834446
* Collaborative Research:   CSR-EHCS(EHS), TM:   Distributed Sensing via Robust Consensus on Manifolds
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Francesco Bullo, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2011
* USD 162,500.00

This project aims to develop theory and algorithms for distributed sensing from
high-dimensional, non-Euclidean data corrupted with noise and outliers. The
development of such a distributed sensing framework faces several critical
challenges. For instance, most distributed algorithms such as "consensus"
proceed by locally averaging low-dimensional Euclidean data to obtain a global
average. In most applications, however, data are high-dimensional, and plagued
with noise and outliers. Moreover, the goal is not necessarily to average the
measurements, but to reach a consensus on a model inferred from the
measurements. Since the estimation of such models often involves optimization on
manifolds, nearly all algorithms for solving these problems are centralized, and
require resources not available in wireless sensor nodes. This project offers a
significant paradigm shift in distributed sensing based on novel robust
consensus algorithms on manifolds. The first goal is to develop distributed
sensing algorithms based on geometric control, graph theory, and machine
learning, for processing data related by parameters lying in Riemannian
manifolds. The second goal is to develop distributed sensing algorithms based on
robust statistics and machine learning, that are robust to noise, and outliers.
The third goal is to apply these robust consensus algorithms on manifolds to
several distributed localization problems in wireless sensor networks.

The development of robust distributed estimation techniques on manifolds can
impact many application areas, such as surveillance, security, tele-immersion,
space exploration, environmental monitoring, and assisted home living. Such
applications require professionals trained at the intersection of hybrid,
embedded, and networked systems, robotics, sensor networks, control theory,
computer vision and machine learning. The multidisciplinary expertise of the
team will foster training at the intersection of these disciplines.