* 0834873
* The Effects of Computer-Assisted Instruction in Teaching Human Anatomy: An Experimental Study
* EDU,DUE
* 12/15/2008,06/30/2012
* Robert Tallitsch, Augustana College
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 06/30/2012
* USD 150,000.00

(Biological Sciences 61) The Proposed project is a joint effort of Augustana
College and St Andrews University. They propose to evaluate whether or not
computer-assisted instruction (CAI) enhances students' ability to interpret 3D
structural relationships. Their goal is to enhance and augment typical human
anatomy laboratory exercises by: developing laboratory modules (10 at Augustana
and 11 at St Andrews), utilizing the Cyber-Anatomy(TM) software program; and
introducing these modules into college-level human anatomy and combined anatomy
and physiology (A &amp; P) courses. They will test students' ability to
understand and interpret 3D spatial relationships upon entering a college-level
human anatomy or A &amp; P course and determine the improvement, if any, in the
students' understanding and interpretation of 3D structural relationships
following the completion of such courses with and without
CAI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Although CAI has been utilized in
undergraduate anatomy and A &amp; P courses for several years, very few studies
have focused on the effectiveness of these undergraduate courses. This project
fills that void in the current literature. The innovative aspects of this
proposed study are (1) the involvement of four instructors at two different
undergraduate institutions; (2) the collaboration of faculty from the Center for
Computer-Aided Design at the University of Iowa in the development of the
software program, Cyber-Anatomy (TM); and (3) the development of laboratory
modules linked to a new human anatomy software program designed to enhance
students' ability to interpret 3D structural
relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: If use of CAI results in a
positive outcome as regards student learning and student attitudes towards the
sciences involved, additional work will be undertaken to further develop the
tool. This computer program and others like it could provide an excellent tool
for CAI in human anatomy courses and combined A&amp;P courses at community
colleges and four-year undergraduate institutions, nation wide.