* 0834322
* Individual Mentoring Minority Junior High School Students in Science and Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Goldie Byrd, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Daphne Y. Rainey
* 08/31/2011
* USD 10,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;GOLDIE S. BYRD North Carolina A&amp;T State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Goldie Byrd received her Ph.D. at Meharry
Medical College in Microbial Genetics. After completion of a sabbatical at the
Duke University Center for Human Genetics, she initiated a collaboration to
study the genetics of Alzheimer Disease in African Americans. In 2003, Dr. Byrd
joined the faculty at North Carolina A&amp;T State University (NCA&amp;T) where
she now serves as Chair of the Department of Biology. She recently won a multi-
million dollar grant from the National Center on Minority Health and Health
Disparities that is designed to build genetics research capacity at NCA&amp;T.
Over her career, Dr. Byrd has been instrumental in developing innovative
curricula, conducting research, and mentoring research students on the
undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral levels. She has traveled
internationally on fact finding missions to assist with global collaborations in
teaching and research. Dr. Byrd's passion for teaching was recognized when she
received the University of North Carolina Board of Governors award for Teaching
Excellence in 2001.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Byrd has provided two decades of
outstanding science mentoring efforts and programs that continue to provide her
with opportunities for mentoring minority students, using a pipeline approach.
Dr. Byrd not only mentored in one-on-one situations, but she has also
established mentoring programs and networks in ways that continue to encourage
significant collaborations and partnerships with faculty colleagues throughout
the University of North Carolina system and across the nation. She has a stellar
track record of conceptualizing, developing and winning support for mentoring
activities from the high school level, to the undergraduate level, to the
Masters and Postdoctoral levels. Dr. Byrd's efforts have been productive and
far-reaching, as she also mentored minority and non-minority teachers and
college faculty members who mentor minority students in the sciences. She has
touched the lives of hundreds or even thousands of individuals in the sciences.
In addition, she has provided support for infrastructural changes, at the
facilities, curriculum and technology levels in efforts to provide students with
the necessary exposure to compete in mainstream scientific communities. Dr. Byrd
has an outstanding track record of advancing minority students toward Ph.D.
programs and health care programs and subsequent careers in the biological and
biomedical sciences.