* 0834555
* CSR-EHCS(EHS), TM:   Virtual Execution Environments for Wireless Sensor Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Kim Hazelwood, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2010
* USD 180,000.00

Wireless sensor nets (WSNs) promise anytime/anywhere information about the
physical world with a spatio-temporal resolution that was unimaginable just a
few years ago. However, development tools for WSNs are still conspicuously
inadequate; they are notoriously unstable and difficult to debug, reprogram, or
profile at run-time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These problems motivate the need for
virtual execution environments (VEEs) in the WSN domain. A VEE is a software
system that sits above the hardware layer and modifies the execution behavior of
a native binary executable at run time. VEEs are designed to perform operations
on a program binary during execution, such as program shepherding, execution
profiling, dynamic reprogramming, and debugging. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of this research is to explore, design, implement, and evaluate
VEEs for the WSN domain. This project considers three basic VEE architectures:
injection-based, translation-based, and interpretation-based VEEs. A key aspect
of this research is to revisit fundamental design decisions of conventional VEEs
to make them operate with the limited resource profiles of sensor nodes. The
results of this research will make it easier to quickly and robustly develop
sensor network applications, thereby helping to transition this promising
technology into the mainstream. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;