* 0834373
* CSR-PSCE,SM:    Compiler-Directed System Optimization of a Highly-Parallel Fine-Grained Chip Multiprocessor
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Uzi Vishkin, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Krishna Kant
* 08/31/2012
* USD 400,000.00

Accelerating single programs on multicore processors remains an outstanding
challenge in computer systems design. Unfortunately, existing parallel systems
achieve little speedup on programs other than regular dense-matrix codes. And,
most of the world's programs are in this category, broadly termed non-regular
code. Of course some non-regular codes have little parallelism beyond
instruction level parallelism (ILP); hence no speedup is possible on multicores.
However in other non-regular code, parallelism is present but is not
exploitable. Reasons include high synchronization costs, non-loop parallelism,
non-array data structures, recursively expressed parallelism and parallelism
that is too fine-grained to be exploitable. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous work
by the PIs presented the PRAM-based XMT parallel architecture which has
demonstrated good speedups on non-regular codes: 23X on breadth-first search in
graphs and 9X for finding spanning tree in graphs, using 64 processors vs. the
best-in-class serial processor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is developing
new compiler technologies for XMT to achieve scalable performance in the face of
architecture decisions made for scalability. It is studying better compiler
techniques to achieve scalable performance for UMA architectures such as XMT.
These include better task schedulers using global queues rather than work
stealing; improved pre-fetching tailored for XMT's unique memory hierarchy; and
using scalable non-cache-coherent Scratch-Pad Memory local to each XMT processor
to reduce the need to go to expensive remote memory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of this project are (i) the development of compiler technologies
necessary to reduce the research risk of XMT to the point where industry is
willing to commercialize the technology; (ii) the delivery of scalable speedups
for erstwhile hard-to-parallelize applications; (iii) the demonstration of
technologies for robust performance across large classes of serial, regular
parallel, and non-regular parallel programs; (iv) demonstrating a serious
contender for a future universal desktop architecture; and (v) educational and
outreach initiatives to popularize XMT and improve the skills of the future
workforce.