* 0834230
* CSR-EHCS(EHS), SM:   Collaborative Research:   Integrated Energy-Aware Resource Scheduling for Wireless Real-Time Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Liqiang Zhang, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2011
* USD 77,369.00

Real-time embedded systems (RTES) found in many real-world applications demand
that timing requirements for computations and communications are satisfied. In
addition, energy consumption is becoming a major consideration for such systems,
because of the proliferation of mobile, wireless, and embedded systems with
limited energy resources. Energy consumption significantly impacts the cost,
performance, and life time of such systems. This research addresses the lack of
system-wide energy conservation approaches by developing integrated scheduling
techniques to reduce the overall energy consumption of wireless real-time
systems while meeting applications' timeliness requirements. Integration in this
context refers to reducing the energy consumption of a system as a whole by
maximally exploiting the Dynamic Voltage Scaling (DVS) capabilities of CPU cores
and the Dynamic Power Management (DPM) capabilities of other resources and
devices. Important results of this work are novel and highly applicable
algorithmic techniques for energy-efficient RTES. The broader impacts of this
project can be found in both education and research, in addition to its enormous
social impacts due to the pervasiveness of real-time systems and environmental
concerns. The results of the experimental studies are being made available
online for other researchers to pursue their own research and education
interests.&lt;br/&gt;The effort also helps greatly to alleviate the problem of
many theoretical system-level power reduction techniques not being adopted due
to the lack of sound studies based on actual hardware platforms.&lt;br/&gt;