* 0834239
* CSR-DMSS, SM:   Aeolus:   Secure Support for Preserving Confidentiality and Integrity in a Distributed Environment
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Barbara Liskov, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* M. Mimi McClure
* 08/31/2012
* USD 420,000.00

Abstract Private and confidential information, e.g., credit card numbers and
medical records, is increasingly being stored online. Also increasingly this
information is exposed due to human errors and malicious attacks. The proposed
research addresses this problem through the design and implementation of a new
system, called Aeolus. Aeolus will enable construction of applications in a way
that greatly reduces the danger of unauthorized release of information. Aeolus
includes both a new distributed security model and its support via a distributed
platform. The model is simple and high level; the goal is to provide a tool that
is easy to use and understand, so that it will be used in practice. In addition,
Aeolus allows programmers to use programming languages of their choice and also
to use components provided by third parties. The security model is based on
information flow control, which prevents leaks of confidential information by
controlling what can be done with information. The model contains novel ways to
provide safe and precise delegation of authority. The proposed research
additionally includes a first proof-of-concept implementation to allow
evaluation of the model, a second implementation aimed at improving performance
and reducing the size of the trusted base, a development of an architecture and
replication techniques for storage servers that prevent leaks while not
requiring users to encrypt their information. The work addresses a pressing
problem with online information since it will greatly reduce this exposure due
to errors and malicious attacks. It will additionally impact society through
education, both of students on the project and through courseware.