* 0834208
* Individual Nomination
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Susan Kauzlarich, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Richard A. Alo
* 08/31/2011
* USD 10,000.00

SUSAN M. KAUZLARICH University of California, Davis

Dr. Susan Kauzlarich has been professor of Chemistry at the University of
California, Davis, since 1987. Her work focuses on solid-state and materials
chemistry. The primary focus of her work is the search for new materials with
novel structures and properties using synthesis and characterization of novel
magnetic and electronic materials and synthesis and characterization of
nanoclusters. Dr. Kauzlarich received the Maria Goeppert Mayer Distinguished
Scholar Award from Argonne National Laboratory in 1997. Dr. Kauzlarich has built
and continues to develop a pipeline of women and underrepresented students into
chemistry from high school through graduate study. Dr. Kauzlarich has been
involved in the mentoring of women and underrepresented students with a focus on
low income students. She has received two awards for her mentoring efforts from
the University of California: Outstanding Mentor Award from the UCD Consortium
for Women and Research (2002) and in 2005 UC Davis Distinguished Graduate
Mentoring Award.

Dr. Kauzlarich's one-on-one mentoring has produced excellent results with
students excelling in STEM research and innovation. She has reached out to
fellow faculty to introduce mentoring concepts and helped non-advisees to
understand what the importance of mentoring means and how to harness the
positive effects of mentoring. Dr. Kauzlarich?s efforts can be patterned on
other campuses and provides a role model for those faculty members that would
like to better understand and participate in mentoring. Dr. Kauzlarich models
behavior on personal mentoring and mentoring through both development and
participation in programs. Dr. Kauzlarich developed the American Chemical
Society Summer Educational Experience for the Economically Disadvantaged (SEED)
program and then brought in other faculty and released leadership in the program
but continued to serve as mentor. She has also worked to spread the culture of
high quality mentoring to faculty and students through the organization of
discussions and workshops.

Dr. Kauzlarich has taken a one-on-one approach to her mentoring efforts and
among her graduates are 25 Ph.D. and 4 M.S. students and 13 postdoctoral
fellows. She has supported and advised the research of many undergraduates and
high school students in her lab. Noteworthy is the number of awards Dr.
Kauzlarich's students have received. From high school student through
postdoctoral fellows, the students she has mentored have been extremely well
prepared to enter the STEM workforce through academia and industry.