* 0834294
* SGER: Quantifying subglacial erosion rates and Timing of Holocene warm periods by in-situ 14C/10Be -  A proof of concept
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2008,07/31/2009
* Joerg Schaefer, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 07/31/2009
* USD 40,864.00

This project will develop and apply a novel in situ carbon-14/beryllium-10
(14C/10Be) chronometer as a tool to quantify periods during which mountain
glaciers and ice-sheets were smaller than today. The results will provide a
semi-continuous record of fluctuations of the Rhone Glacier during the Holocene,
which can be combined with glacier energy balance models to estimate temperature
and precipitation changes. The project will also aid in providing a better
understanding of the patterns and rates of subglacial erosion beneath an alpine
type glacier, and it will afford a calibration for the new isotopic earth
surface process tool, which could be applied in many other glacier and ice-sheet
systems globally. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will quantify the duration
in which glaciers were smaller than today and, in turn, infer key information
related to climate warm periods, which will provide relevant information
concerning the present-day global warmth. This is a neglected area of
investigation, since we often operate under the assumption that recent climate
change has been continuously in one direction. This research has the potential
to provide realistic constraints on the extent and nature of previous warm
episodes and to develop a method for extending this analysis to other parts of
the globe.&lt;br/&gt;