* 0834409
* CSR-EHCS (EHS), TM:   Compositional Technology for Safety-Critical Modular Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2010
* Daniel Liberzon, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2010
* USD 300,001.00

This research focuses on developing concepts and methodologies to evaluate and
design property-preserving interfaces for safety-critical systems. These are
systems that require real-time sensing/control and rely on existing networking
infrastructures for coordination and information exchange. These systems, which
range from power distribution networks and air (or other) traffic control
systems to avionic controllers and to embedded automotive electronics, are
characterized by high complexity that is associated with both discrete and
continuous aspects. The resulting intricate behavior of these safety-critical
interconnected systems challenges traditional notions for safety, security, and
reliability. It necessitates the development of new methodologies for
understanding how to obtain compositions of such modular systems and how to
design interfaces that achieve not only robust operation and performance but
also ensure trust and privacy among users. The research seeks a unifying and
multifaceted approach to this problem. The approach is to decompose the large
body of research on modular systems and interface design to address: state
estimation in interacting modular systems and implications to safety; model
verification and property checking for modular hybrid systems; and compositional
models and interface design in switched discrete and continuous control systems.
The research draws on areas as diverse as distributed algorithms, robust and
fault-tolerant design, hybrid system control, performance evaluation, applied
probability, graph theory, distributed estimation, and formal methods. These are
applied to the problem of analyzing and understanding the tradeoffs involved in
the design of modular systems with real-time sensing and control capabilities.
The research is expected to have significant impact in permitting and enabling
the ubiquitous use of critical network infrastructures for a variety of diverse
applications.