* 0834797
* CSR-DMSS, SM:   Next-Generation Thermal-Aware, Energy-Efficient Resource Management for Data Centers
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Sandeep Gupta, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2013
* USD 282,000.00

This project addresses the challenges in developing predictive and autonomic
thermal-aware and energy-efficient task scheduling algorithms for heterogeneous
High-Performance Computing datacenters. Energy savings of software controlled
job management in large-scale datacenters has not been adequately explored.
Existing scheduling and power management algorithms are mostly reactive in
nature. This research will investigate the trade-off between the schedule
efficacy and the runtime complexity of producing a spatio-temporal task schedule
(with start times of each task and its computing node assignment or placement),
with an objective to develop algorithms that can be applied in real-world
situations. Novelty of this research lies in viewing datacenters as a cyber-
physical entity and proactively configuring and controlling both the cooling and
computing systems in a coordinated manner. Previous research results show that
energy savings are very limited unless the cooling is dynamically adjusted to
the computing load. Outcomes of this research will include: a) study of the
trade-off between computational complexity and efficiency of the scheduling
algorithm, b) proactive algorithms that produce task, power and cooling control
schedules in an unified manner, c) software architecture that will encompass the
power control of the computing equipment, as well as dynamic configuration of
the cooling systems, and d) test results from real-world data centers that show
the applicability and practicality of the developed schemes. Results will be
publicly available at IMAPCT Lab's website (http://impact.asu.edu/), and
scientific findings will be included in multi-disciplinary courses with cyber-
physical focus. Practical benefits of this research will be demonstrated in
academic and corporate datacenters.