* 0834524
* CSR-EHCS(CPS) TM:   Robust Composition and Interoperability of CPS Components
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Insup Lee, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2012
* USD 965,637.00

Modern medical devices are often complex distributed systems. They require
substantial embedded software and exhibit feedback loops between their
components that involve multiple humans, such as caregivers, doctors, and
patients. Such systems need to be flexible enough to accommodate significant
uncertainty in their environments, such as varying and often unpredictable
reactions of patients to treatments and medications. As with many other complex
systems, the increasingly prominent trend is to assemble medical devices from
independently developed hardware and software components. To accommodate this
trend and simultaneously maintain the high degree of confidence that is required
of medical systems, research is needed in the area of active
components.&lt;br/&gt;The idea of an active component extends traditional
components with novel capabilities that support compositional reasoning to
improve interoperability. The basic concept of an active component is that the
component carries a self-model that can be used by its peers, which specifies
the intended and failure behaviors that peers can expect and the behavior it
assumes from peers.&lt;br/&gt;The project is developing active components as a
compositional framework for medical device software and systems (MDSS), and
applies active components to model and analyze the environmental aspects of
MDSS, to anticipate expected and unexpected interactions, and to compare mental
models and systems models to detect and prevent potential user errors. In
particular, the active component framework will be applied to establish high
confidence in MD PnP (Medical Device Plug-and-Play) interoperability, an on-
going effort targeting dynamic integration of medical devices. The project also
seeks to apply, evaluate, and refine the notion of active components by using
them for new advanced medical device systems where compositionality and
interoperability are essential, such as medical devices based on sensor
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;