* 0834812
* Collaborative Research:   CSR-EHCS(CPS), TM:  Teleolog:  Certified Software for Medical Robotics
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Luca De Alfaro, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2011
* USD 191,809.00

Healthcare is 16% of the United States Gross Domestic Product. Technology in the
form of medical devices as well as health informatics is critical to improving
the quality and reliability of care and the reduction of cost. Medical devices
are increasingly controlled by software, and failures in the software can often
be life-threatening. Medical devices are instances of cyber-physical systems
that operate in both the physical and virtual world. The scientific challenge is
to demonstrate that the combined cyber-physical system is safe for its intended
purpose. The Teleolog project takes on the challenge of certifying the safety of
SRI's M7 system for robotic telesurgery. The M7 medical robot allows a surgeon
to perform telesurgery by manipulating the master controls in order to mobilize
two robot arms at the slave station connected through a network. The project
takes an explicit, evidence-based approach that leans heavily on formal
verification technology for modeling and analyzing the electronic and physical
components, the human user, the software control, as well as the interaction
between these components. The certification effort reengineers the M7 software
to develop a formal assurance case for the safety and resiliency of the system.
The models, formats, tools, and certification techniques developed during the
certification of M7 can be employed in the certification of other cyber-physical
systems. The project also develops course material, case studies, and training
kits for educating students in the design and analysis of cyber-physical
systems, evidence-based software certification, and resiliency engineering.