* 0834599
* CSR-PSCE,TM:   Dynamic Runtime Optimization and Adaptation for High Performance and Power Management on Multi-Core Processors
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Antonia Zhai, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2012
* USD 570,000.00

As multi-core/many-core processors are on the technology roadmap of almost every
major microprocessor and embedded-processor vendor today, applications can no
longer count on increasing clock rate to improve their performance. They must
exploit various forms of parallelism (e.g. thread-level, data-level, and/or
memory-level) to achieve improved performance. In the mean time, processors are
facing the well-known power wall, instruction-level parallelism (ILP) wall and
memory wall that are likely to be exacerbated in the future. Static compilers
have been one of the major contributors to dealing with all those challenges.
However, they lack runtime information to be used to address possible
interactions among tasks competing for the same resources. In addition,
operating systems and middleware often incur too much overhead for some forms of
parallelism to be effectively used at runtime.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dynamic
runtime optimizers have proven to be capable of dealing with many runtime issues
such as memory optimizations on single-core processors. They incur minimal
amount of runtime overhead and yet are able to explore useful runtime behavior
to re-optimize binary code and re-adapt its execution to achieve higher
performance or more efficient power/thermal management. This project researches
and develops a dynamic runtime optimizer for multi-core/many-core processors.
Such an optimizer requires an infrastructure with several major components each
with new approaches and techniques that are different from what are currently
used for single-core processors. In this project, a set of benchmarks will be
statically compiled and annotated to exploit various forms of parallelism,
including speculative threads generated by a research parallelizing compiler
that explores thread-level speculation.