* 0834299
* CSR-EHCS (EHS), SM:  Run-Time Assurances for High Confidence Embedded Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* John Stankovic, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2011
* USD 223,415.00

Project Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common vision of the future
is one where our everyday environments are replete with smart cyber physical
objects networked to form complicated systems of systems. People will interact
with these embedded systems both explicitly and implicitly. The systems will be
heterogeneous, need to exist for many years, and operate in the context of real
world communication, sensing and failure realities. Many of the systems will be
unattended (at least for large periods of time) and often performing very
important tasks. The systems will be open in the sense that they will permit
access to their functions from humans and other cyber physical systems. The
current rapid development and deployment of wireless sensor networks and
ubiquitous computing systems and their interactions are exacerbating the need
for high confidence embedded systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Achieving high
confidence embedded systems will require new assurance technologies both off-
line and on-line. This work addresses on-line run-time assurance. Comprehensive
solutions for run time assurances in high confidence embedded systems are
developed. The main intellectual contributions are determining how to specify
and support at run time a collection of solutions that enable embedded systems
to improve confidence and demonstrate application operability. The broad impact
of this work is extensive since there is a proliferation of embedded systems
being deployed or contemplated for critical applications such as fire fighting,
pollution control, disaster response, tracking, military surveillance, and
medical assistance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;