* 0834593
* Collaborative Research:   CSR-DMSS:   On-road Real-time Information Systems for driving safety atop VANET-WSM symbiosis
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Wensheng Zhang, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Krishna Kant
* 08/31/2010
* USD 110,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improving driving safety has been a top objective for
vehicular ad hoc networks (VANETs). However, the lack of sensing in the absence
of cars ahead on the road and frequent network disconnections specific to VANETs
could lead to driving hazards: These networks cannot detect dangerous road
conditions with good accuracy and cannot guarantee timely propagation of alert
messages. To address these problems, this research proposes to merge inexpensive
wireless sensor networks (WSNs) with VANETs to create a VANET-WSN symbiotic
architecture. In this architecture, sensor nodes are deployed along road sides
to detect dangerous road conditions and facilitate timely information sharing
among vehicles; in return, VANETs provide richer computation, communication,
storage, and power resources to help WSNs overcome their resource constraints.
On top of this symbiosis, more effective on-road information systems for safe
driving can be deployed. The main objective of this project is to explore the
design and implementation of a prototype VANET-WSN symbiotic system and conduct
research to test and measure the feasibility and performance of the proposed
architecture. Additionally, a number of real applications built and evaluated on
top of this architecture help identify and address architectural challenges in
supporting application development and deployment. This research is anticipated
to produce first-hand experimental results that will lead to a more accurate and
comprehensive understanding of the scientific and engineering principles behind
the VANET-WSN symbiotic architecture, and thus will contribute to developing new
and practical technologies for significantly improved driving safety.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;