* 0834235
* Management and Operation of the Virtual Astronomical Observatory
* MPS,AST
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2015
* David De Young, Virtual Astronomical Observatory, LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Nigel Sharp
* 04/30/2015
* USD 11,000,000.00

Abstract 0834235 Schreier

The Virtual Astronomical Observatory (VAO) is, by design, coming of age at a
time of profound change in the nature of research in astronomy. Astronomical
researchers already have hundreds of terabytes of data available online, and
enormous scientific potential can be unleashed were they able to find relevant
datasets, access them, compare them quantitatively, and ultimately understand
their astrophysical implications. The VAO will make it easy for researchers to
connect large data sets with high performance computational resources, providing
the needed data discovery, access, and integration framework. The basis for the
VAO has been developed in recent years through the National Virtual Observatory
(NVO) program in the US, the AstroGrid project in the UK, the Astrophysical
Virtual Observatory and subsequent EuroVO program in Europe, and national VO
programs in Japan, Australia, China, and a dozen other countries. The
International Virtual Observatory Alliance (IVOA) has created a united vision of
global data access through a network of interconnected archives and databases,
all speaking a common language of standard interfaces and protocols. This has
helped to induce organizations to open up access to data that were previously
restricted or inaccessible, catalyzing technical and sociological changes that
continue to spread to virtually all research disciplines.

This award supports the first step towards managing and operating the US VAO for
NSF and NASA, building on the project team's experience and expertise in
developing the NVO infrastructure. The NVO was a research and development
project, but the VAO will be an operational facility, providing firm support for
users, including reliable services, documented and robust applications,
responsive answer-line support, tools and libraries that support custom
applications, and training and professional outreach programs. The VAO will
develop new capabilities in response to community needs, and continue the
standardization process, enriching interfaces and adopting and adapting new
underlying technologies.

The VAO's impact goes far beyond the astronomical research community, because of
its unprecedented potential for public outreach and education. VAO-enabled
programs such as Google Sky and World-Wide Telescope will bring astronomical
data to classrooms and households, providing novel curriculum development, and
engaging citizen scientists to contribute to scientific knowledge. The VAO
clearly demonstrates the value of investment in fundamental information
technologies, such as grid computing, data-mining and visualization algorithms,
and advanced data storage and curation.