* 0834313
* Individual Nomination
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2009,04/30/2010
* Cato Laurencin, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Daphne Y. Rainey
* 04/30/2010
* USD 10,000.00

CATO T. LAURENCIN University of Virginia&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr.
Cato Laurencin is the Lillian T. Pratt Distinguished Professor and Chairman of
Orthopaedic Surgery and Professor of Biomedical Engineering, Professor of
Chemical Engineering at the University of Virginia (UVa). He received his Ph.D.
degree in biochemical engineering/biotechnology from the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology (MIT), and an M.D. degree magna cum laude from Harvard Medical
School. Dr. Laurencin is also a Fellow of the National Academy of Sciences,
Institute of Medicine and world-renowned expert in shoulder and knee surgery.
Dr. Laurencin received the Presidential Faculty Fellowship from President Bill
Clinton in recognition of his efforts to bridge medicine and engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Laurencin has also received numerous awards for his
activities as a mentor and role model to underrepresented minority students and
faculty including the William Grimes Award from the American Institute of
Chemical Engineers which specifically recognizes a chemical engineer's
outstanding achievements as a distinguished role model to minorities, the
Virginia Engineering Foundation's Robert A. Bland award which recognizes
extraordinary contribution to the field of UVa engineering by a faculty member
whose contribution to the field is of particular significance to African-
Americans, and the Commonwealth of Virginia's Workforce Diversity Award.
Throughout his distinguished career, Dr. Laurencin has made deliberate steps to
ensure his work impacts not only within the research community but also in the
lives of the future generations of scientists and engineers that he personally
mentors. His track record as an advocate for and mentor to underrepresented
minority students, teachers and faculty is exemplary. Dr. Laurencin's programs
indicate his passion for underrepresented students; from the Research Experience
for Undergraduate (REU) programs in which underrepresented minority
undergraduate students spend a summer in the laboratory gaining exposure to the
field of Biomedical Engineering, to the Research Experience for Teachers (RET)
program that funds high school teachers to spend a summer learning about the
field of Biomedical Engineering and then disseminate this information to their
students. In the 18 years that Dr. Laurencin's laboratory has been in operation,
over 85 underrepresented minority students at the undergraduate, graduate, and
post-graduate levels have undertaken research projects in the lab, with over 20
students completing graduate or post graduate degrees, award presentations and
honors research theses. An integral part of the current and future mentoring
activities of the nominee is the inclusion of underrepresented minority students
at the undergraduate and graduate levels as well as students, post-docs and
faculty across a wide spectrum of disciplines.