* 0834233
* Correlation among Physicochemical Properties, Photochemical Fate and Toxicity of TiO2 Nanoparticles
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Andrij Holian, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
*  Ashok S. Sangani
* 08/31/2011
* USD 300,000.00

CBET-0834233&lt;br/&gt;Wu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: The
objective of the project is to establish a correlation among physicochemical
properties, photochemical fate, and toxicity of TiO2 nanoparticles (NPs). We
will synthesize and characterize three forms of NPs: bare TiO2 nanospheres, bare
TiO2 nanowires and amine-coated TiO2 nanowires. We will use in vitro cultures of
primary murine alveolar macrophages to study the direct immunomodulatory effects
of NPs, and an in vivo mouse model to investigate the pulmonary and central
nervous system (CNS) toxicity after lung deposition. We will determine how the
shape and/or the surface coating affect the aggregation status, solubility,
chemical stability, surface chemistry, reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation
and reactivity (photocatalytic activity) of TiO2 NPs, and determine the impact
of these parameters on NP toxicity. We will also observe the photochemical fate
of TiO2 in the aqueous environment upon irradiation of solar-simulated light in
the drinking water and synthetic wastewater, including the transformation of the
aggregation status, solubility, chemical stability, surface chemistry, ROS and
reactivity of TiO2 NPs. Finally, we will study how these environmental
transformations will, in turn, influence the toxicity of TiO2 NPs.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Implementation of the project will promote the
fusion of different disciplines and the collaborative partnership among two
universities and one federal lab. The research will identify the environmental
fate and the transformation process of engineered TiO2 nanoparticles in the
aqueous environment under the solar-simulated light irradiation. The research
will provide new insight into the toxicological responses to both the "as-
produced" TiO2 NPs and after environmental transformation. Broad data
dissemination will directly impact the risk analysis for human health and
environmental impacts and will provide mechanisms for improved planning for
commercialization of NPs. The educational objectives of this effort are to train
graduate and undergraduate students, to recruit underrepresented students to
participate in the proposed research, and to outreach to high school teacher
training. In addition, the experimental results will provide a valuable resource
for case study in class. The education and learning activities will attract
young talents into the multidisciplinary field interfacing environmental
engineering with nanotechnology and biology, and thus helping U.S. stay in a
leading position in this strategic field not only today but also in the future.