* 0834340
* Collaborative Research:  Parameterization of Gas Flux at High Wind Speed
* GEO,OCE
* 03/14/2008,03/31/2012
* Craig McNeil, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 03/31/2012
* USD 440,489.00

The rate of air-sea exchange of O2 and N2 will be measured at high to extreme
wind speeds (20-60 m/s). A physical understanding of the gas exchange processes
and parameterizations of the flux rates will be developed from this data.
Custom-built water-following Lagrangian floats will be air-deployed into
hurricanes during 2008 and 2009. Fluxes will be measured from the mixed layer
budgets of O2 and N2 and from the eddy-covariance of vertical velocity and gas
concentration using a combination of two different commercial oxygen sensors and
custom-built total gas tension sensors. The floats will also measure temperature
and salinity, surface wave spectra, surface wave breaking rates and bubble
properties. Additional profiling EM-APEX floats will provide the depth-time
profiles of temperature, salinity and velocity necessary to model the mixing
component of the gas budgets. Wind and pressure data will be provided by
operational aircraft remote sensing and drop sonde data. The flux measurement
techniques will be compared with other methods during two North Atlantic cruises
of the SOLAS-DOGEE program during 2006 and 2007. Modeling and data analysis will
focus on understanding the physics of bubble-mediated gas transfer and will use
this understanding to formulate new parameterizations of gas transfer rates at
high wind speeds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts.&lt;br/&gt;Gas exchange
across the air-sea interface is a key component of the global carbon budget.
Uncertainties in the parameterizations for gas exchange rate at high wind speeds
lead to uncertainties of up to 70% in the directly computed net global CO2
uptake by the ocean. This work aims to reduce these uncertainties by improving
the parameterizations. The gas sensors developed by this project will be
commercially available. They will be specifically designed for use on autonomous
platforms such as floats, gliders, surface drifters and autonomous underwater
vehicles. One currently enrolled graduate student will be supported through the
completion of his Ph.D thesis. Undergraduates will participate during the
summers at both the University of Rhode island and the University of Washington.
&lt;br/&gt;