* 0834803
* Student/Young Faculty Travel Support for Americas Workshop on Solid-State Sensors &amp; Actuators 2008. To be held on June 1-5 at Hilton Head.
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2008,10/31/2008
* Kimberly Foster, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 10/31/2008
* USD 8,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this proposal is to request funds for the support of travel awards
for graduate students and untenured junior faculty participation in the 2008
Solid Sate Sensors and Actuators Workshop to be held at Hilton Head from June
1-5, 2008&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: The purpose of the workshop
is to disseminate research results in the area of MEMS technology amongst a
group of attendees which are primarily from the Americas. The agenda of the
workshop includes plenary speakers from academia and industry to discuss stat-
of-the-art in research areas on the fringe of micro/nanosystems. There will be
27 contributed papers and approximately 60 contributed posters. The whole
workshop is in a single session format. The Hilton Head workshop is very
selective, and with travel student presenters, advisors of the students are much
more likely to send their students. It is especially useful for the young
faculty to get financial support for travel to this
conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The knowledge gained and
experiences shared from the workshop are planned to be captured electronically
and broadly disseminated via website. It will benefit the students and the young
faculty to make the presentation and /or present posters. They will get feedback
from the attendees which will be very fruitful for their continuing
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;