* 0834288
* CSR-PSCE, SM:    Automatic Multithreaded and Transactional Memory Workload Synthesis for Efficient Multi-core Design Space Evaluation
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Tao Li, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Krishna Kant
* 08/31/2011
* USD 200,000.00

Multi-core systems have become mainstream in everything from server to embedded
computing markets. As hardware and software designers adopt transactional memory
as a cost-effective multi-core programming paradigm, evaluating TM/multi-core
design, using a wide spectrum of transactional applications, is crucial to
quantify the trade-offs among different design criteria. One roadblock that the
TM/multi-core research and design community faces is the lack of representative
transactional memory benchmarks. This project aims to develop innovative
techniques, methods, and new tools for accurate, effective, and automatic
transactional memory workload synthesis to address these challenges. This may be
significantly beneficial to the multi-core architecture research and design
community. The synthetic TM benchmarks preserve the behavior of original
multithreaded workloads while the parameterized transaction synthesizer can
produce transactional code with widely varied behavior that can effectively
stress the TM design in different dimensions. Moreover, the parameterized
synthetic workloads will have significantly reduced runtime, which allows
architects and designers to quickly explore the large TM/multi-core co-design
space within which numerous design tradeoffs need to be evaluated. The
successful development of innovative transactional memory workload synthesis
techniques, methods and tools will have significant impact on the design,
evaluation and optimization of future multi-core based systems. Specifically, it
will: (1) significantly improve multi-core processor and system design and
research productivity; and (2) largely ensure that the design is really
beneficial to multi-core oriented applications. This project's integrated
education and outreach plan will help to educate a broad spectrum of citizens
and students. This includes expanding computer architecture curriculum with
advanced modeling and evaluation methods, recruiting minorities and
undergraduate students into research, and collaborating with the computing
industry to integrate the developed technologies into real-world multi-core
processor design flow.