* 0834022
* SUSY09: The 17th International Conference on Supersymmetry and Unification of Fundamental Interactions; June 2009, Boston, MA
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2010
* Pran Nath, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 04/30/2010
* USD 10,000.00

This proposal is to provide partial support for a Conference at Northeastern
which will bring experimentalists and theorists together to discuss new
developments in Physics Beyond the Standard model related to Tevatron and LHC
physics. The 17th "International Conference on Supersymmetry and Unfication of
Fundamental Interactions (SUSY)", will be held at Northeastern University in
Boston, June 18-24, 2009. The conference will bring together leading experts in
the area of physics beyond the Standard Model including supersymmetry, extra
dimensions, string phenomenology, and model building. There will be a strong
experimental component in the scientific program with a number of experimental
talks in the area of particle physics and specially related to the analysis of
data from the Fermilab Tevatron, and hopefully of preliminary data from the
Large Hadron Collider. There will be a special session on new physics signatures
analyses at the LHC. Some of the topics that will be included are : Physics from
CDF and D0 at the Tevatron, Supersymmetry and the Higgs Phenomenology at the
LHC, Sparticles and their detection at the Large Hadron Collider,Extra
dimensions, Flavor problem and CP violation, the interconnections of dark matter
and the LHC physics, LHC new physics signatures and simulations, and Neutrino
physics and proton stability. The broader impacts are that many students will
participate and give talks in parallel sessions at SUSY-09. This would be an
important opportunity for them to interact with a wide group of active
researchers in their area to achieve a broader perspective of developments on
the frontiers of physics The Physics program of the conference will help in the
discovery of new physics beyond the Standard Model. This would have important
implications for the development of high energy theory and string theory in the
coming decades.The conference will enhance international collaboration among
groups working on similar projects.