* 0834195
* A Randomized Study of the Impact of STEM Mentors with Disabilities on High School Students with Disabilities
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* JoAnn Sowers, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 09/30/2012
* USD 766,481.00

A Randomized Study of the Impact of STEM Mentors with Disabilities on High
School Students with Disabilities is an investigation of the impact of mentoring
by adults with disabilities on youth with disabilities in STEM.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first aim of the Project is to conduct an exploratory
randomized clinical trial investigating the extent to which systematic
interaction with STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics) mentors
with disabilities promotes the STEM-related career planning knowledge, self-
efficacy, engagement and performance of high school students with disabilities.
The proposed study will build upon an established conceptual framework
explaining the role of mentors in facilitating students' self-efficacy and
achievement, and previous research documenting the benefits of mentoring and,
most specifically the benefits of mentoring of youth with disabilities by
successful adults with disabilities (e.g., Burgstahler &amp; Cronheim, 2001;
Cory &amp; Burgstahler, 2007;Hibbard, Cantor, Charatz, Rosenthal, Ashman,
Gundersen, Ireland-Knight, Gordon, Avner, &amp; Gartner, 2002; Powers, Sowers,
&amp; Stevens, 1995). The study will feature a three-independent group,
randomized block, repeated measures design utilizing multiple-agents, multiple
methods, and established protocols and measurement methods. The study includes a
three-group comparison: 1) high school students with disabilities exposed to
STEM mentors with disabilities; 2) high school students with disabilities
exposed to STEM mentors without disabilities; and 3) and high school students
with disabilities who are not exposed to mentors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
second aim of the Project is to specify efficacious STEM mentor program methods
and evaluation strategies, based on the study's summative and formative
findings, which will be used to advance adoption of efficacious STEM mentoring
approaches through a larger replication study of strategic impacts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An independent evaluation of the project will be conducted
by Kasey McKraken from David Heil and Associates, an organization specializing
in the design of science-based education programs, products, and services
including project evaluation design and implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
following dissemination strategies will be utilized:&lt;br/&gt;1. In line with
the second aim of the project, a replication manual detailing STEM mentor
program methods and evaluation approaches, based on the summative and formative
findings, will be prepared and comprehensively disseminated.&lt;br/&gt;2. At
least 2 manuscripts will be published in professional journals in STEM
education, such as Journal of Research in Science Teaching and Journal of
Research on Technology in Education, and Science and Technology
Policy.&lt;br/&gt;3. The methodology and findings will be presented at a minimum
of 4 regional and national conferences, such as the National Science Foundation
Annual PI Meeting, American Educational Research Association (AERA) and American
Academy for the Advancement of Science (AAAS).&lt;br/&gt;4. Findings will be
posted on the Internet through Portland State University?s-Regional Research
Institute's web site (http://pdx.edu/rri)&lt;br/&gt;