* 0834505
* The 52nd International Conference on Electron, Ion and Photon Beam Technology and Nanofabrication, 2008
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/2008,04/30/2009
* Henry Smith, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Shaochen Chen
* 04/30/2009
* USD 5,000.00

This is to request support in the amount $5000 to enable students to attend the
52nd International Conference on Electron, Ion and Photon Beam Technology and
Nanofabrication, 2008, to be held in Portland, Oregon, May 27 to May 30, 2008.
In the fields of nanofabrication, electron and ion-beam lithographies, photon
and imprint lithographies, particle-beam optics, and forefront applications of
nanofabrication, this conference is preeminent. The requested travel aid will
enable students to present their research to a high level international
scientific community. They will observe how scientists and engineers exchange
innovative ideas and other information at conferences, and they?ll hear first-
hand presentations of up-to-date research results in nanotechnology.

Learning how a technical conference serves as a venue for conveying information
to other is an important element of a student?s education. Also important is
leaning how to present, in a cogent and understandable way, the results of one?s
research. The requested support will help to accomplish these ends. At the
conference students will make important personal contacts and learn of
employment opportunities. In a special student breakfast, to be held on Friday,
the conference organizers will describe to the students how the conference
program is put together and how papers are selected for oral or poster
presentation.