* 0834254
* Conference:  27th International Congress on Applications of Lasers &amp; Electro-Optics (ICALEO 2008); Temecula, California; October 20-23, 2008
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2008,05/31/2009
* Yongfeng Lu, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 05/31/2009
* USD 15,000.00

The objective of this project is to support 30 graduate students, from the
United States, to attend the 27th International Congress on Applications of
Lasers &amp; Electro-Optics, which is an annual conference organized by Laser
Institute of America, to be held in Temecula, California from October 20 to 23,
2008. This support opportunity will be advertised though emails to be sent out
by Laser Institute of America. The students can apply the support by replying
the emails sent from Laser Institute of America. The student selection process
will be based on the following priorities: 1) Students from groups traditionally
underrepresented; 2) Students from universities and colleges that traditionally
lack funding to support graduate student attendance at conferences; and 3)
Students who present high-quality papers, as determined by the conference chairs
in consultation with the program committee. The selected students will be
expected to present their papers during the conference, compete for student-
paper awards, and attend a ?Student Career Forum: Future for Graduate Students
in Academy and Industry?. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The efforts to be made in this
project will blend research and educational activities for the graduate students
who attend. By participating in the conference, these students will be exposed
to state-of-the-art research topics and will interact with academic and
industrial leaders. They will learn how to best use their time in graduate study
and how to be prepared for their future career. The priority of support will be
given to the graduate students from underrepresented groups, such as women,
African American and Hispanic students, and from universities that lack
financial resources. &lt;br/&gt;