* 0834057
* CSR-EHCS, SM:   A Supervisory Control Approach to Concurrent Programming
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2011
* Panos Antsaklis, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2011
* USD 270,000.00

In the context of concurrency, programming is complicated by a number of issues
that need to be addressed, such as mutual exclusion, liveness, and fairness.
Petri nets (PNs) are formal models developed in Computer Science for the
modeling of concurrent systems. In Control Systems, PNs have been used in the
context of supervisory control (SC) of discrete event systems (DES) and powerful
theoretical results have been developed. However, these results have not yet
been systematically applied to Computer Science problems for which PNs were
created. This research would apply SC tools to the automatic synthesis of
programming code based on high-level supervisory control program specifications.
SC is of interest because various desirable features of programs can be seen in
terms of supervisory control specifications. The goal of the research is to
reduce programming effort by having more of the higher level requirements
implemented automatically by the SC tools. While SC methods have been used to
obtain control software, neither the application to the synthesis of concurrent
programs nor the application of PN based SC methods have been done so far. PNs
are natural models of concurrency that allow the use of a number of efficient
supervisory control methods, without excluding other approaches. Another new
feature of the work is the extraction of a SC specification from a specification
language. This topic is of interest in order to obtain compact and easy to
develop specifications, hiding the size of the underlying DES models and the
technical details involved in the formulation of SC problems. Finally, the
research is unique in the way it handles the SC, in an attempt to take advantage
of multiple methods available in the literature.

The programming code produced by the SC tools is correct by construction and the
programmer has only to manage simpler high-level specifications. The research
pursued represents a fresh and novel approach to writing concurrent programs and
it involves software development and research on supervisory control methods,
specification languages, and code generation strategies. On one hand, the
project provides a step forward towards a higher level of automation in the
development of concurrent programs. On the other hand, this project will provide
a platform for testing, comparing, and developing DES methods in general. Parts
of the project will involve students at undergraduate level, will also benefit
undergraduate students via undergraduate research and design projects. A major
part of the proposed work is being carried out at a primarily undergraduate
institution.