* 0834686
* CSR-DMSS, SM:   ConfVeal:   Automated Testing of Security Configuration Enforcement in Distributed Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,04/30/2010
* Ehab Al-Shaer, DePaul University
* Standard Grant
* Krishna Kant
* 04/30/2010
* USD 266,355.00

ConfVeal: Automated Testing of Security Conguration Enforcement in Access
Control Devices As network security devices constantly updated in their
implementation to accommodate new features, or new hardware optimization, the
enforcement of the security conguration becomes questionable. In this project,
we propose a fully automated pseudo-live testing system (called ConVeal) of
security conguration enforcement of access control devices. Our system,
ConfVeal, has two novel components: (1) Segmentation-based Test Trac Generator:
it uses a novel technique that translates policy congurations into coarse and
ne-grain segments in trac space and then generates packets intelligently
according to the segment criticality in order to achieve high test space
coverage, and (2) Comprehensive Policy Generator: it generates comprehensive
policy proles considering various policy structures, eld values, rule complexity
and interactions based on customized proles or learned features of existing
policy conguration. This research will investigate fundamental issues related to
security devices quality assurance. This is important for vendors, government
and general consumers. We believe that our proposed research agenda will promote
deployment new ecient techniques for access control conguration testing by
vendors. New concepts and tools for testing security systems which will
stimulate modeling and theorizing pseudo-live conguration testing in research
and education. The project will integrate research and education through a close
interaction between faculty and both graduate students.