* 0834484
* EHCS:   Dynamic Vertically Integrated Power-Performance-Reliability Modulation in Embedded Digital Signal Processors
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Abhijit Chatterjee, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2012
* USD 220,000.00

Serious new technical challenges are barriers to advances in microelectronics
technology as technology scaling comes up against fundamental limits of material
properties and lithography. Large process variations and other random
performance and power constraining imperfections are now being observed as
microelectronic devices are scaled down to atomic dimensions. This requires that
module level performance in electronic designs be pessimistically guardbanded to
ensure proper overall system level functionality, forcing systems to operate at
performance levels far below the inherent capability of the underlying design
fabric. In addition, embedded DSP systems must be designed to work under worst
case operating conditions resulting from ill-conditioned input signals. Wider
guardbands from increasing performance and input signal variability in future
technologies can negate most of the performance benefits of scaling, stalling a
key payoff from Moore?s Law for embedded systems. In such an environment,
introduction of new scaled devices will be cost-effective only if the guardbands
can be controlled down to acceptable margins, despite the presence of these
uncertainties. This remains a major unsolved challenge, especially for embedded
DSP processors that must be concurrently optimized for system level power,
performance and reliability. To address these problems, this project is
developing the concept of test, diagnosis and continuous signal monitoring
enabled dynamic circuit-architecture-algorithm co-modulation (or co-tuning) for
both static (procees) and dynamic (input signal) uncertainties. Under this new
design paradigm, feedback driven reconfiguration control mechanisms involving
circuitry and software (?tuning knobs?) are designed into the IC to support
power-performance trade-off and reliability recovery post manufacture. The
research pursues vertically integrated circuit-architecture-algorithm tuning
methods that offer 10X benefits over optimizations performed at a single level
of the design hierarchy. The diagnostic information generated is used to
dynamically optimize (post-manufacture) individual module level behavior to
optimize system level performance, power and reliability metrics via specially
designed hardware and software control mechanisms. In this way, each
instantiation of a design adapts to the maximum performance, power, and
reliability levels it is capable of in the presence of process variations and
adverse operating conditions.

Graduate students working on the project receive a unique kind of training in
this multidisciplinary research, which together the fields of digital design and
test, control systems, embedded digital signal processing architectures, and
algorithms. The students participate in summer internship programs with
industry. Through joint efforts at Georgia Tech, Auburn University, and Tuskegee
University, this project also actively supports the goals of recruiting more
U.S. citizens, women and minorities to graduate programs.

