* 0834034
* Computer Science and Computational Approaches to Music for Middle School and High School Students
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2008,11/30/2009
* Adam Meyers, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 11/30/2009
* USD 40,000.00

This Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) supports a pilot study at New
York University (NYU), under which computer science (CS) is being taught to math
and music savvy children in grades 7-12. They are learning how CS principles
apply to music, a technical field with known computational applications
including sound manipulation, music information retrieval, and musicrelated
artificial intelligence. The focus is on fundamental scientific concepts like
algorithms and data structures and how they apply to technical problems. This
contrasts with previous approaches to teaching pre-college CS, e.g., AP computer
science classes focus on a currently popular computer language (JAVA) and other
classes focus on currently popular computer applications (word processing,
spreadsheets, etc.). Follow up studies are anticipated for teaching other
computational domains, such as robotics and artificial intelligence approaches
to solving games. Again, the focus will be on formal computational problem
solving, rather than the use of currently popular computer languages and
applications. This study explores the incorporation of basic CS into the
middle/high school curricula, a significant question for the educational and
scientific research communities. The ubiquitousness of computational thinking in
current intellectual thought makes this an extremely significant line of
research. The teaching materials created in this pilot study will be available
on the world wide web and results will be submitted for publication. This pilot
study is intended as a stepping stone to a real computer science curriculum for
pre-college students, which should prove essential to the future economic and
intellectual development of the United States.