* 0834075
* Fate and Toxicity of metallic nanoparticles in aquatic organisms
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Nancy Denslow, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2013
* USD 299,122.00

CBET-0834075 Barber

Substantial amounts of metallic nanomaterials are being utilized yet there is
little knowledge about the effects of these materials in the environment.
Preliminary data indicates that copper and silver nanoparticles are acutely
toxic in zebrafish and daphnia. The proposed studies will investigate the
biological fate and toxicity of metallic nanoparticles in various trophic
levels. The overall hypothesis is that exposure to metallic nanoparticles will
result in bioaccumulation and trophic transfer different than soluble forms of
the metal. Moreover, long-term exposure to nanometallics may produce toxicity
that is qualitatively and quantitatively different than soluble metals. To
address these hypotheses, 3 specific aims are proposed: 1) To determine metal
bioaccumulation and trophic transfer rates in aquatic organisms exposed to
metallic nanoparticles; 2) To determine effects of long-term exposure to copper,
silver and titania nanomaterials on zebrafish and daphnia; and 3) To determine
the role of particle mediated reactive oxygen generation in gill toxicity.

To address these aims, zebrafish (Danio rerio) will be exposed to copper,
silver, nickel or titanium dioxide as aqueous solutions or nanoparticle
suspensions. The uptake and distribution of metal will be determined for each
form in T. tubifex, P. subcapitata, D. pulex, and zebrafish. We will then
determine trophic transfer from producer to primary consumer and from primary
consumer to secondary consumer. Standard protocols will be utilized to examine
long-term toxicity of these particles in zebrafish as adults and at early life
stages as well as in daphnia life-cycle assays. These studies will identify
threshold values for mortality, embryonic and larval survival and reproduction.
They will also determine target tissues for toxicity by examining histological,
biochemical and molecular markers of toxicity. Comparison of these markers will
allow determination of if nanoparticles produce toxicity that differs from
soluble forms of the same metal. Finally, the ability of metallic nanoparticles
to produce reactive species will be examined the importance of oxidative stress
in gill toxicity will be determined.

Intellectual Merit: The proposed studies represent an interdisciplinary
collaboration of toxicologists, engineers, and aquatic pathologists who bring a
unique combination of experience, facilities, and resources to bear on the study
of environmental impact of nanotechnology. These studies will determine whether
metallic nanoparticles are accumulated and transferred across trophic levels.
The effects of long term exposure to copper, silver and titania nanoparticles in
aquatic organisms will be identified as well as appropriate markers for their
toxicity. Data will be developed that seeks to understand how particle mediated
radical production is involved in toxicity. The experiments will evaluate the
performance of several standard aquatic toxicity tests for use with
nanoparticles and determine their suitability for this purpose.

Broader Impacts: This research will provide research training for post-doctoral
researchers at the interface of particle science and biology. Investigators on
this project are participants in the SEAGEP program and this will be leveraged
to provide research opportunities for underrepresented minorities. In addition,
the investigators plan to collaborate with other national resources in
nanotechnology such as Center for Nanotechnology in Society at Arizona State
University and ICON at Rice to disseminate research results to the scientific
and educational communities and to society at large. Researchers will also work
with the Graham Center for Public Policy at the University of Florida to ensure
that research findings are translated to policy makers.