* 0834306
* Organizational Nomination: Undergraduate Astronomy Research Mentoring at the Maria Mitchell Association
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Janet Schulte, Nantucket Maria Mitchell Association
* Standard Grant
* Daphne Y. Rainey
* 08/31/2011
* USD 10,000.00

MARIA MITCHELL ASSOCIATION Nantucket,
Massachusetts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Maria Mitchell Association
(MMA) honors America's first professional woman astronomer who believed that
students learned best by doing real research projects. The MMA is dedicated to
furthering science education, encouraging women in science, and serving as a
science resource for Nantucket, MA. The mission is to increase knowledge and
public awareness of the universe and the natural world through programs of
scientific research and education.&lt;br/&gt;The Association celebrates its
Centennial of the MMO (1908-2008) and the fiftieth anniversary of its
outstanding undergraduate mentoring program.&lt;br/&gt;The program of supervised
undergraduate research was initiated by Dr. Dorrit Hoffleit, the second MMO
director, in 1957, and it has continued under the guidance of subsequent MMO
directors - Drs. Emilia Belserene (1978-90), Eileen Friel (1991-96) and Vladimir
Strelnitski (1997-present). Initially, the program was available only to female
students; male students were first admitted in 1977, but the majority of the
positions (two-thirds, on average) are awarded to females. The MMA is now a
permanent NSF Research Experiences for Undergraduates site in astronomy.
&lt;br/&gt;An analysis of the MMA astronomy alumni/ae career paths shows that
the MMA's mentoring principles bring remarkable and ever improving results. In
particular, the percentage of MMA astronomy alumni/ae attaining the PhD level
increased from the (relatively high) value of approximately 20% in the first two
decades of the program to about 60% in the last decade, this probability being
now approximately equal for the male and female MMA astronomy interns - a
remarkable and promising achievement, given the relatively small numbers of PhD-
level women researchers and professors in American astronomy and physics.
&lt;br/&gt;The extraordinary level of mentoring at the MMA is also seen from the
fact that during the last decade, all the interns, without exception, completed
their summer research projects, all presented the results, as a minimum, at a
semi-annual meeting of the American Astronomical Society, and nearly three-
quarters of them became authors or co-authors of papers published in refereed
editions.