* 0834619
* CSR-PSCE, SM:   Memory Management Innovations for Next-Generation SMP
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Patrick Eugster, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Krishna Kant
* 08/31/2012
* USD 308,000.00

The underlying paradigm shift to parallel programming brought on by the
introduction of multicore computing and the resulting challenges posed by this
shift are just beginning to be experienced by consumers and programmers alike. A
foremost challenge is scalability, especially in increasingly widespread
automated memory management techniques such as garbage collection. As
architectures move to 80 cores and beyond, new algorithms are needed that
require almost zero synchronization and shared state. So-called "lock-free"
algorithms leverage atomic low-level hardware instructions which are either
quite expensive or exhibit sub-linear scalability due to cache coherency and
memory-model constraints.

To pave the way for exploiting the potential of future scalable symmetric
multiprocessing (SMP) this project proposes three contributions that simplify
the inherent complexity within parallel systems for programmers and at the same
time offering protection from deadlocks, livelocks, data races, as well as from
security threats such as zero-day exploits. These contributions include (1)
Ribbons - a new, more flexible, shared-memory programming model, where sharing
constraints can be specified in a pair-wise fashion between restricted threads.
Ribbons protect against inadvertent or malicious access to data and mitigate
unbounded heap corruption in unsafe runtime environments, and subsume the
familiar thread model. (2) Automated memory management techniques that exhibit
near linear speedups on 32 cores and beyond. These techniques primarily consist
of a garbage collection scheme that exploits thread-local data to avoid costly
atomic instructions in the fast path. (3). Integrated support at the OS level.
The two previous goals can be implemented in isolation, but exhibit many
synergies when combined into a single system at all levels. Integrated support
at the OS will lead to more scalable, energy-aware task scheduling algorithms
and will provide the systemic-wide support required for the new fundamental
execution model of ribbons to be viable in industry and become widely adopted.

This project proposes cooperation with the community to enhance existing memory
management benchmarks to suitably test scalability across 32+ cores. The
evaluation stage will also involve a case study where undergraduate students
implement a project using either ribbons or normal threads and processes. All
software implemented in this project will be made available under open source
licenses.