* 0834493
* CSR-DMSS, SM:   DoC - Distributed Opportunistic Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Mohan Kumar, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Krishna Kant
* 08/31/2012
* USD 207,572.00

CSR-DMSS, SM: DoC - Distributed Opportunistic Computing
(0834493)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to carry out
preliminary, fundamental research work in the area of opportunistic computing.
When pairs of devices come within each others? communication range,
opportunistically, short-lived links (or opportunistic links) are created.
Opportunistic computing exploits the opportunistic links created by pair-wise
contacts, to share information content, resources and services, leading to a
wide variety of applications. Groups of computing nodes and their associated
pair-wise contacts in an opportunistic network give rise to a distributed
opportunistic computing system. Essentially, opportunistic computing can be
described as distributed computing with the caveats of intermittent connectivity
and delay tolerance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The novelty of the proposed work lies
in the exploitation of opportunistic communication contacts to provide
collaborative computing services to applications and users. The unique
contributions of this project include the development of an adaptive protocol
for opportunistic communication in support of computing, a middleware
architecture for masking the disruptive nature of the underlying network from
applications and users, and a mechanism for delay tolerant, remote execution of
tasks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will lead to tangible contributions to
the improvement in human quality of life and make significant impact on Internet
based applications, computer science and engineering. The project outcomes have
relevance to applications in crisis management situations, entertainment,
transportation, education and military. In general, the outcomes of this project
have broad applicability in such areas as entertainment, health care,
transportation and automobiles, military and education. Research findings will
be incorporated into graduate and undergraduate courses. &lt;br/&gt;