* 0834784
* CSR-DMSS, SM:   Incremental Web-scale Data Processing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Kenneth Yocum, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Krishna Kant
* 08/31/2009
* USD 100,000.00

This project seeks to develop incremental processing abstractions
and&lt;br/&gt;technologies to address the approaching bottleneck in
processing&lt;br/&gt;unstructured web-scale data. Government, medical,
financial, and web-based&lt;br/&gt;services increasingly depend on the ability
to rapidly sift through huge,&lt;br/&gt;evolving data sets. These data-intensive
applications perform complex&lt;br/&gt;multi-step computations over successive
generations of data inflows (e.g.,&lt;br/&gt;weekly web crawls or nightly
telescope dumps). Current approaches to&lt;br/&gt;processing unstructured data
have driven the development of massively&lt;br/&gt;parallel "ad-hoc" data
processing systems, such as MapReduce. However,&lt;br/&gt;they process data in a
snap-shot fashion, forcing massive re-computations&lt;br/&gt;when even a small
amount of new data arrives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core of the project
consists of a cluster-based incremental data&lt;br/&gt;processing system that
overcomes these limitations. A key component is a&lt;br/&gt;dataflow programming
model that combines massive parallelism and flexible,&lt;br/&gt;incremental
computations. An incremental processing controller&lt;br/&gt;orchestrates
multiple backend data processing tasks, ensuring reliable,&lt;br/&gt;consistent
operation in the event of node failures. The project seeks to&lt;br/&gt;shed
light on the fundamental challenges and benefits of
incremental&lt;br/&gt;processing for ad-hoc data by using both industrial and
e-science&lt;br/&gt;applications. For example, through cooperation with Yahoo!
Research, the&lt;br/&gt;project will vet existing prototypes on real-world web-
indexing dataflows&lt;br/&gt;and large data sets. While in the short term the
project provides a&lt;br/&gt;platform for such highly skilled operators, the
long-term goal is to&lt;br/&gt;significantly advance the methods and
abstractions that the scientific&lt;br/&gt;community and commercial world use to
tackle processing vast, dynamic data&lt;br/&gt;sets.