* 0834252
* Conference:  ISBE 2008 conference, to be held at Cornell University in August 2008
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Sandra Vehrencamp, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* daniel wiegmann
* 06/30/2009
* USD 10,000.00

Proposal # 0834252: Support for ISBE 2008 conference PI: Sandra L. Vehrencamp

Support from the NSF will provide funds for the 12th biennial congress of the
International Society for Behavioral Ecology (ISBE) to be held at Cornell
University in August 2008. ISBE congresses are exceptionally international in
composition and held alternately in the New World and the Old World. ISBE
meetings are also unusually gender-balanced, both in participation and in
leadership, and the strongly international membership and meeting structure are
designed to facilitate interactions between the most well known researchers in
the field and the many younger scientists and students from around the world who
attend these meetings. ISBE congresses tend to place a greater emphasis on the
theoretical bases and processes of behavioral evolution than Animal Behavior
Society meetings. The explicit blend of theory and experiment has continued to
be the main thread linking members of the Society as topics have evolved and
shifted in popularity. Taxonomic coverage is broad, ranging from invertebrates
to vertebrates including humans, and primary topics include communication,
cooperation and conflict, sexual selection, personality, and foraging
strategies. The 2008 ISBE congress has attracted a record number of participants
(1020 scientists), the largest conference ever held at Cornell and a challenge
for the campus. Press coverage will disseminate the exciting new scientific
findings into the news services for worldwide distribution.