* 0835466
* SGER:   Exploring Timescale Parallelization for Long-timescale Molecular Dynamics
* CSE,OAC
* 05/15/2008,10/31/2009
* Srinivas Aluru, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Manish Parashar
* 10/31/2009
* USD 103,063.00

The goal of the proposed project is to develop timescale parallelization
techniques to rapidly advance on the timescale through tracking of multiple
event trajectories. This will be achieved by developing parallel strategies for
the recently invented timescale methods such as parallel replica dynamics,
temperature accelerated dynamics, and forward flux sampling. These techniques
can then be combined with spatial parallelization techniques to provide a
multiplicative boost to the number of processors that can be e^ectively
utilized. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Extending molecular dynamics timescales by orders of
magnitude while&lt;br/&gt;retaining atomic level details constitutes a
revolutionary advance in furthering scientific and engineering knowledge through
atomistic simulations. If successful, the proposed high-risk exploratory
research will significantly increase the timescale of molecular dynamics
simulation capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To ensure broad impact to the molecular dynamics
community, the developed methods will be made available as part of next
generation LAMMPS software package, which already has a substantial user base.
Other open source programs will be released to enable computational scientists
to take advantage of the proposed research. Through the project, a postdoctoral
research associate will be trained in interdisciplinary research that combines
advanced scientific&lt;br/&gt;computing and computational methods aimed for
petascale system