* 0835153
* HRRA: Emergency Regional Studies in the Heartland of the Yunnanese Bronze Age: Archaeological Survey in SW China
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2008,07/31/2009
* Henry Wright, New York University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2009
* USD 25,000.00

With National Science Foundation Support, Dr. Alice Yao, Dr. Henry Wright and
the Yunnan Provincial Institute of Cultural Relics and Archaeology in China will
conduct one season of archaeological research on the Lake Dian Basin. The team
brings together U.S. and Chinese specialists in archaeology to investigate the
origins of a powerful Bronze Age polity known as the as the Dian Kingdom.
Located in the well-protected high altitude basin of Lake Dian, the Dian Kingdom
emerged as a formidable independent polity occupying an important communication
node between ancient China and mainland Southeast Asia. The Dian Kingdom and
neighboring polities appeared to have achieved prominence during a dynamic
period of escalating interregional warfare and trade across ancient China and
Southeast Asia. Current archaeological research seeks to determine the impact
these regional political developments may have had on the sociopolitical
formations in the Lake Dian basin. Was this sociopolitical complexity directly
introduced by Chinese states or motivated by competition and trade with its
immediate neighbors? Only the recovery of Bronze Age occupation sites in the
Lake Dian can address the enigmatic origins of the Dian Kingdom. This project
provides a first-ever international effort to search for possible prehistoric
occupations in this region.

Solving the nature of Dian origins requires a solid understanding of the timing
of sociopolitical developments within the Lake Dian basin. The goals of the
project are 1) to identify prehistoric occupation sites from archaeological
field survey and satellite imagery, 2) to provide radiometric dates from these
discovered sites that would contribute toward a chronology for the Dian polity,
and 3) to collect materials from surfaces and exposed cuts to document the
nature of cultural activities at these sites. The survey approach employs high
resolution satellite imagery taken before the introduction of mechanized
agriculture to guide a controlled field survey in target areas showing greater
promise of site recovery. This exploratory investigation can potentially chart
the genesis of the Dian region from its prehistoric beginnings to its
florescence as a Bronze Age polity.

If successful, the direct intellectual merit of the research will be the
discovery of prehistoric occupation sites in a region of China where few sites
have ever been documented. The recovery of these sites would provide the spatio-
temporal framework necessary to chronicle the socio-political developments of a
poorly understood region in China. This groundwork would then stimulate the
development of working models for secondary formations in the ancient world.
Beyond the scientific value of discovering ancient Dian sites, the project
anticipates broader impact by promoting scholarly exchange between the US and
China through this first time archaeological collaboration in Yunnan province.
In addition, the development of cost-effective reconnaissance methods that are
simultaneously non-intrusive can be easily adapted to fit the needs of public
archaeology and heritage management.