* 0835880
* Improving students' mathematical sense-making in engineering:  Research and development
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Edward Redish, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Donna Riley
* 08/31/2013
* USD 499,991.00

In this project a team from the University of Maryland Departments of
Physics,&lt;br/&gt;Mechanical Engineering, and Electrical &amp; Computer
Engineering, will redesign a freshman physics course sequence to improve
mathematical comprehension or ?sense-making? in engineering students. It will
assess the effects of these improvements by comparing students who had taken the
traditional courses with students who had taken the modified courses in
sophomore level required mechanical and electrical engineering courses. Two
specific research questions will be addressed. What factors contribute to
students? difficulties with mathematical sense-making? Can redesigned
introductory physics courses improve students? mathematical sense-making and
overall performance in their later engineering courses? Previous research
suggests that to address the first question the research team must probe not
just for mathematical skill deficiencies but also for students? lack of
understanding of the relevant physics/engineering concepts, lack of ability or
propensity to translate between formalism and real-world relations, and na√Øve
beliefs about how to learn and apply math. These factors and interactions among
them will be explored using multiple methods, including analysis of video of
students solving challenging problems in small groups. The second question will
be addressed using the team?s previous work in modifying the algebra-based
introductory physics sequence for life science majors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For
engineers, effective use of mathematics is more than manipulating equations and
applying algorithms. It involves mathematical ?sense-making? or looking for
coherence and meaning partly by translating between symbolic relations on the
page and causal and functional relations in the world. Although mathematical
sense-making is central to students? success with modeling and design, many
engineering students have trouble with it. Underpreparation and underconfidence
in math often discourage students, and improved methods of teaching mathematical
sense-making can increase the number and diversity of engineering
majors.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;