* 0835824
* Collaborative Proposal:  CDI-Type I: A multidisciplinary, multiscale approach to discover organizing principles in macromolecular dynamics and functions
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Cecilia Clementi, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 09/30/2012
* USD 279,941.00

The understanding of cooperative processes in biomolecular systems (such as
protein dynamics, folding, and self-assembly) poses outstanding challenges both
for theory and experiment. The large number of degrees of freedom involved, and
the degree of heterogeneity present, may at a first glance suggest the lack of
general principles.

As Francis Crick wrote twenty years ago, commenting on macromolecular dynamics,
"what seems to physicists a hopelessly complicated process may have been what
Nature found simplest". The behavior of a macro-molecular system appears
overwhelmingly complicated. Biologically relevant macro-molecular systems are
the result of billions of years of evolution, during which details and
exceptions have been selected for functional reasons. In spite of the
complexity, collective phenomena emerge in macromolecular systems, as for
instance in protein folding and self-assembly processes, suggesting the
existence of organizing principles that may actually exploit the complexity to
obtain simplicity.

Is it possible to understand (that is, reproduce, quantify, and predict) how
organization emerges from the interactions of the single degrees of freedom in a
biomolecular system, over a broad spectrum of length and timescales? Empirical
and theoretical evidence supports the idea that for most macromolecular
processes only a small portion of the conformational space is visited, and that
for medium/long time scales a very small number of parameters are enough to
describe the coarse dynamics of a large macromolecular system. Previous work in
this direction has not been automatic nor systematic, and has been driven mostly
by physical intuition, with little or no guarantee of success.

It is the goal of this work to develop and apply a radically different approach,
that reconciles biological and biochemical approaches with a physical and
mathematical perspective. A key step towards the formulation of the general
"rules" that evolution has employed for regulating the behavior of biomolecular
processes resides in the mathematically rigorous identification and the
physically sound macromolecular process of interest. The methods that will be
developed to this end are based on multiscale will be widely applicable to the
analysis of the geometry of large high dimensional data sets, across and such
data sets.