* 0835426
* Dynamic Support for Virtual Math Teams
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Carolyn Rose, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 07/31/2013
* USD 306,132.00

Free on-line learning promises to transform the educational landscape of the
United States through a significant broadening of supplemental educational
opportunities for low income and minority students who do not have access to
high quality private tutoring to supplement their in school education. The
proposed solution is to develop a technological augmentation to available human
support in a lightly staffed Virtual Math Teams (VMT) environment as well as
deploying conversational agents that are triggered by automatically detected
conversational events and that have the ability to elicit valuable collaborative
behavior such as reflection, help seeking, and help provision. This project
brings together expertise in technological development and careful
experimentation both in the lab and in the classroom, a track record for large
scale deployment of educational materials, and a solid foundation in significant
student learning results in collaborative environments. The project builds on
results from a pilot project in which the team has built VMT-Basilica, which is
a technical infrastructure for supporting collaborative problem solving, as well
as having conducted pilot studies with it in an on-line setting with promising
results. The VMTs use the infrastructure provided by the Math Forum. This
project also contributes to the general development of intelligent agents to aid
collaboration in a wide variety of settings where collaboration support is
needed. By bringing together research in education environments and in computer
based intelligent agents, this project is potentially transformative in both
computer science and mathematics education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
has the potential to bring mathematics to a national community since the
development of these agents will substantially reduce the amount of time a human
must monitor VMT collaborations. VMTs operate primarily out of the classroom and
act as supplemental work for students learning mathematics. In addition, since
the collaboration support provided by these agents is not specific to
mathematics problem solving, agent supported collaboration could be expanded to
any field where collaboration needs to be supported - from education to business
to the military.&lt;br/&gt;