* 0835968
* Exploratory Project: Graduating ENgineers In the U.S. (GENIUS) Summer Program
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Grant Warner, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Cheville
* 12/31/2009
* USD 99,336.00

This exploratory effort will address the challenge of increasing the number of
African-American high school graduates prepared to matriculate in engineering
and computer science university programs, by implementing the GENIUS Summer
program. The month-long summer camp targets rising juniors in high schools
located in the DC metropolitan area. The program will prepare students for
academic success in university-based STEM programs and provide students and
their families with additional insight on the college application process. The
GENIUS program will address two critical inquiries that impact the rate of
students applying to, matriculating in, and graduating from accredited STEM
programs. To what extent can innovative and emerging ideas in technical
entrepreneurship motivate students to embrace engineering? To what extent does
exposure to university personnel and culture impact students? views of attending
college? As the US population becomes more diverse, the minority population will
become an increasing segment of the technology workforce and recruitment and
retention rates must be improved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The changing demographics
of the American society make it imperative to develop effective strategies for
graduating African-American engineers, a group that traditionally underperforms
its national and international peers in math and science. The GENIUS Program
addresses this issue by developing a program targeting rising high school
juniors at schools that are predominately African-American and struggle with low
graduation rates and lower than average performance on standardized exams. The
program will marshal existing university services and strategic University
partnerships for support.&lt;br/&gt;