* 0835976
* CELEST:   A Center of Excellence for Learning in Education, Science, and Technology
* SBE,SMA
* 03/01/2010,08/31/2016
* Robert Sekuler, Trustees of Boston University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2016
* USD 19,399,383.00

CELEST seeks to understand the fundamental processes that underlie human
learning by studying dynamic interactions within and among brain regions.
Interdisciplinary research teams study how the brain learns to (1) plan: to make
decisions for appropriate actions based on assessment of risks and potential
rewards in a given situation, (2) explore: to perform planned actions to move
about familiar and unfamiliar environments, (3) communicate: to use noisy and
incomplete sensory information to interact effectively with other agents and
objects in the world, and (4) remember: to encode and guide retrieval of
information to achieve goals. CELEST is a multi-faceted collaboration that
focuses the efforts of scientific and educational teams led by 15 senior
scientists at four Boston-area universities. CELEST combines undergraduate and
graduate training in interdisciplinary research that combines experimental
cognitive neuroscience with quantitative behavioral and brain modeling of normal
and abnormal learning during perception, cognition, emotion, and
action.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: CELEST transfers the results of
basic research on learning to undergraduate and graduate courses. This is
achieved through its ongoing development of course materials for the new
undergraduate neuroscience major at Boston University, and through electronic
dissemination on the CELEST web site. Outreach to the undergraduate neuroscience
community also occurs by means of a one-day CELEST workshop and related workbook
about the cognitive basis of successful learning strategies. A number of CELEST
programs are targeted at increasing opportunities for groups underrepresented in
science to participate in its innovative curriculum and research initiatives.
These include graduate fellowships, summer internships for faculty from
minority-serving institutions, a ten-week summer program for undergraduates from
underrepresented groups to work in CELEST faculty labs, and a week-long summer
workshop to introduce undergraduates to the interplay of modeling and
experimental techniques in cognitive neuroscience. Center added value: By
bringing together distinct scientific communities that traditionally employ
different practices and techniques, CELEST interdisciplinary science is changing
the way we understand how the brain learns, and how different parts of the brain
interact with each other during learning. Through collaboration with industrial
partners, including the development and transfer of large-scale neuromorphic
engineering and technological algorithms to industry and government
laboratories, CELEST facilitates research for practical applications that cannot
be supported by conventional single-investigator grants. CELEST faculty,
postdocs, and students are playing increasingly important roles in communicating
with non-specialists through many activities including blogs, workshops, and
presentations to secondary school audiences. The integration of CELEST research
and education is accomplished through the development of innovative curriculum
materials based upon mathematical and computational models of mind and brain.
through electronic and personal presentations to a variety of audiences, and
through sponsorship of scientific conferences and workshops.&lt;br/&gt;