* 0835839
* CDI-Type I: A computational database for cyber-assisted discovery of oceanic  mixing processes in multi-resolution, feature-driven simulations
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2013
* Scott Baden, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2013
* USD 602,017.00

A computational database will be investigated for cyber-enabled discovery of
spatio-temporal transport and mixing dynamics in geophysical turbulent flows
modeled through simulation. It will be possible to identify vortical flow
structures and follow them in time to compute conditional flow quantities,
thereby, quantifying the dynamical role of these structures. The database
provides an efficient extensible framework for formulating and validating
hypotheses. It combines the machinery of an imperative model of spatial data
retrieval with powerful computational facilities tailored to dynamic
representations of irregular time-dependent structures, overcoming limitations
of relational databases in handling such data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts of this research are in its contributions to the national infrastructure
for research and education in Computer Science, Geosciences and Mechanical and
Aerospace Engineering; it will lead to a computational methodology applicable to
any field that involves time-dependent, multi-scale physical phenomena and
admits mathematical rules to characterize features that are posited to be
dynamically important.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two Ph.D. students will be trained
and will work together with collaborators outside their own fields, enabling
cross-disciplinary teaching and training. Research results will be integrated
into high-performance computing courses and the database will be used as a tool
in graduate courses in turbulence and computational fluid dynamics. The software
produced by the investigation will be disseminated publicly. The investigators
will actively recruit from under-represented groups.