* 0835436
* CDI-Type II: Collaborative Research: Computational Models for Evaluating Long Term CO2 Storage in Saline Aquifers
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2013
* Yicheng Lu, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 09/30/2013
* USD 318,000.00

Collaborative Research: Computational Models for Evaluating Long
Term&lt;br/&gt;CO2 Storage in Saline
Aquifers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key goal of this project is to
produce a prototypical&lt;br/&gt;computational system to accurately predict the
fate of injected CO2&lt;br/&gt;in conditions governed by multiphase flow, rock
mechanics,&lt;br/&gt;multicomponent transport, thermodynamic phase behavior,
chemical&lt;br/&gt;reactions within both the fluid and the rock, and the
coupling of all&lt;br/&gt;these phenomena over multiple time and spatial
scales.&lt;br/&gt;To tackle this grand challenge effort, a multidisciplinary
research&lt;br/&gt;team has been assembled of senior researchers M. F.
Wheeler,&lt;br/&gt;T. Arbogast, and M. Delshad of the Center for Subsurface
Modeling&lt;br/&gt;and I. Duncan from the Bureau of Economic Geology at
The&lt;br/&gt;University of Texas at Austin, as well as M. Parashar
of&lt;br/&gt;the Applied Software Systems Laboratory at Rutgers University.
This&lt;br/&gt;group has expertise in (1) applied mathematics and
computational&lt;br/&gt;science that includes multiscale and multiphysics
algorithms, solvers,&lt;br/&gt;uncertainty, and optimization (2) computer
science&lt;br/&gt;that includes dynamic adaptivity, model/code couplings, and
data&lt;br/&gt;management and transport (3) compositional modeling
and&lt;br/&gt;CO2 injection processes and (4) CO2 demonstration
sites.&lt;br/&gt;In each of the third and fourth years of the project, we
will&lt;br/&gt;host a two-day workshop for high school teachers, advanced high
school&lt;br/&gt;students, and undergraduate students with an interest in high
school&lt;br/&gt;teaching. We will provide training in the use of a
sophisticated groundwater&lt;br/&gt;simulator, to be used as a tool to engage
and pique the interest of&lt;br/&gt;high schoolers, perhaps leading some to
careers in mathematics, the&lt;br/&gt;sciences, and interdisciplinary work. In
addition, two postdoctoral&lt;br/&gt;students and roughly two graduate students
will be supported&lt;br/&gt;throughout the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geologic sequestration is a proven means of
permanent CO2 greenhouse gas&lt;br/&gt;storage, but it is difficult to design
and manage such efforts. Predictive&lt;br/&gt;computational simulation may be
the only means to account for the lack of&lt;br/&gt;complete characterization of
the subsurface environment, the multiple scales of&lt;br/&gt;the various
interacting processes, the large areal extent of saline aquifers,&lt;br/&gt;and
the need for long time predictions. This proposal will investigate
high&lt;br/&gt;fidelity multiscale and multiphysics algorithms necessary for
simulation of&lt;br/&gt;multiphase flow and transport coupled with geochemical
reactions and related&lt;br/&gt;mineralogy, and geomechanical deformation in
porous media to predict changes in&lt;br/&gt;rock properties during
sequestration. The work will result in a prototypical&lt;br/&gt;computational
framework with advanced numerical algorithms and underlying&lt;br/&gt;technology
for research in CO2 applications, which has been validated
and&lt;br/&gt;verified against field-scale experimental tests. The
multidisciplinary&lt;br/&gt;research team has expertise in (1) applied
mathematics and computational&lt;br/&gt;science, (2) computer science and
engineering, (3) compositional modeling and&lt;br/&gt;CO2 injection processes,
and (4) CO2 demonstration sites.&lt;br/&gt;In each of the third and fourth years
of the project, we will&lt;br/&gt;host a two-day workshop for high school
teachers, advanced high school&lt;br/&gt;students, and undergraduate students
with an interest in high school&lt;br/&gt;teaching. We will provide training in
the use of a sophisticated groundwater&lt;br/&gt;simulator, to be used as a tool
to engage and pique the interest of&lt;br/&gt;high schoolers, perhaps leading
some to careers in mathematics, the&lt;br/&gt;sciences, and interdisciplinary
work. In addition, two postdoctoral&lt;br/&gt;students and roughly two graduate
students will be supported&lt;br/&gt;throughout the project.