* 0835932
* IEECI Exploratory Project:  Why Women Stay: An Investigation of Two Successful Programs
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2012
* Hank Yochum, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard N. Smith
* 04/30/2012
* USD 149,969.00

The proposed research will help the engineering education community understand
how to better attract and retain a more talented and diverse student body by
investigating two successful engineering/pre-engineering programs that have been
designed specifically to facilitate self-efficacy of students in engineering.
One program is a well established full year high school course built around the
national FIRST robotics competition. The other is a new engineering program at
all-women Sweet Briar College. The PIs hypothesize that this attendance to the
socio-cultural aspects in the design and development of both programs, which
focuses on achieving self-efficacy of the students, attributes to the 70-90%
retention rates of females in these programs. This work will identify specific
components of the two programs to both improve the understanding of the issues
which are resulting in more women entering and staying in engineering/pre-
engineering programs, and to also identify components from these existing
programs for replication in other programs. Three groups will participate in
this research study: females and males from the high school, and female
undergraduates from the college. Both quantitative and qualitative measures will
be used to evaluate the gender related outcomes of the programs. Factors
influencing changes in beliefs as well as factors influencing student decisions
to remain in the program will be investigated. Data from the female students
will be compared with responses from the control group, the male students, to
specifically identify factors that are unique to the females.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improving retention will contribute to increasing the
participation of women in engineering programs, which will increase the number
and diversity of engineering students who will enter the workforce. This project
will evaluate components leading to the high retention rates of female students
in two programs, disseminate the results through multiple venues, apply the
results to improve the activities of the existing programs, and facilitate the
replication of strategies in new initiatives. The partnership of the research
team will facilitate dissemination among scholars and practitioners in multiple
STEM education disciplines, gender studies, and also the education community at
the high school and college/university level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;