* 0835981
* THE ROLE OF SERVICE-LEARNING: IMPROVING ENGINEERING EDUCATION; ATTRACTING WOMEN INTO ENGINEERING
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Chris Rogers, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Donna Riley
* 08/31/2013
* USD 541,552.00

Instructional strategies that use holistic, real-world applications of science
and technology tend to be more effective for attracting and retaining the
interest of women and underrepresented minorities. This proposal focuses on
service-learning, a pedagogy which combines active citizenship with student
learning. A major component of service learning is that it serves to enhance the
academic curriculum as an integrated feature. At the same time, the service
projects meet genuine needs of the communities in which and with whom they take
place. This project will examine the outcome that participation in service-
learning in schools of engineering better attracts and retains women engineers.
Along with traditional assessment of success such as course grades or graduation
rates, this research will measure participants' perceptions of self-efficacy,
their perceptions of the nature of engineering, and their understanding of
fundamental engineering concepts. The overall goals of this proposal are to
measure the effectiveness of service-learning programs as pedagogical methods
for teaching engineering and to examine how service-learning programs attract a
more diverse set of engineering students than is currently represented in the
population of engineering students. The study of three well-established service
learning programs at Tufts and Purdue will use established methods to test self-
efficacy and understanding of the nature of engineering and will also develop
new instruments to evaluate student understanding of the concepts of engineering
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research could have significant
impact on the number and diversity of engineering graduates and on their ability
to effectively address real-world problems. If service learning is shown to
provide a more holistic understanding of engineering and its role in society for
all students, then implementation of service learning programs will enhance the
general workforce by recruiting and graduating more diverse and more competent
students to meet the needs of the future. &lt;br/&gt;