* 0835552
* Wavelet-based Statistical Modeling and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Marina Vannucci, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2010
* USD 62,000.00

This proposal summarizes current interests of the P.I. and future directions, in
both research and education. Topics all involve the development of wavelet-based
methods and represent natural extensions of the P.I.'s previous work. The three
main areas of interest are: (1) Bayesian Clustering of Functional Data. The
objective is to develop novel Bayesian methods for clustering of functional
data. The approach proposed by the P.I. is model-based and uses infinite mixture
models together with the selection of wavelet coefficients describing
discriminatory features of the data. (2) Analysis of Protein Mass Spectra. The
overall goal of the P.I. is to develop methodologies for extracting important
features of proteomic data whileincorporating dimension reduction wavelet
techniques. The P.I. has a growing interest in the area of Bioinformatics and
has established collaborations with a number of investigators at Texas A&M. (3)
Wavelet-based Methods for Long Memory Data. This project relates to the
development of wavelet methods for time series modelling. The P.I. plans to
build on her previous work on long memory estimation and on change-point
detection and to explore novel applications to functional Magnetic Resonance
Imaging (fMRI) data.

The novel methodologies developed in this proposal constitute advances in the
theory and practice of wavelet-based methods. Applications to data arising from
interdisciplinary collaborations demostrate the practical usefulness of the
proposed methods, and confirm the success of wavelets as a tool for analysing
data. The proposed clustering methods are quite general and can be applied to a
number of different contexts that involve functional data. The P.I. has previous
experience with the analysis of data from studies involving Near Infrared
spectra and of biomedical data. She has also established several collaborations
in the area of Bioinformatics and plans to develop wavelet methods for the
analysis of high-throughput protein mass spectra. Broader impacts of this
proposal are in the collaborative nature of the proposed research but also in
its educational and training objectives and in its efforts to disseminate
results. The P.I. is engaged in several collaborations with investigators in the
life sciences, both at Texas A&M and at other universities. She continues her
engagement in the mentoring of graduate students and in training activities. She
also maintains an updated webpage on her research activities where papers and
accompanying software are posted in a timely manner.