* 0835414
* EFRI-RESIN: The Interface of Infrastructures, Markets, and Natural Cycles - Innovative Modeling and Control Mechanisms for Managing Electricity, Water and Air Quality in Texas
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2014
* Ronald Prinn, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2014
* USD 2,068,000.00

PI name: David Allen&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Texas at
Austin&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 0835414&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is an
outcome of the competition as part of the Emerging Frontiers in Research and
Innovation (NSF 07-579) solicitation under the subtopic Resilient and
Sustainable Infrastructures (RESIN). The goal of this project is to demonstrate
that the operation of electricity generation and water supply infrastructures
can be made more resilient and sustainable by integrating assessments of air
quality and water availability into electricity generation dispatching
decisions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project proposes to:&lt;br/&gt;1) Create
integrated infrastructure/markets/natural cycles models using the state of Texas
as a source of data and as a geographic and temporal test-bed.&lt;br/&gt;2)
Evaluate the resiliency of the integrated system to a series of challenges or
"shocks" to test resiliency and sustainability&lt;br/&gt;3) Assess alternative
technical, economic and institutional mechanisms for incorporating assessments
of air quality and water availability into the operation of electricity
generating systems; these alterations will include changes to existing wholesale
power markets, air quality regulation, and emissions markets, as well as
potential developments in water markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of
this research would provide new methods for improving the resilience of
electrical and water infrastructures. A major outcome of the work will be the
proof of principle for a next-generation framework for managing the impact on
emissions and water use of electricity generation by integrating advanced
meteorological information with existing and potential market developments in
electricity generation, air quality management, and water availability. This
framework will also help in understanding a broader set of impacts from
perturbations in the integrated system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By demonstrating a
next-generation framework for the integrated management of air quality, water
use, and electricity generation, the project will provide alternatives for
policy-makers in the case study region. In addition, the information generated
by this project will be used to develop educational modules that will be used in
classes in energy systems, air pollution control and environmental regulation
and policy at both UT and MIT. Further, project personnel will participate in
scientific and policy meetings/workshops at which project results will be
presented, including forums such as MIT's "Knight Science Journalism Fellows",
in which journalists spend a year at MIT. Finally, the project will be used to
continue the University of Texas' outreach to female students, specifically by
engaging participants in UT's Women in Engineering Program (WEP) as project
interns.