* 0835767
* CDI-Type I: Understanding Regulation of Visual Attention in Autism through Computational and Robotic Modeling
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2008,03/31/2012
* Brian Scassellati, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 03/31/2012
* USD 700,000.00

Eye tracking has become a widespread tool throughout the cognitive sciences and
has attracted particular attention as a behavioral measurement tool for children
with developmental disabilities. However, there are no standardized quantitative
tools for assessing broadly defined attention skills in young children, and
there is a lack of analysis techniques that would allow gaze patterns to be
compared across individuals, across populations, or for a single individual
across time. This study will develop methods of quantitatively measuring
attentional capacities by (1) designing a Visual Attention Assessment Suite
(VAAS) which examines the interaction and impact of particular features of
scenes on visual attention; (2) constructing novel computational analysis
techniques for comparing gaze patterns across individuals, populations, and
time; (3) validating these techniques against both standard behavioral
assessment protocols and through an embodied modeling approach to ensure that
our models capture the behaviorally important aspects of gaze.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The regulation of attention has been hypothesized as one
of the fundamental factors affecting early development of children with autism.
This project will develop quantitative measures that can be used as diagnostic
and prognostic indicators and to evaluate the effectiveness of particular
treatment approaches. This project represents the first integrated and
interdisciplinary attempt to develop a much needed full-scale diagnostic
instrument that operates purely through eye-tracking, computational techniques,
and individual modeling. Although our primary focus is the interpretation of
gaze data with respect to autism, eye tracking is used extensively in
psychology, primatology, usability studies, marketing, and human-computer
interaction experiments. The models and analysis tools constructed under this
project will be equally applicable to these other domains. This project also has
the potential to produce novel methods of assessing attentional abnormalities in
other developmental disorders (e.g., mental retardation, attention deficit
disorder, specific learning disabilities), novel educational assessment methods
of pre-kindergarten readiness, as well as to develop training methods for
teaching clinicians and educators behavioral assessment using a robot as a model
illustrating various attentional patterns in children with disabilities.