* 0835371
* Collaborative Research: Enabling Independent Learning of Computer Programming Using Programs Written by Peers
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Wanda Dann, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2011
* USD 110,000.00

Last Modified Date: 08/04/08 Last Modified By: Amy Baylor &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Abstract &lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this project is to develop and
evaluate user interface tools that enable middle school students to effectively
teach themselves the basics of computer programming using programs written by
peers. The proposed tools will enable middle school users to 1) identify
interesting functionality within programs written by peers and 2) re-create that
functionality for use in their own programs through automatically generated
custom tutorials. As users complete these tutorials to re-create functionality
selected from programs their peers have written, they will be introduced to a
broad range of programming concepts and constructs. The project will include
user testing to both guide and evaluate the development of 1) user interface
tools that enable novice programmers to find code of interest in an unfamiliar
codebase and 2) technology to automatically generate customized tutorials based
on a recorded history of the sequence of user interface actions used to
construct a program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computer programming has become a
fundamental tool that enables progress across a broad range of disciplines
including basic science, communications, and medicine. Yet, Computer Science is
failing to attract the number of students necessary to sustain progress both
within the discipline and in those disciplines supported by computer science.
Opportunities to study computer science during middle school (when many students
begin to opt out of math and science based careers) are rare. This project will
enable middle school children to teach themselves computer programming using
programs created by their peers. The project will be implemented within
Storytelling Alice, an environment that enables middle school children to write
programs to create 3D animated movies. Users will be able to identify parts of
movies created by other users that interest them and follow automatically
generated tutorials to learn how to create the selected parts of those movies.
By building tools that help users to learn effectively from programs written by
peers within an appealing programming environment, we enable middle school
students across the country to develop skills in computer programming at a time
when formal opportunities to study computer science are decreasing and the need
for computer scientists is increasing. While this project targets middle school
students in the context of learning computer programming, there are many other
audiences (e.g. adults learning a new piece of computer software) would benefit
from software technologies that enable self-teaching &lt;br/&gt;