* 0835986
* Assessing Impact of Teaching, Advising and Mentoring on Students in the Enterprise Program
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2010
* Robert Warrington, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Cheville
* 12/31/2010
* USD 95,634.00

This exploratory project will measure and explain the impact of quality
teaching, advising, and mentoring on Enterprise students at Michigan Tech, with
particular focus on student retention in engineering majors, graduation rates,
and career intentions. Recent data shows a substantially higher six-year
graduation rates for Enterprise students compared to non-Enterprise students,
the hypothesis of this project is that the high quality teaching, advising, and
mentoring efforts of Enterprise faculty have had a significant and measurable
impact on students? graduation rates and career success. The research will
produce a completed study that documents evaluation methods and results and
suggests practical applications of the knowledge gained from the project to the
improvement of engineering education. It will also create a model that
recommends methods and metrics for assessing the impact of teaching, advising,
and mentoring on student retention in engineering, graduation, career
intentions, and other outcomes. The project will utilize a variety of evaluation
methods to study students enrolled in the Enterprise program and will use non-
Enterprise engineering students as a control group. Since the impacts of
teaching, advising, and mentoring are not typically susceptible to the kinds of
metrics used to measure research accomplishments, a model that can directly
measure quality in the classroom and its impact on student outcomes would be
potentially transformative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research
can help strengthen the business of engineering education by offering new
evidence of the importance of teaching excellence, the impact of curriculum
innovation, and the contribution of faculty who advise and mentor students,
especially in active, applied learning environments such as Enterprise. This is
valuable information for recruiting engineering students, for designing programs
that retain engineering and other STEM students, and for attracting sustainable
industry support for an active-learning curriculum.