* 0835773
* CDI-Type II: Collaborative Research: Bibliographic Knowledge Network
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2011
* James Pitman, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 09/30/2011
* USD 166,610.00

This project will develop a suite of tools and services to encourage formation
of virtual organizations in scientific communities of various sizes, such as
conference groups and departmental research groups, and allow such organizations
to filter out relevant documents from various input streams, select and enhance
the quality of bibliographic data associated with the organization, and attract
researchers to contribute to activity of the organization. Methods of
bibliometric analysis, machine learning and statistical visualization will be
applied to assist the exploration and understanding of bibliographic collections
of various sizes, for example all work produced by a research group, or
published in a journal, or all work in a field. This will provide an interactive
environment which allows the researcher to move beyond static summaries to
dynamically explore the environment in which an article of interest exists. In
particular, methods of machine-learning will be applied to to build an article
recommendation service, based on collaborative filtering and on semantic
analysis of bibliographic data, initially for researchers in probability and
statistics. Research will also be done to provide adequate authoring tools for
authors in mathematical fields to easily create highly structured, machine-
readable documents in latex, bibtex and or similar formats, which can then be
easily aggregated and interlinked in encyclopedic compilations, and then
subjected to machine-learning and statistical analysis to provide high-level
overviews of the landscape of these fields. In statistics, mathematics and
related fields, including social science, we expect the networks of information
about authors, publications, problems and datasets that will be created and
exposed through this project should advance these fields by revealing hidden
connections among different sub-disciplines, and accelerating the transmission
of knowledge across these sub-disciplines. With respect to information science,
the project should advance understanding of the collaborative production and
enhancement of bibliographic information online, leveraging flexible similarity
metrics presented in a visually stimulating way to draw interest and encourage
the researcher to expand their search parameters.

This proposal addresses three fundamental problems of knowledge management: the
compartmentalization problem (how to break down barriers which separate
disciplines), the navigation problem (how to guide students and researchers
within and between disciplines), and the maintenance problem (how to provide
incentives for individuals and organizations to improve the quality of publicly
accessible knowledge). It is proposed to solve these problems by gradually
distilling the wealth of heterogeneous data now available in digital formats
into an openly navigable network of websites, the Bibliographic Knowledge
Network (BKN), each node of which is a website dedicated to a specific topic or
field of knowledge. Each participating site will typically be designed as a
guide for researchers, teachers, and students in a particular field of
knowledge, and maintained by a Virtual Organization with a commitment to that
field. The BKN will be created through the development of software which makes
it easy for a large collection of mostly small and distributed organizations to
brand, select, maintain, and annotate collections of structured scientific
content. That content will be made available in machine-readable formats, to
allow connections between ideas in different disciplines to be made using
methods of machine learning. Methods of machine learning will be applied to
provide article recommendation services based on both collaborative filtering
and semantic analysis of documents. The collective knowledge system emerging
from this project will be available beyond the walls of academia, and provide
well-organized high quality information to anyone with an Internet connection.
The expository components of the system will attract people from all backgrounds
to pursue scientific careers, and will allow students at all levels to encounter
materials which will lead them to higher levels. The system will add great value
to other Open Access initiatives, including the system of interoperable digital
repositories, Wikipedia, Open Journal Systems, and free academic search
services.