* 0835543
* CDI-Type II Beyond Kohn-Sham Density Functional Theory In Time-Dependent Dynamics
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Oleg Prezhdo, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 09/30/2012
* USD 864,000.00

Kohn-Sham density functional theory (DFT) provides a universal theory of the
properties of condensed matter. This theory, for which W. Kohn received the 1998
Nobel Prize, has revolutionized practical calculations. Nevertheless, the theory
is based on an average, non-interacting description, and ultimately fails at
long time scales. Thus one of the challenges of modern theoretical physics is to
develop methods that go beyond this average picture. A practical solution would
be transformative. Our multi-disciplinary project addresses this challenge by
exploiting real-time approaches. Specifically we will use a combination of real-
time DFT and explicit treatments of additional degrees of freedom such as
collective coordinates and atomic positions, which are appropriate for problems
in materials science and nuclear physics. Such dynamic approaches naturally mix
configurations, and provide a common framework for treating long-time behavior
in various applications. Though the above extensions are currently
computationally demanding, they are likely feasible with expected increases in
computer power, together with theoretical and algorithmic advances made possible
by the CDI. The broader impacts of a successful methodology are of considerable
theoretical and practical importance. For example, going beyond Kohn-Sham DFT
could likely enable new discoveries ranging from nuclear structure and reactions
to technology including electronics, photonics, and catalysis. In addition, the
focus on computational techniques will bring advanced computer science methods,
computer codes, and high performance computational methods into theoretical
physics and materials science, and will help train a new generation of
scientists.