* 0835947
* EFRI-COPN: Dynamics of Neural Networks on a Planar Patch-Clamp Array:  Training, Identification, and Control
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Russell Tedrake, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 08/31/2012
* USD 1,881,608.00

The core of this project will be a collaboration between Sebastian Seung, who
has been using in vitro cultures to test his existing models of learning in
neurons, and Tedrake, who has been working on intelligent robotics informed by
control theory. The main ideas are: (1) to revolutionize the in vitro work, by
solving technical problems with patch-clamp arrays, so that they can be used to
monitor hundreds of cells effectively in parallel; and (2) to apply robust
system identification to develop new reduced models of the living neural
circuits (as well as calibrate traditional biological models), and train these
circuits to address benchmark challenges which represent the cutting edge of
research in robotics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The patch clamp arrays and the data
which they generate may themselves be highly transformative. Solving these
technical problems is a major step towards being able to interface with hundreds
of neurons in the brain itself, in the future. The connection between control
theory approaches, reinforcement learning and actual biological data, in facing
common robotic control challenges, will encourage greater crossdisciplinary
cooperation and understanding at an institution which plans a key role in US
engineering education. The level of detail of this data will make it possible to
evaluate models of learning in far more detail than is possible when data are
available only on inputs and outputs of the neural circuits.