* 0835930
* EFRI-RESIN:  Optimization of conjunctive water supply and reuse systems with distributed treatment for high-growth, water-scarce regions
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2014
* Robert Arnold, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2014
* USD 2,162,200.00

PI name: Kevin Lansey&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of
Arizona&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 0835930&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award is an outcome of the competition as part of the Emerging Frontiers in
Research and Innovation (NSF 07-579) solicitation under the subtopic Resilient
and Sustainable Infrastructures (RESIN). The proposed project will advance
engineering and scientific understanding and will develop new methods for
integrated water and wastewater infrastructure planning. Over the next four
years, the project aims to identify, design and evaluate water supply/wastewater
treatment system configuration alternatives in the presence of complex,
competing objectives and uncertainty. Each configuration will include all major
conveyance facilities (pumps and pipes), storage, and treatment facilities for
water and wastewater. Alternative facilities plans will be evaluated based on
the triple bottom lines consisting of: (i) economic, (ii) environmental, and
(iii) social values. The major intellectual innovation is the proposed approach
to optimize a sustainability objective function that embodies the triple bottom
line with components representing capital, operation, and maintenance costs;
greenhouse emissions and depletion of ecosystem water allocations; social and
institutional defined limits on water reuse and decentralized wastewater
treatment; and risk as penalties arising from failure to meet system
sustainability and resilience objectives. In addition to the innovations in the
encompassing effort, novel approaches will be developed for dual water
distribution system planning and design and new computational algorithms will be
developed to optimize the resulting models. Frameworks for assessing social and
institutional preferences, in the short-term for existing infrastructure and
reuse options and in the long-term as co-evolving with conjunctive systems will
be established.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multiple factors combine to increase the
complexity and urgency of water/wastewater facilities planning, as addressed by
this project: (i) water scarcity and the need for efficient and sustainable use
of every available water resource; (ii) increased population and thus, increased
demand for water; (iii) general deterioration of water supply and sanitary
infrastructures that are reaching the end of their lifecycles; (iv) heightened
public awareness of the quality of water consumed; (iv) interdependence of water
supply goals and other, sometimes competing objectives such as in-stream uses
for reclaimed water and minimization of greenhouse gas emissions. These factors
necessitate an urgent consideration of infrastructure system sustainability and
resilience in the presence of supply and demand uncertainties. In short, water
supply based solely on engineering judgment must be transformed to operate in an
increasingly complex planning landscape. Moreover, the proposed research
directly addresses the recently identified "National Academy of Engineering
Grand Challenge" of restoring and improving urban infrastructure and wastewater
systems. The systems analytical tool will generate impact, not only in the
southern Arizona growth corridor but also nationally as a result of its generic
approach. It will allow planners to objectively approach decisions regarding
sustainable water/wastewater systems integration, degree of decentralization of
new wastewater treatment facilities, timing and scale of new facility addition,
and (where system extension is contemplated) apportionment of costs among
existing and proposed facilities. The application of the tools to real systems
and generating guidance for the applicability of decentralized dual water supply
system will lead to the much broader impact of altering the present water supply
paradigm that treats wastewater as a disposal issue rather than a resource. Our
approach considers an integrated water and wastewater infrastructure system that
is advantageous in meeting expanding water demands while accumulating the
benefits of lower energy consumption and cost, a reduced carbon footprint, and
better overall water quality. The project also has significant public awareness
and education activities on water reuse at many levels, including key
institutions (e.g., regional players such as Tucson Water) and K-12 education.
Workshops will be held at AWWARF and WERF meetings. Innovations from the work
will be published in peer-reviewed journals, disseminated to practitioners, and
incorporated into engineering and public policy curriculum. Efforts will be made
to expand the role of under-represented groups in this area through project
participation.