* 0835873
* Formative Feedback: Impacting the Quality of First-Year Engineering Student Work on Modeling Activities
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2013
* Monica Cardella, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Donna Riley
* 09/30/2013
* USD 486,740.00

This project will contribute to the research on engineering learning mechanisms
by designing and investigating the impact of pedagogical approaches on the
quality of students? solutions to complex mathematical modeling problems and
developing guidelines for providing effective formative feedback on students?
modeling work. Mathematical model-eliciting activities (MEAs), based on the
models and modeling theoretical framework, provide engineering students with
opportunities to engage in solving complex problems and develop teaming and
communication skills. Recent work has revealed that instructors and peers have
considerable difficulty providing feedback that is meaningful to students,
causing students to have difficulty interpreting and utilizing the feedback
effectively to improve their math models. This limits student learning that can
be achieved through iterative development of solutions to these complex
problems. Pedagogical approaches are needed to improve instructor and peer
feedback and help students learn to interpret and respond to feedback. Recent
development of tools for assessing and evaluating student work across three
dimensions, mathematical model, re-usability &amp; share-ability, and audience,
will enable investigations into pedagogical approaches around qualitative
feedback. These approaches will be developed, implemented and researched with
the intent of taking full advantage of the nature of MEAs and the assessment and
evaluation tools to develop students? knowledge and skills by improving their
ability to interpret and utilize feedback. What is ultimately sought is a
clearer picture of the relationship between feedback and its impact on students?
learning as viewed through their work products and interactions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The future engineering workforce must be prepared to
address increasingly complex and ambiguous problems, and effectively teaching
open-ended problem solving has been a challenge for engineering education. An
investment in the development of pedagogical approaches around feedback will be
a step towards growing a community of engineering educators who are better able
to teach open-ended complex problems. This work will contribute to assessments
of student learning in complex problem-solving situations and help build a cadre
of engineering graduates better able to solve the next generation of complex
problems. Principles and guidelines for providing appropriate feedback will
greatly facilitate the next steps in dissemination of models and modeling
pedagogies to other educational settings. &lt;br/&gt;