* 0835614
* CDI-Type II: What drives the dynamic creation of science?
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2013
* Walter Powell, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,186,174.00

This multidisciplinary project draws upon sociology, computer science, and
linguistics to study how ideas are created and propagate through scientific
communities, how these communities are formed and change over time, and how
multidisciplinary networks spanning these communities shape scientific
innovation. It creates sophisticated new computational models for extracting and
representing ideas and measuring their impact and novelty, and for extracting
and representing social relations and identifying forms of multidisciplinary
collaboration. Its methods integrate the network analytic tools of social
science with the language processing tools of computer science. It uses network
analysis to improve the ability of computational tools to identify ideas in
scientific texts, as well as the tools of computational linguistics to help
explain the co-evolution of scientific collaborations and innovations. The
models of ideas and their diffusion can be used to investigate hypotheses such
as whether multidisciplinary research accelerates or decelerates scientific
innovation, and how multidisciplinarity influences student and faculty careers.
A relatively shallow but large-scale study of the MEDLINE corpus is combined
with a richer organization-level study of Stanford University faculty (their
publications, grants, affiliations, advising, and teaching) in order to explore
and analyze the complex interrelationships of innovation and multidisciplinary
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research agenda of this project is to
produce new and unique data, create new computational tools, and extend theory
so that scholars change their conceptions of scientific innovation,
multidisciplinarity, and research communities more generally. The integration of
social network and natural language processing techniques is helping to develop
a new vein of research in computational social science, simultaneously offering
empirical rigor and scale to the sociology of science and extending natural
language processing from its previous engineering focus toward true explanatory
social science models.&lt;br/&gt;