* 0835992
* Entrepreneurship Education &amp; Its Impact on Engineering Student Outcomes:  The Role of Program Characteristics and Faculty Beliefs
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Nathalie Duval-Couetil, National Collegiate Inventors and Innovators Alliance
* Standard Grant
* Donna Riley
* 06/30/2014
* USD 599,852.00

Over the past decade, entrepreneurship has emerged as a critical aspect of
engineering education. Driven by changes in the global economy, entrepreneurship
is one of the fastest growing areas of course development in engineering
programs, with hundreds of courses in entrepreneurship now available to
engineering students. However, we know little about program characteristics,
learning goals, assessment practices, and student impacts. This
multidisciplinary research team will identify the characteristics of
engineering-centric entrepreneurship education programs that enroll engineering
students, starting with an in-depth examination of three well-established
programs. Then these results will be used to conduct an inventory of at least 50
additional programs across the U.S. Information collected will identify and
define program types, innovative teaching methods, student learning goals, and
assessment practices. In addition, faculty beliefs about engineering
entrepreneurship education will be studied and interviews with entrepreneurship
faculty will explore what they believe students should learn, how
entrepreneurship should be taught, and how students should be assessed. This
data will be used to develop a survey that will be administered to faculty who
teach in 50 other programs, and then the survey will be generally available.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research, which will include
guidelines for best practices in teaching, program development, and assessment,
will have great significance for educating engineers who will be competitive in
the global economy. Results will be widely disseminated using network of the
National Collegiate Inventors and Innovators Alliance (NCIIA) and will include
workshops and training materials for faculty, dissemination of tools for
evaluation of learning outcomes, and detailed information on the status of
entrepreneurship education programs across the country. This will provide
resources for engineering educators as they modernize the curriculum and will
benefit students who will have wider access to quality engineering
entrepreneurship education options.&lt;br/&gt;