* 0835722
* Workshop on Developing a National Research Infrastructure for the Study of Innovation and Change in Organization, National Science Foundation, Arlington, Virginia, July 23, 2008
* SBE,SBE
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2009
* Carol Corrado, The Conference Board, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Julia I. Lane
* 06/30/2009
* USD 49,006.00

The PI's propose organising and hosting a workshop to identify the key elements
necessary to build an empirical infrastructure that will advance research on one
of the key building blocks of science and innovation policy: organizations. This
will provide an empirical basis for the scientific study of science and
innovation policies that affect innovation, business performance, and change in
organizations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will be held in NSF meeting
space in Arlington, Virginia, on July 23, 2008. It will be adjoined by a Pre-
Conference for the 2008 Kauffman Symposium on Entrepreneurship and Innovation
Data on July 24, 2008&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop organization
will be in the form of five highly structured sessions lasting a total of one
day and with a maximum of 35 participants, with about 20 participants involved
in the program in some way (as speaker, panel moderator, or discussion
facilitator). All sessions will include a floor discussion. The three organizers
will act as both facilitators and rapporteurs&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit&lt;br/&gt;The primary intellectual merit of the proposal is that the new
data and tools that the workshop seeks to develop would provide an evidence
based platform for science policy. It would (1) permit researchers to examine
the innovation process ? both successes and failures ? and (2) explore business
performance and business dynamics at the level of the appropriate economic
entity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader
impacts, the need for better metrics of innovation and business performance was
underscored by the America COMPETES Act and the Innovation Metrics report of the
Department of Commerce (DOC). By fostering transformative research that would
advance the scientific understanding of innovation and its relation to policy
and business strategy, the new infrastructure will respond to these high-level
concerns. &lt;br/&gt;