* 0835797
* CDI-TYPE II: From Language to Neural Representations of Meaning
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Charles Kemp, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2013
* USD 2,100,000.00

This project seeks to develop a new understanding of how the brain represents
and manipulates meaning, by bringing together the perspectives of brain imaging,
machine learning and computational modeling, using converging approaches from
behavioral psychology, linguistics, computer science and neuroscience. In
particular, the brain activity that encodes the meanings of words, phrases and
sentences is studied, along with how the brain encodes the meaning of individual
words in terms of their component semantic features, how it modifies its
encoding of an individual word when it occurs within a phrase or clause, and how
it constructs the encoding of a phrase or clause from the encodings of its
component words. This work builds on recent research showing (1) that repeatable
patterns of fMRI activation are associated with viewing nouns describing
concrete objects such as "hammer" or "toe," (2) that the neural patterns that
encode the meanings of these words are similar across different people, and (3)
that these encodings are similar whether the person views a word or a picture of
the object. Whereas previous work has focused on the neural representation of
single words in isolation, this project studies multiple word phrases and
sentences, which comprise larger units of knowledge; for example how the neural
encoding of a noun is influenced by its adjective (e.g., "fast rabbit" vs.
"cuddly rabbit") and how the neural encoding of a proposition is related to the
encodings of its component words (how "cut" and "surgeons" combine in the
proposition "surgeons cut"). To address these questions, computational models
are developed using a diverse set of training data including fMRI data, data
from a trillion-word corpus of text that represents typical language use, and
behavioral data from language comprehension and judgment tasks, as well as
online linguistic knowledge bases such as VerbNet, and theoretical proposals
from the cognitive neuroscience literature regarding how and where the brain
encodes meaning. These perspectives are integrated into a theory in the form of
a computational model trained from diverse data and prior knowledge, and capable
of making experimentally testable predictions about the neural encodings and
behavioral responses associated with tens of thousands of words, and hundreds of
thousands of phrases and sentences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
potentially constitutes a significant scientific advance in understanding the
relation between brain and mind, impacting a variety of scientific disciplines
involved in the study of semantics, including linguistics, psychology,
philosophy and cognitive science. A second impact comes from use of the methods
and results to understand brain pathologies that involve language disturbances,
such as aphasia, dyslexia, and autism. A third impact comes from the development
of new statistical machine learning algorithms for analyzing and modeling cross-
domain data sets to aid in scientific discovery. Finally, the emerging results
and methods will have an educational impact through courses on Brain Imaging,
Machine Learning, and Psychology taught by the Principal Investigators, and
through a new course to be developed specifically on the topic of "Neural
representations of meaning," with materials to be made available on the web.