* 0835944
* Collaborative Research: Models of Unawareness and Ambiguity
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2007,02/28/2010
* Haluk Ergin, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 02/28/2010
* USD 151,344.00

This study of unawareness and ambiguity has three components. First, a model is
development, where implicit information is embedded in the description of an
act. For example, if a consumer is offered a warranty that provides $500 in case
her tires disintegrate, she is made aware that such a contingency is possible.
Given this recognition, the way a contract frames the states of the world
becomes important. The model complements prospect theory, which considers the
framing of consequences, by considering the framing of states. The choice
objects of the model are lists of contingencies and payments.

This model provides two technical innovations to the theory of awareness. First,
the decision maker's awareness is identified by her preferences over standard
bets. Therefore, unawareness is associated with concepts of likelihood and
probability rather than with knowledge and truth. This allows for partial
awareness of her own unawareness. The explicit axiomatic approach also allows
the analyst to predict how the decision maker will behave given a particular
level of awareness from her preferences with other levels of awareness. Second,
unawareness is defined over partitions of the entire state space, rather than
over particular states. Then the decision maker can be aware of an event without
being aware of its sub-events. For example, she can be aware that her
transmission can fail, without listing all the specific components in her
transmission that might break.

The second component of the study formulates a representation of ambiguity where
the decision maker has a second order belief on the set of priors that is
possibly nonlinearly aggregated. The existence of ambiguity is modeled by the
spread of her second order belief while the attitude towards ambiguity is
modeled by the curvature of the aggregator. Existing characterizations of this
utility assume an exogenous product structure on the state space. For example,
in a resent study, Klibanoff, Marinacci, and Mukerji assume that the second
dimension of uncertainty is over the priors on the first dimension. This is
especially troubling for providing f oundations, because the very concept of a
prior is a decisional theoretical construct, like a discount factor or an Arrow-
Pratt measure. This project attempts to disentangle the theory from such
exogenous structure, identifying the representation from preference over direct
bets on the states. An interesting procedure is presented for identifying the
second order belief and the aggregator from first order preferences, which
should yield a full characterization.

In the final part of the study, an experiment designed to estimate the
parameters of this representation for ambiguity. It uses a novel graphical
choice-theoretic design that provides enough data to confidently calibrate
parameters, rather than simply test hypotheses. Such an estimate would be
eminently useful in empirical applications.

The broader impact of this study is that both theories are especially conducive
for applications. The model of unawareness developed here is constructed in the
spirit of standard subjective models to facilitate its use. It keeps standard
acts and contracts as its primitives. In fact, actual contracts are often
communicated as lists of contingencies and payments. The representation of
ambiguity allows separate comparative statics for the existence and aversion to
ambiguity. Moreover, these comparative statics carry much of the intuition in
standard risk theory. By providing foundations for such a representation, these
techniques can be used confidently. In addition, the measurement device outlined
here is of independent interest because it provides a general method to infer
ambiguity aversion from a sparse amount of "local" data. The experimental
calibration of ambiguity aversion provides a useful estimate to identify other
empirical models that incorporate ambiguity aversion, in the same way that an
estimate of the Arrow-Pratt measure helps to identify empirical models that
incorporate risk aversion.