* 0835571
* CDI-Type II: Collaborative Research: Computational Homology, Jamming, and Force Chains in Dense Granular Flows
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Robert Behringer, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 09/30/2012
* USD 373,579.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Lead: 0835742 Non-leads: 0835571, 0835611,
0835621&lt;br/&gt;PIs: C. O?Hern (Lead), R. Behringer, L. Kondic, K.
Mischaikow&lt;br/&gt;CDI-Type II: Collaborative Research: Computational
Homology, Jamming, and Force Chains in Dense Granular
Flows&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will employ a highly interdisciplinary
approach that integrates new geometrical techniques, modeling, and experiments
to address fundamental, open questions concerning the physical properties of
granular media and other jammed materials such as glasses, foams, and colloids.
The hallmark of jammed materials is that they resist applied forces like solids,
but are disordered like liquids. In addition, many jammed materials possess
heterogeneous, ramified structures known as force chain networks when external
forces are applied. Although the existence of force chains has been known for
decades, a quantitative understanding of their role in physical processes has
proved elusive in part because previous studies have been unable to devise an
unbiased and general definition for them. Precise identification and
characterization of force chains and the response of jammed materials to applied
forces will likely have a transformative impact in many arenas. For example,
financial and energy costs of handling and processing of granular materials,
typically with high inefficiency, is estimated to be at least one trillion
dollars in the US alone. Also, avalanches and earthquakes are examples where the
unpredictable behavior of granular media detrimentally impacts mankind. In this
work, we will apply novel mathematical techniques coupled with computer
simulations and experiments to obtain a quantitative, predictive description of
jammed materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outreach efforts of this project
emphasize providing educational opportunities to students from underrepresented
groups. We will organize education and recruiting trips to predominantly female
liberal arts colleges in the Northeast and historically black schools in North
Carolina, such as North Carolina Central University, and others in the
Southeast. These trips will include giving technical and popular lectures,
including demonstrations to show that research on jammed materials is intriguing
and important. During informal meetings with students we will emphasize that
careers in science and technology are rewarding and open to those in
underrepresented groups. To stimulate further student interest in this research,
we will hold biannual 2-day lab open houses so that promising undergraduates can
be exposed to both experimental and theoretical aspects of our research. To
encourage close collaboration among researchers in the field of jammed
materials, we will organize biannual interdisciplinary workshops. The inaugural
workshop, ``Computational Homology Tools Applied to Jamming and Flow in Granular
Materials'' is scheduled for the winter of 2009.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;