* 0835395
* Dynamic Haptic Geometry in Elementary and Undergraduate Classrooms
* EHR,DRL
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Nicholas Jackiw, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Continuing Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 09/30/2013
* USD 570,258.00

This project combines the dynamic geometry environment of The Geometer's
Sketchpad® with haptic technology, particularly force feedback devices. The
project is creating a series of geometric activities specifically focused on 2D
figures and shapes as well as some simple 3D surfaces and solids, to enable
users of various ages to explore the properties of these objects with various
senses. The project combines these technology goals with learning goals that aim
to provide better access to a wider variety of students, including
underrepresented groups, in science, engineering, and mathematics. The Principal
Investigator (PI) will conduct a series of informal after-school experiments at
the James J. Kaput Center for Research and Innovation in Mathematics Education
and then develop formal classroom interventions with primary school students in
local schools. The PI will also extend these activities to engineering and
mathematics undergraduate classrooms at the University of Massachusetts. The
project will document, using data collected from the technological environment
and other instruments, how students discover properties of mathematical objects
within this new environment and develop formal argumentation, how this varies
across age group, and how it can be integrated into formal classroom settings.
The data will also be used to refine the design of the system.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of the project is to discover what impact fusing a
second modal input of feel to sight achieves in terms of engaging students of a
variety of ages into exploring geometric concepts, and observe what kinds of
mathematical activities can be designed that are significantly different to
those using traditional forms of instruction. It will evaluate the practicality
and educational benefits of integrating such technology. The project builds a
new functionality on top of The Geometer's Sketchpad® software, and because of
Sketchpad's huge impact and adoption by classrooms across the world holds the
promise a potentially transformation of how mathematics, in particular geometric
concepts, are understood by students.