* 0835892
* AdWiki: Cultivating a Wiki-Based Online Community of Practice for Advising Engineering Students by Integrating Open Source Business Model and Social Psychology Principles
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2010
* Jenny Lo, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Cheville
* 12/31/2010
* USD 99,927.00

This project will design and test an online community of practice for student
advising based on the open source business model and proposed principles of
participation from social psychology. The resulting digital artifact will
provide a sustainable platform for student advising and will serve as a test-bed
to study human behavior in socio-technical systems and evaluate advising. The
context for this exploratory research and practice will be the freshmen
engineering program at Virginia Tech. The faculty in the Engineering Education
department is responsible for advising all incoming (approximately 1400)
freshmen students and each faculty advises about 100 students, in addition to
teaching, research, and service responsibilities. This system will benefit the
faculty by making advising easier and more efficient and will provide students
with easy access to critical advising information. This research will produce
metrics for evaluation of advising, a wiki-based sustainable platform for
advising, and theoretical understanding of relationships between human behavior
and socio-technical systems. The results are an important step towards
understanding and developing a community of practice that bridges physical and
electronic worlds and brings together diverse groups of students. Successful
guidelines will be shared and disseminated to other institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Increasing the number of engineering graduates is
important to economic competitiveness, and research has shown that lack of
quality advising is often a factor when students leave engineering programs.
However, research, teaching and service compete for faculty time and there is a
fundamental misalignment between the incentives for tenure and advising and
mentoring of students. The project will create a dynamic repository with
community features and facilitate interpersonal interaction. The sustainability
of this platform is assured through incentives for constant participation of
faculty and advising staff by reducing their time commitment and redundancy of
effort, and by introducing metrics to measure their contribution. This project
will serve as a model for other systems that can support engineering students
for the duration of their undergraduate education.&lt;br/&gt;