* 0835789
* CDI-Type I: Geometric image analysis for computational knowledge discovery in geosciences
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Efi Foufoula-Georgiou, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2012
* USD 467,567.00

The study of earth's topography has fundamental impacts on society, from flood
and landslide prevention and control to the understanding of climate change
impacts, management of land-use practices, as well as design of roads and other
man-made projects in an environmentally sustainable way. The recent availability
of high resolution (0.5 m spacing) digital topography from airborne laser swath
mapping and ground-based lidar offers opportunities to develop a new class of
environmental predictive models that explicitly incorporate important features
of the landscape and thus enhance the accuracy of predictions. The goal of this
project is to develop modern computational geometric image analysis
methodologies applicable to hydrologic and eco-geomorphologic hazard prediction
and control. Specifically, the project studies high-resolution, multiscale, and
dynamic topography with the goal of extracting channel networks, channel banks
and shapes, floodplains and hazard-relevant features such as landslide prone
areas and service roads which contribute to increased sediment production and
thus stream habitat deterioration. &lt;br/&gt;The mathematical and computational
techniques to be exploited and developed come from the area of geometric non-
linear partial differential equations and energy formulations, combined with
differential and computational geometry. Specifically, a combination of
methodologies ranging from geometric scale-space theory to singularity theory
and geometric variational principles, combined with optimal algorithms for
computing special curves on surfaces, will be exploited to derive a complete and
automatic analysis of the topography at multiple relevant scales.