* 0835889
* Collaborative Research: Role of faculty in supporting lifelong learning: An investigation of self-directed environments in engineering undergraduate classrooms
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Jonathan Stolk, Franklin W. Olin College of Engineering
* Standard Grant
* Donna Riley
* 08/31/2012
* USD 83,667.00

Building from self-determination theory, this study will examine how instructor
choices affect a range of student outcomes related to their development as self-
directed and lifelong learners (SDL). Drawing on existing research that suggests
strong correlations between student autonomy support and outcomes related to
SDL, the proposed study examines three research questions. First, in what ways
do engineering instructors assist students to become self-directed learners, and
are there instructor practices and behaviors that lead to greater student
involvement in and ownership of their own learning? The second question asks
about students? behavioral and affective responses to different ways autonomy is
supported in undergraduate engineering settings. Finally, what effect does a
sense of autonomy have on students? perceptions of their own learning? Lifelong
learning requires the development of capacities consistent with those of SDL who
may be characterized as curious, motivated, reflective, analytical, persistent,
flexible, and independent. They possess skills in information seeking, retrieval
and metacognitive awareness. Instructors clearly play a critical role in
influencing outcomes related to SDL through their design and implementation of
courses that foster students? transitions from controlled to autonomous learning
behaviors. Participants in this study will be engineering faculty and
undergraduate students at four collaborating universities. Education faculty
with expertise in motivation and assessment will coordinate the mixed method
evaluation plan. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The need for student-centered learning
approaches that foster a capacity for lifelong learning is recognized by
educators and accreditation agencies as vital for success in today?s engineering
environment. The current emphasis in the engineering education community has
been on assessing students? lifelong learning capacity by measuring outcomes
associated with SDL, rather than on understanding the complex relationship
between instructor practices and SDL outcomes. This project will have broad
impact since all engineering programs are required to demonstrate that students
are gaining the skills needed to be lifelong learners. Broad dissemination of
the work through a variety of mechanisms, including national workshops, will aid
the development of faculty expertise, contribute to the epistemology of
engineering educators, enable the design of more effective teaching
environments, and provide a model for implementation of autonomy-supportive
engineering curricula that have the potential for direct impact on a diversity
of student populations.