* 0835531
* CDI Type II:     Collaborative Research:    Sparse Inference:   New Tools for Structural Knowledge Discovery
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2008,02/28/2014
* Bin Yu, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 02/28/2014
* USD 1,341,676.00

In most areas of human knowledge, the information revolution has resulted in a
massive data explosion. The scale of data sets, their distributed and
heterogeneous nature, and the need to quickly deliver results easily
interpretable by non-experts, raise new theoretical and computational challenges
for statistical learning, from variable selection and structural inference to
visualization and online learning. This project uses sparse statistical
inference as a powerful approach to meet these challenges. Its key insight is
that seeking sparsity is a meaningful way of simultaneously stabilizing
inference procedures, and highlighting structure in the underlying data. This
work thus combines fundamental advances in sparse statistical learning with
cutting-edge computational tools from mathematical programming to create a new
framework for structural knowledge discovery in large-scale, streaming data
sets. It is focused on two fundamental themes in sparse inference: variable
selection and structural inference. Variable selection seeks to isolate a few
key variables from high dimensional data sets and is a fundamental preprocessing
tool in statistical learning. Structural inference then aims to consistently
identify a few core dependence relationships among these variables to highlight
its structure. From a computational point of view, many recent results in
machine learning have relied on advanced methods from convex optimization such
as semidefinite programming and robust optimization and this project seeks to
improve the complexity of these algorithms and their capacity to handle very-
large scale, streaming data. &lt;br/&gt;In practice, this project is motivated
by the desire to help the public understand our democracies by analyzing large-
scale political and social data sets, with a particular focus on voting records,
online news sources, and polling data. Its approach is to apply statistical
inference principles to social sciences, using collaborations with experts in
political science and economics to forge the models and techniques under study.
In carrying out the research, this project will be training graduate students
from statistics, electrical engineering/financial engineering into
interdisciplinary researchers at the interface of statistics, optimization, and
subject matter areas such as finance and political science. In addition we plan
to develop a web site, accessible first to a restricted set of social science
researchers, to allow them to analyze mid-sized corpora of online news in text
format, in the form of say, sparse graphs of words showing statistical
associations between given keywords. The PIs plan to develop a software toolbox
implementing these results, interfaced with common numerical packages such as
MATLAB, R or python as well as an undergraduate course on ``Statistical Analysis
of Online Data" at Berkeley and Princeton, incorporating some of the material
produced in this project into the course program.