* 0835989
* EFRI-RESIN:  21st Century National Energy and Transportation Infrastructures: Balancing Sustainability, Costs, and Resiliency (NETSCORE-21)
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2014
* Arun Somani, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,988,266.00

PI name: James McCalley&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Iowa State
University&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 0835989&lt;br/&gt;Title: EFRI-RESIN
Proposal, 21st Century National Energy and Transportation Infrastructures:
Balancing Sustainability, Costs, and Resiliency
(NETSCORE-21)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is an outcome of the competition
as part of the Emerging Frontiers in Research and Innovation (NSF 07-579)
program solicitation under the subtopic Resilient and Sustainable
Infrastructures (RESIN). Most U.S. energy usage is for electricity production
and vehicle transportation, two interdependent, critical, national
infrastructures. The strength and number of these interdependencies will
increase rapidly as hybrid electric transportation systems, including plug-in
hybrid electric vehicles and hybrid electric trains, become more widely used.
The proposed research is motivated by a recognition that tools, knowledge, and
perspective are lacking to design a national system integrating energy and
transportation infrastructures while accounting for interdependencies between
them, new energy supply technologies, sustainability, and resiliency. Hence, the
goal of this research is to formulate optimal infrastructure designs in terms of
future power generation technologies, energy transport and storage, and hybrid-
electric transportation systems, with balance in sustainability, costs, and
resiliency. The research will characterize interdependencies between energy
resource portfolio and energy/vehicular transportation systems, and will
consider both conventional and non-conventional energy supply options, including
wind, solar, hydro, nuclear, coal, hydrogen, geothermal, biofuels, biomass, and
gasification, together with hybrid electric vehicle and train systems. The
national energy system and the national transportation system targeted in this
research are uniquely large, geographically expansive, and capital intensive,
consisting of multiple, diverse technologies interfaced with complex human
organizations that manage them. The intellectual effort to model and
characterize these systems and understand interdependencies among resource mix
and wind, transportation patterns, and right-of-way; among gasification, carbon,
and transportation; and among prices of petroleum, natural gas, and electricity,
will join power system engineering, thermal design, power electronics,
transportation engineering, communications and computing, environmental science,
sociology, operations research, and macroeconomics. The underlying need is
systems-based: identify the extent to which each technology should be deployed,
when, and where, accounting for interdependencies while optimizing for
sustainability, cost, and resiliency. The proposed research will have long-term
impact on national economy and security, while revolutionizing engineering
science via integrating knowledge of economics, sociology, and human behavior
with systems engineering, interlaced with the full spectrum of energy
technologies. The research outcomes have the potential to contribute to a
national blueprint, together with a modeling process, that drive federal and
state energy policy, research, and investment for the next four decades. This
time frame is motivated by a desire to exceed the traditional 20-30 year
planning horizon required by most federal and state regulatory bodies today. The
project involves a multidisciplinary coalition that includes faculty and
students from Iowa State University and Iowa Lakes Community College, including
several Iowa State University programs and centers: Information Infrastructure
Institute, Office of Biorenewables Programs, Center for Sustainable
Environmental Technologies, multi-institutional Power Systems Engineering
Research Center, Electric Power Research Center, and Center for Transportation
Research and Education. The research will be integrated into new engineering
education programs at Iowa State University that address the energy and
transportation infrastructures and that can serve as model curricula for other
universities and colleges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;