* 0835800
* CDI-Type I: Discovery of Novel Biochemical Pathways
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Vassily Hatzimanikatis, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/2013
* USD 620,000.00

CBET-0835800&lt;br/&gt;Broadbelt&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carbon-based compounds are
marked for a transition. Chemicals and fuels derived from biomass are viewed as
a companion, or even as a successor, to compounds derived from petroleum.
Computational thinking is key to begin to move in the direction of biochemical
conversion of renewable resources, and to navigate among the vast number of
possible combinations of chemicals and processes for producing them. However, it
is not sufficient to simply search databases of known compounds and reactions.
The diversity of biochemistry suggests that there are pathways that have not
been discovered yet, and it is even possible that novel compounds have yet to be
synthesized. The PIs will develop a cyber-enabled exploration platform that will
discover and analyze complex biochemical reaction networks
that:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Present a novel but superior route to a compound
that is already produced biochemically&lt;br/&gt;- Offer a novel route to
produce a compound biochemically that is typically produced via traditional
organic synthesis&lt;br/&gt;- Propose a biochemical synthesis route to a novel
compound&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Promising pathways suggested by their
computational discovery platform will be tested experimentally by their
industrial collaborators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Automated network generation that
defines and implements the chemistry of what they have coined "generalized
enzyme functions" based on knowledge compiled in existing biochemical databases
will be employed. The output is a set of compounds and the pathways connecting
them, both known and novel. To identify the most promising of the thousands of
different pathways generated, they will link the automated network generation
algorithms with property estimation tools. The simplest screening metrics
proposed to rank pathways are pathway length and number of known reactions. More
sophisticated screening tools that will be developed in the proposed work
evaluate kinetic and thermodynamic feasibility. A combination of group
additivity estimation, metabolic flux analysis, protein docking analyses, and
quantum chemical calculations is proposed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work has
the promise of transforming the way that researchers identify new targets for
bioprocessing and provides ripe targets for biochemists who are skilled in
protein engineering, allowing them to more efficiently design novel biochemical
pathways. The PIs' computational framework offers a new paradigm for the
discovery of known and novel compounds and reactions in biochemical systems and
includes new methods to identify promising novel pathways that can be
implemented practically. Development of the cyber-enabled discovery platform
will be carried out in the context of biofuels, but this framework and the
guiding principles are applicable to a wide range of different targets for
biochemical production, including chemicals and pharmaceuticals. The project
will also have a significant impact on the education of high school students,
undergraduates and graduate students through outreach activities and research
opportunities. The involvement of international and industrial collaborators
will enrich the experience of these students through personnel exchange and
internship opportunities and expose them to the increasing globalization of
research.