* 0835712
* Collaborative Proposal:  CDI-Type I: A multidisciplinary, multiscale approach to discover organizing principles in macromolecular dynamics and functions
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2013
* Mauro Maggioni, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 09/30/2013
* USD 240,213.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The understanding of cooperative processes in
biomolecular systems (such as protein dynamics, folding, and self-assembly)
poses outstanding challenges both for theory and experiment. The large number of
degrees of freedom involved, and the degree of heterogeneity present, may at a
first glance suggest the lack of general principles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As
Francis Crick wrote twenty years ago, commenting on macromolecular dynamics,
"what seems to physicists a hopelessly complicated process may have been what
Nature found simplest". The behavior of a macro-molecular system appears
overwhelmingly complicated. Biologically relevant macro-molecular systems are
the result of billions of years of evolution, during which details and
exceptions have been selected for functional reasons. In spite of the
complexity, collective phenomena emerge in macromolecular systems, as for
instance in protein folding and self-assembly processes, suggesting the
existence of organizing principles that may actually exploit the complexity to
obtain simplicity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Is it possible to understand (that is,
reproduce, quantify, and predict) how organization emerges from the interactions
of the single degrees of freedom in a biomolecular system, over a broad spectrum
of length and timescales? Empirical and theoretical evidence supports the idea
that for most macromolecular processes only a small portion of the
conformational space is visited, and that for medium/long time scales a very
small number of parameters are enough to describe the coarse dynamics of a large
macromolecular system. Previous work in this direction has not been automatic or
systematic, and has been driven mostly by physical intuition, with little or no
guarantee of success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is the goal of this work to
develop and apply a radically different approach, that reconciles biological and
biochemical approaches with a physical and mathematical perspective. A key step
towards the formulation of the general "rules" that evolution has employed for
regulating the behavior of biomolecular processes resides in the mathematically
rigorous identification and the physically sound interpretation of the minimal
set of effective parameters needed to faithful reproduce the macromolecular
process of interest. The methods that will be developed to this end are based on
multiscale geometric measure theory, harmonic analysis, and dimensionality
reduction. The core of these ideas will be widely applicable to the analysis of
the geometry of large high dimensional data sets, across and beyond biophysics,
leading to novel general paradigms for dimensionality reduction and regression
on such data sets.