* 0835632
* Collaborative Research: CDI Type I: Optimal and predictive control of neural prostheses using intracortical Brain Machine Interfaces
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Mayuresh Kothare, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Zhi Tian
* 08/31/2012
* USD 275,000.00

The objective of this research is to develop an optimal predictive feedback
control framework for neuroprostheses that are enabled by brain machine
interfaces (BMIs). BMIs, broadly defined, are systems that interface the brain
and a machine (computer) to sense neuronal activity and cognitive processes to
restore impaired motor tasks in disabled subjects. The research focuses on: (1)
development of a computational modeling framework for BMI-based neuroprostheses
that can incorporate large data sets of intracortical neuronal measurements; (2)
identification of natural and "surrogate" optimal feedback sensing paths in
neuromotor prostheses; (3) development of computationally efficient predictive
control algorithms that exploit models and feedback pathways in neuroprostheses;
and (4) experimental evaluation through simulated neuroprosthetic multi-finger
grasping.

Current neuroprosthetic devices are largely "open-loop" and have limited
performance due to their inability to incorporate multivariable feedback,
sensory and interactive signals. This research addresses this limitation,
striving to advance next-generation feedback-enabled neuroprosthetic devices.
The proposed conceptual integration of optimal control theory with principles of
neuroengineering and computational neuroscience provides a framework for
analyzing the numerous feedback modalities intrinsically embedded in a complex
interconnected system of neurons.

For broader impacts, the research seeks to enable the transition of BMI-based
neuroprostheses and assistive devices to stable extended use in human subjects
suffering from peripheral neuropathies, spinal cord injuries, neuromuscular
disorders, and amputations. The project will introduce a computational
neuroscience paradigm in feedback control education while training biomedical
engineers to directly employ tools from computational feedback control theory. A
science outreach effort with Asa Packer Elementary School in Bethlehem and the
middle school Summer Robotics Camp in Baltimore will motivate and excite young
minds to think about solving technological "grand challenges" through
demonstrations of brain functionality.