* 0835445
* SGER: Reconstructing the Tower of Babel: Cross-lingual Language Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2008,11/30/2009
* Regina Barzilay, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 11/30/2009
* USD 56,297.00

SGER: Reconstructing the Tower of Babel: Cross-lingual Language
Learning&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Today, there are more than 6,000 living languages
in the world. It is widely agreed among linguists that human languages share
substantial similarity at all the levels of linguistic structure. The study of
this connection has made possible major discoveries about human communication:
it has revealed the evolutionary history of languages, facilitated the
reconstruction of proto-languages and led to understanding language universals.
The goal of &lt;br/&gt;cross-lingual learning is to capitalize on the deep
connection between human languages to improve automatic language processing.
This exploratory research effort focuses on the use of hierarchical Bayesian
models that jointly induce linguistic structure for each language and at the
same time identify cross-lingual correspondence patterns. The cross-lingual
learning is studied in several tasks ranging from morphological to syntactic
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The expected benefits of this approach are three
fold. First, the performance of cross-lingual learning could yield substantial
improvement over state-of-the-art unsupervised approaches across a range of
tasks. Second, cross-lingual learning is applicable to hundreds of human
languages with no annotated resources which are currently out of reach for
existing text processing methods. Finally, tools developed in the course of this
project will provide powerful comparative analysis methods for researchers in
fields such as linguistics, history, and anthropology.