* 0835711
* Collaborative Research: Are Engineering Departments Adopting Engineering Education Innovations? A National Survey to Assess Contributing Factors
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Erin Leahey, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Cheville
* 06/30/2010
* USD 134,999.00

This research will use a survey to understand and ultimately accelerate adoption
of proven engineering education innovations. The survey of 1,727 department
heads, 271 academic deans, and 28 professional society leaders will test 14
hypotheses related to 8 engineering education innovations. Diffusion of
Innovations theory, which emphasizes stages of the adoption process and the
importance of social networks, will guide this research. The project outcomes
include assessment of prior efforts at diffusing engineering education
innovations, deeper understanding of dissemination mechanisms leading to
specific recommendations, and increased awareness of eight established
engineering education innovations through the survey process itself. Over the
past 15 years, tremendous effort and funding have been invested in improving
engineering education and producing innovations. The eight innovations that will
be investigated in this project are Engineering Diversity Programs, Summer
Bridge Programs, Learning Communities and Integrated Curricula, Design Projects
in First-year Engineering Courses, Artifact Dissection, Student-active
Pedagogies, Curriculum-based Engineering Service-learning Projects, and
Interdisciplinary Capstone Design Projects. The 14 hypotheses will explore
factors relating to dissemination, adoption, transportability, and success of
the innovations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improving engineering education to
produce engineers who are better prepared for the future global economy is vital
to the nation?s competitiveness. This survey directly addresses the effects the
investments made in innovations in engineering and, through dissemination, has
the potential to multiply that investment by informing a wide range of
dissemination strategies and engineering administration customers. Applying
Diffusion of Innovations theory to engineering education is a potentially
transformative approach that may fundamentally change our thinking about
engineering education reform. The data and analysis will provide new insight
into decisions to adopt an engineering education innovation, which will
contribute to both theory and practice. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;