* 0835836
* Promoting Lifelong Learning, Integrated Knowledge, and Professional Identity in Undergraduate Engineering Students Through a Portfolio Development Process
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2014
* Cynthia Atman, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Donna Riley
* 12/31/2014
* USD 571,990.00

This research will address the question of whether integration and reflection
activities via developing a professional portfolio have an impact on students?
lifelong learning competencies, their development of professional identity, and
the ability to integrate their knowledge. It will advance the scholarship on
undergraduate engineering student learning using a three-pronged quasi-
experiment in portfolio development. The three experimental treatments are: (1)
an academic year-long program in which students develop a comprehensive
professional portfolio, (2) a quarter-long program in which students develop a
focused professional portfolio, and (3) a competition that invites students to
develop professional portfolios on their own and submit them for consideration
for an award. These treatments require different levels of commitment from
students who participate in them, as well as institutions that host them. In
addition to investigating the impact of these three treatments, the resources
associated with offering each treatment will be documented in order to better
understand the scalability of each. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To effectively prepare
for engineering in the 21st century, students must acquire the knowledge,
skills, and attitudes relevant to engineering; the type of integrated
understanding of these competencies that is a hallmark of expertise; and the
life-long learning skills and professional engineering identity that enable
students to apply their understandings in rapidly changing contexts and
circumstances. Engineering education researchers are only beginning to
understand how to effectively and feasibly support the development of life-long
learning skills, professional engineering identities, and integrated knowledge.
In order to accomplish these complex and interrelated goals, students need a
variety of learning experiences. They also need opportunities to understand and
articulate what they have learned from their educational experiences and how
what they have learned relates to their futures as engineers?opportunities for
both foundational and critical reflection. This project has the potential to
transform undergraduate engineering education, not by changing the curriculum of
existing programs, but by enabling engineering students to achieve the outcomes
espoused by those programs and to develop into lifelong learners. If successful,
the ideas proposed in this project will be scalable to fit the needs of almost
any college of engineering.&lt;br/&gt;