* 0835689
* CDI-Type II:   Collaborative Research:   Cyber Enhancement of Spatial Cognition for the Visually Impaired
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2013
* Nicholas Giudice, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Richard Voyles
* 08/31/2013
* USD 318,901.00

Wayfinding is an essential capability for any person who wishes to have an
independent life-style. It requires successful execution of several tasks
including navigation and object and place recognition, all of which necessitate
accurate assessment of the surrounding environment. For a visually-impaired
person these tasks may be exceedingly difficult to accomplish and there are
risks associated with failure in any of these. Guide dogs and white canes are
widely used for the purpose of navigation and environment sensing, respectively.
The former, however, has costly and often prohibitive training requirements,
while the latter can only provide cues about obstacles in one?s surroundings.
Human performance on visual information dependent tasks can be improved by
sensing which provides information and environmental cues, such as position,
orientation, local geometry, object description, via the use of appropriate
sensors and sensor fusion algorithms. Most work on wayfinding aids has focused
on outdoor environments and has led to the development of speech-enabled GPS-
based navigation systems that provide information describing streets, addresses
and points of interest. In contrast, the limited technology that is available
for indoor navigation requires significant modification to the building
infrastructure, whose high cost has prevented its wide use.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal adopts a multi-faceted approach for solving
the indoor navigation problem for people with limited vision. It leverages
expertise from robotics, computer vision, and blind spatial cognition with
behavioral studies on interface design to guide the discovery of information
requirements and optimal delivery methods for an indoor navigation system.
Designing perception and navigation algorithms, implemented on miniature-size
commercially-available hardware, while explicitly considering the spatial
cognition capabilities of the visually impaired, will lead to the development of
indoor navigation systems that will assist blind people in their wayfinding
tasks while facilitating cognitive-map development.