* 0835342
* NIRT:  Stimuli-responsive hybrid nanoparticles for controlled chemical delivery
* ENG,CBET
* 11/15/2007,08/31/2011
* Hamid Ghandehari, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
*  Ashok S. Sangani
* 08/31/2011
* USD 840,785.00

Proposal No.: 0608906&lt;br/&gt;Title: NIRT: Stimuli-responsive hybrid
nanoparticles for controlled chemical delivery&lt;br/&gt;PI: Hamid
Ghandehari&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Maryland at
Baltimore&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was received in response to Nanoscale
Science and Engineering initiative, NSF 05-610, category NIRT. The objective of
this research is to construct hybrid stimuli-responsive nanoparticles for
controlled delivery of bioactive agents. The approach is to: i) fabricate porous
nanoparticles made of gold, silica or composites thereof grafted with
genetically engineered stimuli-sensitive polymers and ii) evaluate biomolecule
loading, diffusion, and release from the nanoconstructs as a function of
environmental conditions (pH, temperature).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Controlled drug
delivery systems traditionally use chemically synthesized polymer-based
materials. Control over polymer structure is a major challenge, which affects
their ability to carry and release drugs in the body. There is a clear need to
develop advanced systems with a higher degree of control over their ability to
release the therapeutic payload in a predictable manner. The current research
proposes the fabrication of hybrid inorganic porous nanoparticles with "on-off"
pore caps on their surface made of thermal and pH - responsive recombinant
polymers. At body temperature and neutral pH of the blood stream the polymers
will be collapsed over the particle pores preventing drug release. In the
decreased pH environment (such as that in and around a tumor) the polymers will
be solubilized, allowing drug release. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These hybrid nanostructures provide the benefit of
robust inorganic cores on one hand where their size and porosity do not change
in biological environments, and the flexible surface grafted polymers on the
other allowing controlled drug release. The nanoplatforms can be broadly applied
in delivery, sensing, separation, diagnostics and other areas where smart
materials are utilized. The educational component of this project will
facilitate training of new generations of students and scientists who will be
able to work at the interface of basic and applied sciences for the design of
novel nanoconstructs for use in biomedical applications.