* 0835982
* EFRI-RESIN:  Interdependence, Resilience and Sustainability of Infrastructures for Biofuel Development
* ENG,EFMA
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2014
* Atul Jain, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2014
* USD 1,983,203.00

PI name: Ximing Cai&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 0835982&lt;br/&gt;EFRI-RESIN:
Interdependence, Resilience and Sustainability of Infrastructures for Biofuel
Development&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop
innovative engineering insight for the expansion and operation of interdependent
infrastructure systems to sustainably support the emerging bio-economy. The
infrastructures under consideration are biofuel development from cellulosic
feedstocks and associated supporting infrastructures, including water supply and
quality, as well as transportation to supply the agricultural production and
bioconversion processes. Its objectives are to quantify infrastructure
interdependencies and resilience and sustainability in the context of a complex
adaptive system; detect bottleneck infrastructure and quantify long-term
behavior of system dynamics; examine the influence of social and institutional
resilience on infrastructure systems; and advance fundamental knowledge to
support appropriate engineering designs and sustainable local, regional and
national policy decisions. The research methodology is built on a unique network
and agent-based modeling tool to depict system dynamics with incorporation of
both physical and social details through a computationally tractable framework.
A holistic approach will provide a structure for engineers to work with
environmental and social scientists and community stakeholders on integration of
multiple but key aspects of complex infrastructure systems. &lt;br/&gt;