* 0835863
* CDI Type I. Mixing the Data to Knowledge direction: Computational Thinking for Faint Feature Detection by Feedback Control and Sensitivity/Resolution Enhancement of Matrix Images
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2012
* Stanley Osher, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 09/30/2012
* USD 670,000.00

The investigator and his colleagues propose a new paradigm-shifting approach
towards high resolution and high contrast imaging, which combines revolutions in
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and optical imaging with equally cutting edge
mathematical developments. The approach uses non-linear feedback between the
detector and the sample, so that the measured field is fed back to the MRI
magnet. The unstable feedback increases the dynamical contrast between normal
and cancerous cells. This highly nontraditional approach will be complemented by
incorporating compressed sensing, a data analysis technique where mathematical
algorithms are used to extract specific features and images from a relatively
small number of measurements. Finally, multiple sources and detectors, which
coupled with compressed sensing and feedback imaging can collect data in
parallel will be implemented together, and modern filter-diagonalization
techniques will be used to synthesize the data leading to faster images.

Overall, the research and development that the principal investigator and his
colleagues propose will revolutionize MRI. By applying nontraditional
measurement and imaging technique, the contrast between tumors and normal areas
will be increased many fold. The increase will be based on the same physical
phenomena, chaos, that is used to by birds and jet fighters to quickly switch
their direction. The revolutionary paradigm will will eventually make it much
cheaper and faster to do an MRI scan, thereby having enormously broad impacts.
In 2008, an estimated 1,680,000 people in the U.S. will be diagnosed with
cancer, and approximately 670,000 people will die. Between 10%-35% could have
been saved with earlier detection. This highlights the need for improved early
detection methods, which could have saved many patients. A large (2-5 or more)
reduction MRI acquisition time, which is not feasible with conventional methods,
coupled with the enhanced feature resolution native to the proposed approach,
will allow for faster and cheaper cancer screening, which is crucial to improved
early detection and thus reducing deaths due to cancer. Besides cancer
detection, there are numerous other imaging applications that stand to benefit
from significantly decreased scan time and cost, such as industrial sensing (for
example uniformity of fruits in agriculture) and homeland security applications,
including highly sensitive detection of concealed materials.

