* 0835735
* CDI Type-I: Quantum Diffusion and Quantum Random Walks in Physical Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Robin Cote, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 08/31/2012
* USD 550,488.00

CDI Type-I: Quantum Diffusion and Quantum RandomWalks&lt;br/&gt;in Physical
Systems&lt;br/&gt;Alexander Russell (PI), Robin C?otÂ´e&lt;br/&gt;University of
Connecticut&lt;br/&gt;B. Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;A shocking theoretical
discovery of the late 90?s demonstrated that a computational apparatus directly
harnessing the laws of quantum mechanics could dramatically outpace any
classical computer for a number of important computational problems. This
instigated a broad, ongoing effort both to implement such systems and to
understand their full computational power.&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on
quantum random walks and quantum diffusion. Quantum random walks are important
algorithmic tools appearing, for example, in the the most efficient known
quantum algorithms for basic problems such as element distinctness (that is, the
problem of determining if an element?such as a name or a number?appears twice in
a long list) and evaluation of certain logic circuits. Quantum random walks are
particularly attractive from the standpoint of implementation as they are
presumably simpler to faithfully implement than a general purpose quantum
computer. In particular, they possess a direct connection to quantum diffusion,
an area of ultracold atomic physics. Our goal is to give the first rigorous
analysis of a realistic quantum random walk and, thus, a clear indication of a
candidate quantum system for implementing such walks.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit. In this proposal, we intend to join forces of two new subfields of
computer science and physics, namely quantum random walks (QRW) and ultracold
atomic systems. More precisely, we will explore how the tools developed to
investigate quantum random walks in simple models can be adapted to more
realistic situations corresponding to physical systems of interest. Conversely,
we will study realistic physical systems that could be engineered to correspond
to models solvable with quantum random walks.&lt;br/&gt;These two complementary
approaches will lead to insight about the complex underlying behavior of systems
where quantum diffusion is crucial. Additionally, a large class of systems in
condensed matter physics and&lt;br/&gt;atomic, molecular, and optical physics ?
such as high-temperature superconductors or quantum magnets ? are thought to be
described by models, such as the Bose-Hubbard model or one of its many
generalizations,&lt;br/&gt;where quantum diffusion plays a key role. We plan to
explore how one can control such systems so that simplified experimental setups,
such as ultracold Rydberg atoms or ultracold atom-ion mixtures, can be exploited
to mimic the simple models where the solutions to quantum random walks (and thus
quantum&lt;br/&gt;diffusion) are known.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. We will
continue our successful training efforts via the REU program (we have introduced
dozens of students to real research topics) and graduate research guidance.
Additionally, the PIs will develop and teach a multidisciplinary course entitled
?Quantum information and computation.?&lt;br/&gt;Within KAST (Kids Are
Scientists Too), a 5-day program for 4th through 9th grade students, we will
build new modules based on children?s fascination with technologies and
computers. Additionally, the PIs will continue involvement in the DaVinci
project, a program introducing high-school teachers to topics
in&lt;br/&gt;engineering, mathematics, and physics that can be integrated into
their high school science curricula.&lt;br/&gt;B-1