* 0835794
* CDI Type II Computational Discovery of Unusual Nucleic-Acid-Based Nanostructures
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* Carol Hall, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,499,992.00

CBET-0835794 Hall

DNA can be possibly used to construct tiny scaffolds with many potential
applications including molecular medicine, electronics, sensors, computing and
communications equipment, and consumer electronics. Two-dimensional
nanostructures have already been devised, but further design and development has
so far been limited to making incremental improvements using empirically derived
guidelines.

This project intends to break these barriers using advanced modeling techniques,
a multidisciplinary team of modelers and experimentalists, and a cyber-driven
strategy to design complex, three-dimensional objects at nanometer size scales.
First, modified natural and non-natural nucleosides (the components RNA) will be
devised to increase the number of molecular tools available to create these
structures and to provide accessible sites for attachment of functional
components. Structures will be computed for these two- and three-dimensional
DNA-based building blocks, with and without modified nucleosides. Stability will
then be determined for the building blocks in solution, on planar surfaces,
and/or with metallic nanoparticles. Ultimately, new, hybrid extended three-
dimensional architectures will be designed and built using these findings. A key
to success is testing and refining the modeling approaches by comparing computed
results to the team's experimental results.

The education and outreach agenda includes a team mentoring program for a small
group of women graduate and undergraduate students, individual outreach efforts
to underrepresented groups, and training of four graduate students and four
undergraduates. Cyber-enabled education is an especially interesting aspect of
the project, where a website containing freely-available cyber-structure
software and visuals will allow researchers to design their own DNA
superstructures and will also allow community members, including grades 7-12, to
learn more about DNA self-assembly.