* 0835106
* SGER: Modal Control in Hybrid Si/III-V Optoelectronic Circuits
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2009
* Amnon Yariv, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 09/30/2009
* USD 75,000.00

Objective &lt;br/&gt;The next major advance in optical communication technology
will involve hybrid Si/III-V structures in which the light generation and
detection capabilities of III-V semiconductor will join forces with VLSI Si
electronics. An important step in this direction is a work described as
"electrically pumped hybrid AlGaInAs-silicon evanescent lasers." Our proposal
takes the next major step along this direction, we propose another approach to
hybrid Si/III-V optoelectronic circuits which combines, with minimal compromise,
the advantages of both materials. This is based on the ability to control the
mode behavior in the composite waveguide system.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;The eigenmodes ("Supermodes") of such a
coupled waveguide system can be designed such that the optical energy is
confined to either the Si or the III-V waveguide. This can be achieved by
controlling the geometry of the waveguides along the propagation direction,
e.g., by tailoring the Si waveguide width. Numerical calculations predicted a
four-fold enhancement of the modal gain with this design compared with that of
the existing Si evanescent lasers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
&lt;br/&gt;Once experimentally demonstrated, the "supermode coupling" scheme
will result in more efficient devices so as to greatly increase the density of
integrated components. Through various kinds of exposure, the results and
discoveries will be shared with the scientific and technological communities at
large. Another goal of this project is to educate and train a group of students
to pursue scientific research and to mentor them about the culture of scientific
discovery.