* 0835373
* CDI Type II:  Pseudorandomness
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2013
* Jean Bourgain, Institute For Advanced Study
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,750,000.00

This proposal aims to transform research in mathematics and computer science by
bringing together two major research tracks which have been progressing in
parallel (albeit with nontrivial interaction). In mathematics, the object of
study in many areas (including analysis, number theory, ergodic theory and
combinatorics) is captured by the question: ?What random-like properties does a
(deterministic) mathematical structure have?? In computer science, the object of
study in many areas (including network theory, error correction, computational
complexity and derandomization) is captured by the question ?Can we
deterministically and efficiently design objects with specific random-like
properties?? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs view the two Math and CS tracks
(respectively) as analytic and synthetic approaches for understanding the same
fundamental pseudorandomness phenomena and its interaction with
structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computer science has been mostly a passive
consumer of mathematics, relying on the mathematical analysis of structures to
build desireable objects. We propose to transform this one-way use to a full
fledged collaboration, through the use of the computational view of randomness
to analyze mathematical structures. Preliminary applications of this tool, many
by the PIs, have already led to major breakthroughs both in new understanding of
mathematical objects and in the use of these objects as the basis for
constructions in computer science. Examples of recent breakthroughs resulting
from this cross-fertilization include work on expanders in Cayley graphs,
extractors from sum-product theorems, arithmetic (and other) progressions in
primes, and the use of Gowers? norms in complexity. Many rely on the conceptual
computational tool of pseudorandomness, the inability of any of a class of tests
to tell the difference between a random object and the object in question. This
notion arose in complexity-theoretic approaches to cryptography, but has since
had wide applicability in computer science (e.g. in derandomizing probabilistic
algorithms).