* 0835549
* CDI-Type I: Collaborative Research: Cyber Enabled Engineering of Particle Based Materials and Devices using Energy Landscapes
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Michael Bevan, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2012
* USD 294,065.00

The self- and directed- assembly of colloidal (nano- to micro- scale) particles
into structures within materials and devices is an emerging paradigm with wide-
ranging technological impact. However, the ability to create a target structure
with an acceptably small level of defects is still lacking; systems too easily
become dynamically arrested in undesired disordered, or defect-rich, states. Our
research will synergistically combine recent advances in digital microscopic
imaging techniques and free energy calculation methods to address this problem.
Emerging microscopic imaging tools, including techniques such as confocal and
total internal reflectance, provide unprecedented high-resolution, real-time,
three-dimensional visualizations of colloidal assembly processes. The key is to
mine the tremendous amount of digital data produced in these experiments to
identify successful pathways to particle assembly. Theoreticians have
traditionally approached such problems using the energy landscape (EL) paradigm,
wherein one maps data from the high-dimensional configuration space (of order N,
the number of particles in the system) to an EL in a low-dimensional set of key
descriptors. This EL is the quantity of direct relevance to engineering of the
process of interest; it contains the information (peaks, valleys, saddles) to
quantify the equilibrium states and transition rates between them. In this
research we will (1) develop a close coupling methodology between digital
optical microscopy experiments and particle-based simulation to compare measured
and predicted ELs, and (2) use the resulting ELs to engineer (design, control,
optimize) two applications: the self-assembly of photonic crystals and operation
of electronic nanowire devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Particles with sizes on the
order of nanometers to micrometers immersed in fluid, commonly called colloids,
can serve as the building blocks of interesting new products. Examples include
photonic band gap materials (e.g. for computers that operate with light instead
of electrons) and dynamically reconfigurable nanowires (e.g. for tunable RF
devices). Under certain conditions the colloidal particles will spontaneously
assemble into such useful materials, or they can be induced to do so through the
application of external stimuli such as electric fields or temperature
gradients. However, the pathways to creating desired structures with acceptably
low levels of defects are not well understood. This research employs a
combination of modern digital imaging techniques and theoretical tools from the
field of statistical mechanics to measure, quantify, and control the assembly
process. We will develop knowledge of engineered pathways to low-defect
structured particulate materials that can be systematically implemented in the
manufacturing processes of the future. Furthermore, we will use the rich visual
data generated in experiments (e.g. images, videos), simulations (e.g.
renderings, animations), and analyses (e.g. dynamic, multi-dimensional plots) to
provide intuitive educational experiences for students at all levels
(K-postgraduate) and in outreach programs to the general public.&lt;br/&gt;