* 0835598
* Collaborative Research:  CDI-Type II--The Open Wildland Fire Modeling E-community: A Virtual Organization Accelerating Research, Education, and Fire Management Technology
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2008,10/31/2013
* Janice Coen, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 10/31/2013
* USD 355,109.00

The losses associated with wildfires and the wish to understand, predict, and
control wildfires have driven researchers to create ever more detailed and
powerful computational models. However, the necessary sophistication and realism
requires scientific computing and analysis processes of a complexity that has
itself become a hindrance to further progress and education. In addition, the
research is done by geographically disperse interdisciplinary groups, and making
their models interoperate is a challenge. This project strives to overcome this
complexity and challenges to collaboration by state-of-the-art software
engineering, visualization, and collaboration tools. The results will find
applications in wildfire research, education, training, and management.

The project will provide a web-based service in which a visitor can
transparently interact with combinations of fire behavior models, weather
models, and data sources, and a software environment where researchers can
contribute their software and data. This portal will be seeded with existing
software of the investigators and their collaborators, attract new
collaborators, and serve as a focus for a vibrant online community. The
investigators have already obtained the commitment of a number of prominent fire
researchers, educators, and managers to participate.

Immersive, video game-like, dynamic high-performance visualization will be
provided as freely downloadable PC client software. The computational engine
behind the portal will run on a local computer cluster and remote
supercomputers. The project will build on existing community software in
numerical weather prediction, component based software engineering, and 3D
visualization. It will increase the impact of the research by providing a common
open-source environment, new accessible data repositories, and collaboration
tools.

Fulfilling this vision will require transformational advances in mathematical
modeling of wildland fires, software engineering, and social modes of
collaboration. The investigators will build on their recent achievements in
these areas to make significant additional contributions in each. New methods in
data assimilation will make it possible to incorporate real-time data into
wildfire models. Improvements in component-based software will make it possible
to isolate the complexity of computing and analysis into separate models and
automate the process of connecting these models. A highly integrated
visualization environment will facilitate exploring what-if scenarios in a
collaborative data environment. The coupled models will enable a new level of
understanding of complexity that goes beyond the wildfire dynamics.

The project will create a new generation of cyber-trained students provided with
hands-on experience with state of the art wildfire-weather models and efficient
fire management. Its web-based service will be beneficial in education at all
levels. It will build tools to minimize the separation between interdisciplinary
groups around the world, between research and educational institutions, and
between research and operational fire forecasting. The project includes outreach
to general public and K-12 education through NCAR events and activities, and
integration of the e-community into undergraduate and graduate courses.