* 0835875
* Communication of What Mechanical Engineers Do: A Strategy for Recruiting Women
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2011
* Sarah Zappe, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Alan Cheville
* 02/28/2011
* USD 100,000.00

This exploratory project will determine whether a national impact on recruitment
of women into a discipline such as mechanical engineering can be made through
the dissemination of communication materials which emphasize how the discipline
helps people. The Mechanical and Nuclear Engineering Department at Penn State
will be used to test strategies for increasing the number of female
undergraduates. This project will create a clear image of the mechanical
engineering discipline and communicating that image through materials
emphasizing activities that appeal to women. It will first clearly define
?mechanical engineering? as a discipline and gather examples of mechanical
engineers helping people in the context of the discipline. Then it will create
communication materials to articulate what mechanical engineering is, with an
emphasis on how the discipline helps people. Female engineering students will be
engaged in an interactive presentation that uses the materials to assess the
effect of the materials and make revisions. Then the materials will be
disseminated to high school guidance counselors, high school STEM teachers, and
to all U.S. mechanical engineering department heads.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
meet the future engineering workforce needs and to provide innovative solutions
which are generally derived through diverse teams it is crucial that engineering
disciplines such as mechanical engineering increase the participation of women.
Many female students entering college and contemplating a major have a
misconception about what mechanical engineers do. Because of its name, history,
and culture, mechanical engineering faces a challenge in clarifying its identity
to females and other underrepresented groups. This project will create and
disseminate communication materials to help reduce these
misconceptions.&lt;br/&gt;